
Skip to Main Content
 - Physical Review Journals
All Journals
Physics Magazine


Article Lookup

Sign in
Physical Review D
Highlights
Recent
Accepted
Collections
Authors
Referees
Press
About
Editorial Team
RSS
RSS Feed
Dark Energy Survey: Implications for cosmological expansion models from the final DES baryon acoustic oscillation and supernova data
T. M. C. Abbott1, M. Acevedo2, M. Adamow3, M. Aguena4, A. Alarcon5, S. Allam6, O. Alves7, F. Andrade-Oliveira8, J. Annis6 et al. (DES Collaboration*)
PDF
Share
Phys. Rev. D 113, 063530 – Published 12 March, 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1103/z2q4-qcdq
Export Citation
Article has an altmetric score of 117
1414 total citations on Dimensions.

Show metrics
Abstract
The Dark Energy Survey (DES) recently released the final results of its two principal probes of the expansion history: Type Ia supernovae (SNe) and baryonic acoustic oscillations (BAO). In this paper, we explore the cosmological implications of these data in combination with external cosmic microwave background (CMB), big bang nucleosynthesis (BBN), and age-of-the-Universe information. The BAO measurement, which is ∼2⁢𝜎 away from Planck ’s Λ⁢CDM predictions, pushes for low values of Ωm compared to Planck, in contrast to SN which prefers a higher value than Planck. We identify several tensions among datasets in the Λ⁢CDM model that cannot be resolved by including either curvature (𝑘⁢Λ⁢CDM) or a constant dark energy equation of state (𝑤⁢CDM). By combining BAO+SN+CMB despite these mild tensions, we obtain Ω𝑘 =−5.5+4.6
−4.2 ×10−3 in 𝑘⁢Λ⁢CDM, and 𝑤 =−0.94⁢8+0.028
−0.027 in 𝑤⁢CDM. In 𝑤⁢CDM, BAO and SN push again in different directions of parameter space, favoring, respectively, 𝑤 <−1 and 𝑤 >−1. If we open the parameter space to 𝑤0⁢𝑤𝑎⁢CDM [where the equation of state of dark energy varies as 𝑤⁡(𝑎) =𝑤0 +(1 −𝑎)⁢𝑤𝑎], all the datasets are mutually more compatible, and we find concordance in the [𝑤0 >−1,𝑤𝑎 <0] quadrant, with BAO pushing for 𝑤𝑎 <0 and SN for [𝑤0 >−1,𝑤𝑎 <0]. For DES BAO and SN in combination with Planck -CMB, we find a 3.2⁢𝜎 deviation from Λ⁢CDM, with 𝑤0 =−0.67⁢3+0.098
−0.097, 𝑤𝑎 =−1.3⁢7+0.51
−0.50, a Hubble constant of 𝐻0=67.8⁢1+0.96
−0.86  km s−1 Mpc−1, and an abundance of matter of Ωm =0.310⁢9+0.0086
−0.0099. For the combination of all the background cosmological probes considered (including CMB’s angular acoustic scale 𝜃⋆), we still find a deviation of 2.8⁢𝜎 from Λ⁢CDM in the 𝑤0 −𝑤𝑎 plane. Assuming a minimal neutrino mass, this work provides tentative evidence for non-Λ⁢CDM physics, which is consistent with recent claims in support of evolving dark energy, or a source of unknown systematics.







Physics Subject Headings (PhySH)
Baryon acoustic oscillations
Cosmological parameters
Dark energy
Novae & supernovae
Authorization Required
We need you to provide your credentials before accessing this content.
Log in via your institution
If your institution provides access using Shibboleth/OpenAthens log in.

Log in via APS Member Subscription
If you have a personal subscription through your APS membership please log in.
Starting August 1, 2019 APS member subscribers will need to log in using your member credentials instead of your APS Journal Account.
APS Member Log In
Other Options
Buy Article »
Log in with APS Journals Account
Log in with username/password provided by your institution
Get access through a U.S. public or high school
References (Subscription Required)
Outline
Information
Abstract
Article Text
References
APS logo
News
Join APS
Purpose Led Publishing - Science is our shareholder
Authors
General Information
Submit a Manuscript
Publication Rights
Open Science
SCOAP
3
Policies & Practices
Tips for Authors
Professional Conduct
Reviewers
General Information
Submit a Report
Update Your Information
Policies & Practices
Reviewer FAQ
Guidelines for Reviewers
Outstanding Referees
Librarians
General Information
Subscriptions
Online License Agreement
Usage Statistics
Your Account
Students
Physics
PhysicsCentral
Student Membership
Connect
Privacy
Policies
Contact Information
Feedback
ISSN 2470-0029 (online), 2470-0010 (print).
©2026 American Physical Society. All rights reserved.
Physical Review D™ is a trademark of the American Physical Society, registered in the United States, Canada, European Union, and Japan. The APS Physics logo and Physics logo are trademarks of the American Physical Society. Information about registration may be found here. Use of the American Physical Society websites and journals implies that the user has read and agrees to our Terms and Conditions and any applicable Subscription Agreement.