===== PAGE 1 =====
arXiv:2008.13493v1  [gr-qc]  31 Aug 2020
Teleparallel gravity as a gauge theory: coupling to matter w ith Cartan connection
E. Huguet 1, M. Le Delliou 2,3, M. Fontanini 1, and Z.-C. Lin 4
1 - Universit´ e de Paris, APC-Astroparticule et Cosmologie ( UMR-CNRS 7164), F-75006 Paris, France. ∗
2 - Institute of Theoretical Physics, School of Physical Scie nce and Technology,
Lanzhou University, No.222, South Tianshui Road, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P R China
3 - Instituto de Astrof ´ ısica e Ciˆ encias do Espa¸ co, Universidade de Lisboa,
Faculdade de Ciˆ encias, Ed. C8, Campo Grande, 1769-016 Lisb oa, Portugal † and
4 - Institute of Theoretical Physics & Research Center of Grav itation, Lanzhou University, China ‡
(Dated: September 1, 2020)
We present a consistent and complete description of the coup ling to matter in the Teleparallel
Equivalent to General Relativity (TEGR) theory built from a Cartan connection, as we proposed in
previous works. A ﬁrst theorem allows us to obtain parallel t ransport from the Cartan connection
into a proper Ehresmann connection, while a second ensures t o link the TEGR-Cartan connection to
the Ehresmann one-form that contains the Levi-Civita conne ction. This yields a coupling to matter
in agreement with observations and the Equivalence Princip le. As the fundamental ﬁelds proceed
from the Cartan connection, if one insists on interpreting T EGR as a gauge theory of translations,
such translation gauge ﬁeld can be extracted from the consis tent theory presented. However, this
would entail a fundamental change in the structures known fo r gauge theory and a split between
gauge ﬁeld and connection is imperative. The willingness to take such a step is left to the reader.
PACS numbers: 04.50.-h, 11.15.-q, 02.40.-k
CONTENTS
I. Introduction 1
II. Which connection for TEGR? 2
A. About Cartan connection 2
B. Cartan connection in TEGR 3
III. The coupling to matter: overview 3
IV. The coupling to matter: details 4
A. The Sharpe theorem 4
B. Levi-Civita coupling from Weitzenb¨ ock
one-form 5
C. The AM − →OM map, and the covariant
derivative 6
V. Viewing TEGR as a gauge theory of translations ? 6
A. Gauge ﬁeld vs. connection 6
B. A new gauge paradigm for TEGR ? 7
VI. Conclusion 8
Acknowledgements 8
A. Relating Ehresmann and Cartan connections 8
B. Associated bundle Q 8
References 9
∗ michele.fontanini@gmail.comhuguet@apc.univ-paris7.fr
† (delliou@lzu.edu.cn,)morgan.ledelliou.ift@gmail.com
‡ linzch12@lzu.edu.cn
I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper we describe how a coupling to matter can
be obtained in a new mathematical framework for the
Teleparallel Equivalent to General Relativity (TEGR)
using a reductive Cartan connection. We start from the
Levi-Civita connection, or its corresponding one-form in
the Cartan (tetrads) formalism, to describe the coupling
to matter ﬁelds, which, from observational grounds, is
known to describe it well.
TEGR is the well known theory in which the eﬀect of
gravity does not manifest itself, as in General Relativity
(GR), through induced curvature to spacetime, but by
instead giving it torsion. Although being equivalent to
GR, this approach yields both an alternative description
and interpretation to gravity. It has been presented with
various perspectives: in Ref. [ 1] for its translation-gauge
presentation, in Ref. [ 2] for the “pure tetrads formalism”
approach, while in Ref. [ 3], tensorial formalism is used to
present it, together with another gravitation equivalent
to GR, ﬁrst introduced in Ref. [ 4], the Symmetric TEGR
(STGR). TEGR has also provided a stout base for mod-
iﬁed gravities, such as f (T ) [5, 6] theories, further gener-
alised with f (R, T ) [7], f (T, B ) [8]. Additional important
generalisation comprise Conformal TEGR [ 2, 9, 10], or
Teleparallel Equivalent to Lovelock Gravity [ 11], which
are also actively studied.
Although the familiar tensorial formalism can be used
to formulate TEGR [as in 3], its presentation as a gauge
theory for the translation group [see 1, 12, and refer-
ences herein] allows one to obtain the torsion as the cur-
vature of a connection deﬁned in the principal bundle
of translations. Recently, some of the authors pointed
out a diﬃculty in this formalism: the connection one-
form is implicitly identiﬁed with another mathematical

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
object required to deﬁne the torsion, the so-called canon-
ical one-form. This one-form is only deﬁned in the bundle
of frames and is not a connection, two properties turning
the identiﬁcation problematic [ 13–15].
The idea of relating TEGR, and, more generally, grav-
ity, to translations is a very natural one, since the
Noether current associated with them is the energy-
momentum tensor. On another hand, extending that link
to a gauge theory of the translations group could be more
questionable. Indeed, gauge theories are very success-
ful in the standard model of particle physics describing
fundamental interactions, except gravity, in Minkowski
space. There, the gauges groups ( U (1), SU (2), etc...)
only act on ﬁelds, not on spacetime (their action is of-
ten said to be “internal”). The aim of these theories is
to implement the local invariance of a matter equation
(usually the Dirac equation), under their respective sym-
metry group. This is achieved by introducing gauge ﬁelds
which couple minimally to matter ﬁelds. In that context,
local invariance means that the action of the symmetry
group on matter ﬁelds depends on the position in space-
time.
In gravity the group of invariance involved is the
group of local diﬀeomorphisms of R4 (GL(4, R)), that
is the changes of coordinates mapping spacetime. Its
appearence is motivated by the Equivalence Principle
(EP) translated operationally into the General Covari-
ance Principle (GCP). In the Cartan (tetrads) formu-
lation, any spacetime tensor is mapped by tetrads to
a Lorentz tensor. 1 Thus, all ﬁelds, except the tetrads
themselves, are viewed as scalars under changes of coor-
dinates. These ﬁelds also belong to representations of the
Lorentz group. Indeed, using the appropriate represen-
tation of the Lorentz group, spinorial ﬁelds can also be
taken into account, which is a central feature of the tetrad
approach. In this formalism the GCP translates into two
invariances: the invariance as a scalar under the change
of coordinates, and the invariance under the local Lorentz
transformations in the corresponding representation [ 16].
In this tetrad framework, the coupling of matter ﬁelds to
gravity is usually obtained by the minimal coupling pre-
scription, where the partial derivative are replaced by the
covariant Fock-Ivanenko derivative. In this derivative the
coupling term is the spin (or Lorentz) connection, a one-
form valued in the Lorentz Lie algebra so(1, 3). Then,
from a gauge theory perspective, if that coupling can be
associated with a local Lorentz invariance, the relation
with the local diﬀeomorphism invariance (already satis-
ﬁed) is not that obvious. Moreover, the status of tetrads,
as representing the gravitational ﬁeld, is, in a gauge the-
ory framework, unclear.
Indeed, a large amount of works since the sixties
has been done to clarify this situation 2. Diﬀerent the-
1 This corresponds to the usual change of indices: T ...a...
...b... (x) =
ea
µ(x)eν
b (x)T ...µ...
...ν... (x).
2 To illustrate how that point has been already recognized sin ce the
ories, using diﬀerent symmetry group ( R4, Poincar´ e,
GL(4, R) ⋊ R 4, SO(1 , 4), . . . ), not limited to the dif-
feomorphism group (GL(4 , R)), have been obtained. A
comprehensive review of this gauge approach is [ 18].
We will not directly address here this gauge problem
in its generality. Instead, we will describe a mathemat-
ical framework for TEGR in which the diﬀeomorphism
invariance is canonically satisﬁed. In this framework,
the minimal coupling, through the Levi-Civita connec-
tion one-form, is consistent with current observations,
and derives from a speciﬁc Cartan connection, chosen
such that curvature is the torsion. In the tetrad formal-
ism, this amounts to retrieving the usual Fock-Ivanenko
covariant derivative. Such derivation from a connection
is suitable from a gauge theory perspective of TEGR.
This basis will enable us to map out the modiﬁcations
required on the established framework of gauge theories,
if we insist on interpreting our result as a gauge theory for
translations: mainly, the dissociation of the gauge ﬁeld
from a connection, and the restriction to the translation
“gauge” group, appearing only through its algebra.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Sec. II reviews
the motivations in the choice of a reductive Cartan con-
nection; Sec. III summarizes the relevant issues involved
in coupling gravity to matter with a Cartan connection
and gives a setup for the derivation of that coupling to
matter; technical details are the subject of Sec. IV; we
then discuss Sec. V, the extensions of the gauge paradigm
which could be considered in order to interpret TEGR,
obtained from our results, as a gauge theory for transla-
tions; we ﬁnally conclude Sec. VI; some complements on
technical details are given in appendices.
For general notions and deﬁnitions regarding diﬀeren-
tial geometry we refer the Reader to [ 19–22]
II. WHICH CONNECTION FOR TEGR?
In this section we remind our motivation in using a
Cartan connection to describe TEGR. For the sake of
completeness let us ﬁrst recall some deﬁning properties
of the Cartan connection. More detailed account in the
context of gravity may be found in [ 23, 24], while a com-
prehensive mathematical reference is [ 25].
A. About Cartan connection
Let us ﬁrst recall some facts about Ehresmann connec-
tions on principal G-bundle (a principal ﬁber bundle of
birth of gauge theories let us quote the introduction of a rev iew
of 1985 by Ivanenko and Sardanashvily [ 17, p. 4]: ”The main
dilemma which during 25 years has been confronting the estab -
lishment of the gauge gravitation theory, is that gauge pote ntials
represents connections on ﬁber bundles, while gravitation al ﬁelds
in GR are only metric or tetrad (vierbein) ﬁelds.”

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
Lie group G). Each tangent space on a point of the ﬁber
bundle contains a vertical subspace deﬁned as the tan-
gent space of the ﬁber at this point. Any complementary
subspace of this vertical space is said to be horizontal.
An Ehresmann connection deﬁnes in a unique way the
notion of horizontality in a principal G-bundle: it speci-
ﬁes horizontal subspaces. This is usually done through a
connection one-form ωE whose kernel deﬁnes a horizontal
space at each point of the total space. Such a one-form
is deﬁned by the following properties:
1. it takes its values in the Lie algebra g of the Lie
group G,
2. it is G-invariant: R∗
gω = Adg− 1 ω, Rg being the
right action of G on the bundle,
3. it reduces to the Maurer-Cartan form ωG of the
group G along the ﬁbers: ωE(V ) = ωG(V ), for any
vertical vector V .
Now, let us recall the deﬁnition properties of a Car-
tan connection on a principal H-bundle, H being a sub-
group of a Lie group G. The Cartan connection is deﬁned
through the one form ωC such that:
1. it takes values in the algebra g ⊃ h of G ⊃ H.
2. it is H-invariant: R∗
hω = Adh− 1 ω, Rh being the
right action of H on the bundle,
3. it reduces to the Maurer-Cartan form ωH of the
group H along the ﬁbers,
4. it is, at each point p of the H-bundle, a linear iso-
morphism between the tangent space TpP at p and
the Lie algebra g. This property requires that G
has the same dimension as the tangent space TpP .
The properties ( 1) and (4) distinguish the Cartan connec-
tion from Ehresmann’s. As a consequence of the above
properties, the tangent space of the base manifold M
can be locally identiﬁed with the tangent space g/h of
the homogeneous space 3 G/H. Indeed, the condition ( 4)
precisely states that the H-principal bundle is soldered
to its base M .
For a (3 + 1)-dimensional manifold there are only
three possible homogeneous spaces: both (Anti)-de Sit-
ter spaces, and the Minkowski space. The corresponding
Cartan geometries have the property of being reductive
[see 25, p197 for a deﬁnition], implying that, the Cartan
connection takes the form
ωC = ω + θ,
3 Note that both G/H, with H a closed subgroup of G, being a
homogeneous space, and the fact that g/h can be identiﬁed with
its tangent space are known results of diﬀerential geometry of
Lie groups (see for instance [ 19] p. 294 for the former statement,
and [ 25] p. 163, for the latter).
where ω is an h-valued connection one-form of Ehres-
mann type, and θ a g/h-valued one-form, both deﬁned
on the principal H-bundle. The reductive property also
imply that the curvature of the Cartan connection splits
into two parts:
Ω(ωC) = Ω( ω) + Θ(ω),
where Ω( ω) = dω + ω ∧ ω is the curvature of the connec-
tion ω and Θ( ω) = dθ + ω ∧ θ its torsion.
B. Cartan connection in TEGR
In previous works [ 13, 15] we found that one encoun-
ters diﬃculties in the formulation of TEGR as a gauge
theory of translations, mainly because of the problem-
atic implicit identiﬁcation of the Ehresmann translation
connection, deﬁned in a principal translation bundle ( R4-
bundle), with the canonical one-form θ appearing in the
deﬁnition of torsion: Θ( ω) = dθ + ω ∧ θ, and which is not
an Ehresmann connection. The R4-valued one-form θ is
deﬁned in the bundle of frames LM , a principal GL(4 , R)-
bundle, and its sub-bundle of orthonormal frames OM ,
a principal SO(1 , 3)-bundle, through
(θ(e), V ) = ( e− 1, π∗V ), (1)
where e is a frame in LM over a point x of the base
manifold M , V a vector of T LM, and π the projection
on the base. In coordinates the above relation reads:
θa(e)[V ] = ea[π∗V ] = V a.
In an attempt to remedy this situation, we proposed
to consider a Cartan connection directly deﬁned over the
bundle of orthonormal frames OM . The choice of a Car-
tan connection is ﬁrst of all motivated by the fact that,
when deﬁned on OM , it can be chosen such that its cur-
vature is the torsion, a central property for TEGR. This is
related to the property for the Cartan connection on OM
to be reductive (see Sec. II A). In this case the curvature-
less and torsion-full Cartan connection one-form reads
ωC = ωW + θ, (2)
where the Ehressman term, ωW , is the curvature-less
Weitzenb¨ ock one-form connection and where the term,
θ, coincides with the canonical one-form on OM .
We remark that the term θ of the Cartan connec-
tion ( 2) takes its values precisely in the translation sub-
algebra g/h = R4 of the Poincar´ e algebra, thus local
translations are implemented in the Cartan connection
although θ is not a connection by itself.
III. THE COUPLING TO MATTER: OVER VIEW
This section aims to summarize how we obtain the
Levi-Civita covariant derivative from the reductive Car-
tan connection we proposed as a possible connection to
describe TEGR as a gauge theory.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
The connections usually used in gauge theories are of
Ehresmann type. They are associated to parallel trans-
port and covariant derivative. These two notions are
not directly available for a Cartan connection. There-
fore, to obtain a covariant derivative from a Cartan con-
nection leads to associate it to an Ehresmann connec-
tion. An obvious way to realize this mapping in the case
of a reductive Cartan connection, is to deﬁne parallel
transport through the Ehresmann part of the connection.
In our context, this part is the Weitzenb¨ ock connection
ωW , which obviously cannot give the Levi-Civita cou-
pling4. We thus have to consider a diﬀerent way to im-
plement parallel transport. Remark that, the use of the
Weitzenb¨ ock connection for the parallel transport would
imply that the spacetime manifold be parallelizable –
which correspond to a trivial bundle of frames – and thus
the theory not strictly equivalent to GR 5. Another, more
general, way to build a covariant derivative from a Car-
tan connection is to use a theorem (proven by R. Sharpe
in [ 25] and reproduced in Appendix A) which, essen-
tially, gives a map between the set of Cartan connections
and that of Ehresmann connections satisfying a technical
condition (detailed in Sec. IV A). We will, in Sec. IV B,
make use of this theorem to map the Cartan connec-
tion ωC deﬁned on the orthonormal frame bundle OM
to an aﬃne connection on the principal Poincar´ e bundle
AM (the aﬃne extention of OM viewed as a principal
Lorentz bundle). The specialization to the orthonormal
bundle, which can be related to the Equivalence Prin-
ciple, allows us to introduce the contorsion one-form in
order to obtain a Levi-Civita connection as the Lorentz
part of the aﬃne (Poincar´ e) connection (this is detailed
in Sec. IV B). This aﬃne connection is then mapped back
onto the orthonormal frame bundle OM where it divides
into two parts: the Levi-Civita connection ωLC and the
canonical one-form θ. However, the Levi-Civita connec-
tion obtained that way, appears as the combination of
the Weitzenb¨ ock connection and its related contorsion
κW , namely ωLC = ωW − κW , a well known result, refor-
mulated in the case of ﬁber bundle in Ref. [ 28, theorem
6.2.5 p. 79]. Thus, we ﬁnally recover the Levi-Civita cou-
pling to matter under the form obtained in [ 1], opening
the possibility to relate this connection to (local) trans-
lations.
IV. THE COUPLING TO MATTER: DETAILS
In this section we detail our proposal to obtain the
Levi-Civita covariant derivative from the reductive Car-
tan connection ( 2). Our approach mainly relies on a the-
orem, hereafter referred as Sharpe theorem relating Car-
4 Which would respect observational evidence and the Equival ence
Principle.
5 Note, however that the solutions exculded from GR by the par-
allelizability are discarded on physical basis [ 26, 27].
tan and Ehresmann connections. This theorem is proved
in [ 25] and reproduced in Appendix A. We ﬁrst exam-
ine this theorem, and then show how to switch from the
Weitzenb¨ ock to the Levi-Civita connection in the Lorentz
sector. Finally, we use these properties to obtain the co-
variant derivative on the spacetime manifold.
A. The Sharpe theorem
Let us ﬁrst consider the main ingredients of the Sharpe
theorem (theorem A.1) and how it specializes in our con-
text. The theorem is concerned by a principal H-bundle
P (M, H ) and its so-called G-extension6: the principal
G-bundle Q(M, G) = P ×H G. In our framework, a bun-
dle formalism for TEGR with a Cartan connection [ 13],
P is the bundle of orthonormal frames OM identiﬁed
with the principal Lorentz( SO0(1, 3))-bundle, and Q is
the Poincar´ e-bundleAM , its corresponding aﬃne bun-
dle with structure group P := SO0(1, 3) ⋊ R4.
A central assumption of the theorem is the existence of
an H bundle-map. ϕ : P − →Q, that is a continuous map
such that ϕ(ph) = ϕ(p)h with p ∈ P and h ∈ H ⊂ G.
The theorem states that ϕ∗ is a one-to-one correspon-
dence between the set of Ehresmann connections on Q
(here AM ), whose kernel does not contains non-null vec-
tors of ϕ∗(T P) (the technical condition we mention in
Sec. III), and the set of Cartan connections on P (here
OM ).
Our goal is to obtain explicitly the expression, on a
Cartan connection one-form ωC, of the inverse map of ϕ∗,
that is ( ϕ∗)− 1 (ωC). In theorem A.1, ( ϕ∗)− 1 isn’t formu-
lated in a closed form. Instead, it is obtained as the ex-
tension of a general Cartan connection ωC to a one-form
on the product P × G: j(ωC), in Eq. ( A1). This one-form
j(ωC) is proven to be the pull-up from Q to P × G of an
Ehresmann connection ωE whose kernel intersection with
ϕ∗(T P) is reduced to zero, that is precisely the image of
ωC by ( ϕ∗)− 1.
An explicit expression of ωE = ( ϕ∗)− 1 (ωC) for a Car-
tan connection ωC requires to specify Eq. ( A1) in a local
trivialization.
We ﬁrst recast it for our matrix Lie group:
j(ωC) = g− 1ωCg + g− 1dg, (3)
taking into account the projections appearing in Eq. ( A1)
by recalling, for a product of manifolds M × N , that one
can always write T(m,n)(M × N ) = TmM ⊕ TnN . In this
form, ωC acts on T P and g− 1dg, the Maurer-Cartan form
of G, acts on T G.
To simplify matters, let us specify a local trivialization
– fa : π− 1(Ua) − →Ua × F , where π is the projection on
the base, {Ua} an open covering of M and F a ﬁber –
6 see for instance [ 20] and Appendix B.

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
by the local product U × F for some open set U of the
covering. We then set
PU := U × H,
QU := U × G,
and accordingly: ( P × G)U = PU × G. Local coordinates
for points p ∈ PU , q ∈ QU will be hereafter denoted by
p = (x, h) and q = (x, g) respectively, with x ∈ U .
In a local trivialisation corresponding to U × G, G be-
ing a matrix Lie group, a connection one-form ω can be
decomposed as:
ω(x, g) = g− 1ω
U
(x)g + g− 1dg, (4)
where ωU (x) acts on tangent vectors of TxU ⊂ TxM and
g− 1dg is the Maurer-Cartan form acting on vectors of
TgG. Applying Eq. ( 4) to the Cartan connection ωC in
the trivialisation corresponding to PU gives
ωC(x, h) = h− 1ω
U
C (x)h + h− 1dh. (5)
Inserting Eq. ( 5) in Eq. ( 3) gives the expression of
j(ωC) in the local trivialization corresponding to PU × G:
(j(ωC)) (x, h, g) = g− 1 (
h− 1ω
U
C (x)h + h− 1dh
)
g
+ g− 1dg,
(6)
In the trivializations deﬁned above, the mapping from
P × G to Q, which allows us to relate j(ωC) to ωE, can be
obtained by setting the coordinate on the ﬁber H of PU
to the neutral element e and identifying the result with
QU:
U × {e} × G = QU .
This corresponds to the quotient operation performed in
deﬁning Q as the associated bundle P ×HG (see Appendix
B for details). Performing this quotient in Eq. ( 6) gives
(ϕ∗)− 1 (ωC), the Ehresmann connection we are looking
for, in the local trivialization corresponding to QU:
ωE(x, g) = g− 1ω
U
C (x)g + g− 1dg. (7)
Now, observe that Eq. ( 4) also applies, in particular,
to the Ehresmann connection ωE in the trivialisation cor-
responding to QU.Then, comparing Eq. ( 4) for ωE with
the above Eq. ( 7) leads to:
ω
U
E (x) = ω
U
C (x) (8)
B. Levi-Civita coupling from W eitzenb¨ ock
one-form
The above considerations show us that, when restricted
to the base manifold, both the original Cartan connec-
tion and the Ehresmann connection obtained from it,
thanks to Sharpe’s theorem A.1, are the same on the base
manifold, see Eq. ( 8). They diﬀer mainly through the
Maurer-Cartan form between Eqs. ( 7) and ( 5). In partic-
ular, for the reductive Cartan connection of Eq. ( 2), the
Weitzenb¨ ock term remains untouched by the map (ϕ∗)− 1,
which thus cannot lead to a Levi-Civita coupling.
To remedy this problem, one starts by observing that
any Ehresmann connection is related to any other by a
G-invariant7 horizontal g-valued one-form. This can be
seen as follows. First, let us consider the diﬀerence of
any pair of Ehresmann connection one-forms ω1 and ω2.
Using Eq. ( 4) repeatedly for ω1 and ω2, and substracting
the result one obtains, in the same local trivialization
ω2 − ω1 = g− 1 (ω
U
2 − ω
U
1 ) g.
This g-valued one-form is manifestly G-invariant and hor-
izontal. Second, if α is a G-invariant horizontal g-valued
one-form in Q, the sum ω + α, where ω is an Ehresmann
connection, is both G-invariant and g-valued. In addi-
tion, since α is horizontal, ω + α reduces to the Maurer-
Cartan form along ﬁbers. Thus the g-valued one-form
ω + α is G-invariant, and reduces to the Maurer-Cartan
form along the ﬁbers, it is consequetly an Ehresmann
connection one-form.
This property allows us to recast Eq. ( 7), up to a re-
deﬁnition of ωE under the form
(ωE + α) (x, g) = g− 1 (ω
U
C ) (x)g + g− 1dg, (9)
where α is a G-invariant horizontal g-valued one-form in
Q. The Eq. ( 8) in the trivialization corresponding to QU
becomes accordingly
ω
U
E (x) + α
U
(x) = ω
U
C (x).
Then Eq ( 9) can be recast under the form
ωE(x, g) = g− 1 (ω
U
C − α
U
) (x)g + g− 1dg, (10)
Now, let us specialize to our framework in which
P = OM , Q = AM and ωC = ωW + θ. In that case,
one can show [ 28, theorem 6.2.5 p. 79] that, for a given
Ehresmann one-form ω on P = OM , there exist a unique
one-form κω on P = OM , the so-called contorsion one-
form, such that ω − κω = ωLC, the Levi-Civita one form.
The contorsion κω being thus the diﬀerence between two
Ehresmann connections it has the properties required to
enter in Eq. ( 10) as the one-form α. We can therefore
set α to the contorsion corresponding to the Weisenb¨ ock
connection
α = κωW =: κW
in order to obtain the Levi-Civita one-form in the Ehres-
mann connection ωE when the Ehresmann part of the
7 By G-invariance we mean the property for a one-form α to sat-
isfy: R∗
gα = Adg− 1 (α), that is for matrix Lie group R∗
g α =
g− 1αg.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
reductive Cartan connection ωC is ωW . Finally Eq. ( 10)
specializes to
ωE(x, g) = g− 1 ((ωW + θ)
U
− κ
U
W ) (x)g + g− 1dg, (11)
C. The AM − → OM map, and the covariant
derivative
In the two previous sections we have shown how,
starting from the Cartan-Weitzenb¨ ock one-form ( 2) in
P = OM , one can obtain the Ehresmann-Levi-Civita
one-form ωE = ωLC + θ in Q = AM , the principal
Poincar´ e bundle.
As a last step, the covariant derivative, corresponding
to the Levi-Civita connection, over the base manifold M ,
can now be obtained thanks to a theorem shown in [ 22,
proposition 3.1 p. 127] which states 8 the existence of a
map, hereafter β, which associates to an aﬃne connec-
tion, generically ω + φ deﬁned on AM , the pair ( ω, φ) on
OM .
This applies in particular to the aﬃne connection ωE
given in Eq. ( 11) for which β : ωE ↦→(ωLC, θ). This map
allows us to deﬁne the covariant derivative, associated to
the reductive Cartan connection ( 2), as the usual covari-
ant derivative of GR, that is the Fock-Ivanenko deriva-
tive. This is the main result of this section.
However, let us emphasize that the Levi-Civita con-
nection appearing in this covariant derivative should be
considered as a function of ωW , θ and η (the Minkowskian
metric) these two last quantities entering in the deﬁni-
tion of the contorsion κW . As a consequence, the Levi-
Civita connection one-form should not be associated to
the gauge ﬁeld mediating gravity.
V. VIEWING TEGR AS A GAUGE THEOR Y OF
TRANSLATIONS ?
A. Gauge ﬁeld vs. connection
In gauge theories of particle physics, the gauge ﬁelds
(associated with gauge bosons) are those ﬁelds which,
at our present energy scale, mediate one of the funda-
mentals interactions (electromagnetic, weak or strong)
between matter ﬁelds. They are termed gauge ﬁeld since
their dynamical free equations (uncoupled from matter),
involving gauge ﬁelds through their ﬁeld strength, exhibit
gauge invariance. On the mathematical side, the gauge
ﬁelds are recognized to be sections of Ehresmann con-
nections deﬁned on a principal bundle, whose structure
group G is a global symmetry group of the free (in the
8 W e specialize here this theorem to the sub-bundle of orthono rmal
frame OM and its aﬃne extension AM .
sense of uncoupled through gauge ﬁelds) matter equa-
tions. The ﬁeld strengths are (sections of) the curvature
of these connections one-form. The coupling between a
matter ﬁeld and a gauge ﬁeld, renders the interacting the-
ory of matter ﬁeld locally invariant under the symmetry
group G. Thus, in these theories, on the physical side,
the gauge ﬁeld is a dynamical ﬁeld which fulﬁlls two re-
lated roles: to mediate an interaction and to ensure local
invariance under some symmetry.
In classical gravity the spacetime is a metric manifold
(M, g), the metric being, in the Cartan view, induced
by orthonormal (co-)frames (tetrads) through η(e, e) = g.
This manifold is canonically the base of a frame bundle
F M. It is a Gl(4 , R) principal bundle which contains
the orthonormal bundle OM as a principal SO(1 , 3) sub-
bundle. A speciﬁc structure, the canonical one-form θ, is
always deﬁned on F M. It realizes the so-called solder-
ing9 and is independent of the existence of any connection
on F M. In particular, it is worth noting that θ is not
a connection one-form by itself. When an Ehresmann
connection is present on F M, the canonical one-form al-
lows us to deﬁne the torsion. The one-form θ is speciﬁc
of the frame bundle, with no equivalent in the mathe-
matical framework of particle physics gauge theory just
described, where the Frame bundle, although always de-
ﬁned, is not used. As a consequence, the particle physics
framework can be expected to be too restrictive to en-
compass a gauge theory of gravity involving torsion, such
as TEGR.
The above remarks lead us to consider the role played
by θ in our proposal to describe TEGR with the help
of the reductive Cartan connection ωC = ωW + θ. The
canonical one-form appears in two places:
1. in the deﬁnition of ωC Eq. ( 2), where as a one-form
valued in R4, the translation part of the Poincar´ e
algebra, it is identiﬁed with the term θ.
2. in the deﬁnition of the contorsion one-form used to
rewrite the Levi-Civita one-form as the combina-
tion ωLC = ωW − κW (see Sec. IV C).
Thus, we observe that the canonical one form θ is, ﬁrst,
the part of the Cartan connection related to the local
translation invariance, and second, enters in an essential
way in the coupling with matter. These two characteris-
tics are reminiscent of those retained at the beginning of
the present section to identify a gauge ﬁeld. Since such
a ﬁeld is deﬁned on the base manifold, let us examine
the pullback, on the base manifold, of the canonical one-
form and its associated Levi-Civita connection, that is
the connection that enter the usual gravitational covari-
ant derivative on the base. In the present context, the
pullback along some section σ of the canonical form θ
reads
σ∗θ = e, (12)
9 Note that θ is not the solder form by itself [see 13].

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
where e is a local ﬁeld of frame (a tetrad), and that of the
connection ωLC, in some open set U of the base, reads
ω
U
LC = ω
U
W − κ
U
W . (13)
The Eq. ( 12), will play a central role in the translation-
gauge interpretation, because it relates θ, a canonical
structure, to the dynamical ﬁeld e. Indeed, Eq. ( 12) can
be read of as the one-to-one relation between σ and e
induced by θ: to choose a section is to choose a frame.
Now, e, in the Cartan view of gravity, is the solution of
the gravity ﬁeld equations. These, are known to exhibit
gauge invariance, the choice of a gauge, that is the choice
of a particular frame e, being, in the ﬁber bundle context,
precisely the choice of a section σ. These facts point
towards the interpretation of the frame e as the gauge
ﬁeld of the theory.
Eq. ( 13), on another hand can be viewed as the deﬁ-
nition of a “fake gauge ﬁeld”, in the sense that the Levi-
Civita term corresponds to the implementation of the lo-
cal Lorentz invariance through the covariant derivative,
but has no proper dynamics, other than that being in-
duced by the tetrad e. Indeed, the ﬁrst term on the
r.h.s. of ( 13), the Weitzenb¨ ock connection one-form, only
involves local Lorentz transformations and has a null cur-
vature (ﬁeld strength), while the second term on the r.h.s.
of ( 13), the contortion one-form, is built on η, the con-
stant Minkowskian metric, and the ﬁeld e. The tetrad
e thus appears here as a dynamical ﬁeld which “drives”
the Lorentz invariance.
We ﬁnally come to the conclusion that, at least in the
context of TEGR, a distinction should be made between
the gauge ﬁeld and the connection. Note that, such a
distinction does not imply any change in particle physics
theory (at least at our energy scale), since the structures
involved in that extension are not present (not used) in
the particle physics framework.
B. A new gauge paradigm for TEGR ?
This observation, shows us a possible way to interpret
TEGR as a gauge theory of translations if we allow one to
broaden the structure of a gauge theory by introducing
a distinction between the gauge ﬁeld and the connection.
In this view, the gauge ﬁeld is deﬁned as the pullback on
the base manifold, along some section σ, of the canonical
form θ, that is as a frame e. To remind the motivations
for such an interpretation, let us recall that the ﬁeld e:
1. is a dynamical ﬁeld, whose equation exhibits gauge
invariance,
2. mediates the interaction through the Levi-Civita
connection, Eq. ( 13), which in the present context
is induced by the ﬁeld e, as described at the end of
Sec. V A,
3. is to some extent responsible for the local Lorentz
invariance in the sense that the Levi-Civita connec-
tion is here determined by e and structural elements
as η.
These three properties are characteristic of a gauge ﬁeld
(Sec. V A). Then, if we insist to interpret TEGR as a
gauge theory, we can describe it using e as the gauge ﬁeld
of translations associated with the Cartan connection ωC
Eq. ( 2).
As explained at the end of Sec. V A, this interpretation
does not require any changes in the usual framework of
particle physics gauge theories since the departure from
that framework relates to extraneous quantities: θ, e.
Nevertheless, it requires a distortion of the attributes of
the gauge ﬁeld, in the sense that the ﬁeld associated to
translations, the tetrad e, does not implement a local
invariance nor mediates the interaction in the same way
as gauge ﬁeld of particle physics would do. This is of
course related to the nature of that ﬁeld, which is not a
connection.
Here, the coupling made through the Levi-Civita con-
nection, although induced by the translation ﬁeld e, re-
lates to Lorentz invariance. Furthermore, coupling to
matter involves the corresponding representation of the
Lorentz group, in particular matter’s spin. For a scalar
ﬁeld, as it is spinless, that coupling reduces to zero. Since
gravity seems to couple universally to matter, that is in-
dependently of its spin, the gravitational coupling should
also arise from elsewhere. Indeed, since the generators of
the translations span the space g/h = R4 of the Poincar´ e
algebra and, as seen in Sec. II A, this space is identiﬁed
to the tangent space of the base manifold, the expansion
of the partial derivative operator on the tetrad basis in a
neighborhood of some point x,
∂µ = (∂µ)a ea(x)
shows that the partial derivatives are related to local
translations. The universal coupling to gravity should
thus be assigned to the partial diﬀerential operator, and
related to local and inﬁnitesimal translations. We re-
mark that this interpretation is reminiscent of that of the
translation-only gauge theory [see 1, sec 5.3], although it
avoids the problematic identiﬁcation of the gauge ﬁeld
with a connection mentioned in the introduction Sec. I.
Here, we point out that, although the structure of the
coupling to matter of our Cartan-TEGR formulation is
mathematically well deﬁned, the gauge interpretation of
the tetrad is more a matter of opinion. The conceptual
split between the concepts of gauge ﬁeld and connection
being sound, objections can be raised on the protracted
reasoning that leads to the link between translations and
the gauge ﬁeld e. In particular, gauging translations in
the present context does not correspond to replacing a
global symmetry by a local one, the translations gener-
ated by the g/h part of the Poincar´ e algebra being always
local (and inﬁnitesimal). We oﬀer such interpretation to
the adhesion from the reader, but abstain from claiming
it.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
VI. CONCLUSION
The main aim of this article is to show that it is pos-
sible to retrieve the correct coupling to matter in TEGR
starting from a Cartan connection and following a well
deﬁned and robust procedure to obtain the familiar Levi-
Civita form which of course ﬁts all presently available
data. To achieve this we use a powerful theorem by
Sharpe that yields a one to one correspondence between
Cartan connections and Ehresmann aﬃne connections,
we apply the Equivalence Principle to extract the Levi-
Civita connection from TEGR’s Weitzenb¨ ock one-form,
we eventually map the results from the Aﬃne bundle to
the Frame bundle. Following these steps the coupling to
matter is then given by the usual Fock-Ivanenko covariant
derivative appearing as a consequence of the structure
descending from the initial choice of Cartan connection.
Beside showing how to coherently retrieve the correct
coupling to matter from TEGR with a Cartan connec-
tion, we adventure in discussing how the usual paradigm
of gauge theories in classical particle physics needs to be
enlarged if one insists on interpreting the structure of the
TEGR as a gauge theory for the translation group. More
precisely, it appears that a distinction between the con-
nection (on spacetime) and the gauge ﬁeld is required: in
such interpretation torsion appears as the ﬁeld strength
of the Cartan connection, justifying the Cartan struc-
ture to reproduce TEGR in a bundle framework, and the
co-frame (tetrad) as the gauge ﬁeld related to local trans-
lation invariance. We note furthermore that the Lorentz
invariance is also driven, although indirectly, by the co-
frame.
As an interpretation of the theory here described, the
gauge theoretic nature of TEGR could certainly still be
discussed and adhesion to such interpretation is left to
the reader. Nevertheless, the Cartan connection ap-
proach gives a new and consistent theoretical description
of TEGR.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thanks, D. Bennequin for helpful
discussions on geometry. The work of M. Le D. has been
supported by Lanzhou University starting fund, and the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(Grant No.lzujbky-2019-25).
Appendix A: Relating Ehresmann and Cartan
connections
For convenience we reproduce here the theorem [Prop.
3.1 p. 365 of 25], relating Ehresmann to Cartan connec-
tions, that we use to obtain a covariant derivative.
Let G be a Lie group and H a subgroup of G,
P := P (M, H ) a principal bundle.
Let Q := Q(M, G) = P ×H G the principal G-bundle
associated to P by the action by left multiplication of
H on G. The principal bundle P is a sub-bundle of
the principal bundle Q through the canonical inclusion
p ↦→(p, eG).
Let EQ be the set of Ehresmann connection ωE on Q
such that Ker( ωE) ⋂ ϕ∗(T P) = 0, and CP the set of g-
valued Cartan connections on P .
Theorem A.1 Let (G, H) be a Klein geometry 10 and let
P and Q be principal H and G bundles, over a manifold
M , respectively. Assume that dim G = dim P and that
ϕ : P ↦→Q is an H-bundle map. Then the correspon-
dence ϕ∗ : EQ − →CP , is a bijection of sets.
The inverse map of ϕ∗ is deﬁned as follow: let ωC a
g-valued Cartan connection on P (M, H ), it can be ex-
tended to a one-form j(ωC) on P × G deﬁned by the
expression:
j(ωC) := Adg− 1 π∗
P ωC + π∗
GωG, (A1)
where ωG is the Maurer-Cartan form on G, while
πP and πG are the projections on P and G respectively.
This one-form on P ×G, is proven to be the pull-up, from
Q to P × G, of the Ehresmann connection ωE such that
ϕ∗(ωE) = ωC.
Appendix B: Associated bundle Q
In Ref. [ 13], we commented on associated bundles, and
in particular, on associated vector bundles. Here we re-
call some facts about associated Lie group bundles in
relation to our application of the Sharpe theorem to the
Cartan connection in Sec. IV A.
Let us remind from [ 13, appendix 4] that 11 P ×H F ,
where P = P (M, H, π) is a principal left H-bundle and
F a H-space, is a manifold whose points are the orbits
(the equivalence classes) for the right action RH(p, f) ↦→
RH(p, f) := ( ph, h− 1f ) of H on the product space P × F .
The projection map π of P induces a projection ˆπ from
P ×H F onto the base M . The ﬁber of P ×H F over
some x ∈ M is then deﬁned as ˆ π− 1(x). Then, on can
show that the local diﬀerentiable structure of P ensures
that P ×H F is a ﬁber bundle with base M , ﬁber F , and
structure group H.
In Sharpe theorem, the resulting associated bundle
Q = P ×H G is, in fact, a principal G-bundle. This is
because the Lie group G (the Poincar´ e group in our par-
ticular framework) contains the Lie group H (the Lorentz
10 A Klein geometry is a pair ( G, H), where G is a Lie group and
H ⊂ G a closed subgroup such that G/H is connected [see 25,
p. 151]
11 W e use here the notation ×H instead of ×ρ in coherence with
that of Sharpe and [ 20].

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
group) as a subgroup. Indeed, Q is the so-called G-
extension of P [see 20, Sec. 5.3.3]. As a consequence,
following our notations Sec. IV A, a local trivialisation
of Q = P ×H G correspond to the local product U × G, U
being some open set of trivialization, corresponding local
coordinates on Q are ( x, g).
[1] R. Aldrovandi and J. G. Pereira,
Teleparallel Gravity: An Introduction , Vol. 173
(Springer, 2013).
[2] J. W. Maluf and F. F. Faria, Confor-
mally invariant teleparallel theories of
gravity, Phys. Rev. D85, 027502 (2012) ,
arXiv:1110.3095 [gr-qc] .
[3] J. B. Jim´ enez, L. Heisenberg, and T. S. Koivisto, The
Geometrical Trinity of Gravity, Universe 5, 173 (2019) ,
arXiv:1903.06830 [hep-th] .
[4] J. M. Nester and H.-J. Yo, Symmetric teleparal-
lel general relativity, Chin. J. Phys. 37, 113 (1999),
arXiv:gr-qc/9809049 [gr-qc] .
[5] R. Ferraro and F. Fiorini, Modiﬁed
teleparallel gravity: Inﬂation without in-
ﬂaton, Phys. Rev. D75, 084031 (2007) ,
arXiv:gr-qc/0610067 [gr-qc] .
[6] S. Capozziello, R. D’Agostino, and O. Lu-
ongo, Extended Gravity Cosmography,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D28, 1930016 (2019) ,
arXiv:1904.01427 [gr-qc] .
[7] S. Bahamonde, C. G. B¨ ohmer, and
M. Wright, Modiﬁed teleparallel theories
of gravity, Phys. Rev. D92, 104042 (2015) ,
arXiv:1508.05120 [gr-qc] .
[8] S. Bahamonde and S. Capozziello, Noether
Symmetry Approach in f (T, B ) teleparal-
lel cosmology, Eur. Phys. J. C 77, 107 (2017) ,
arXiv:1612.01299 [gr-qc] .
[9] J. Formiga, Conformal teleparallel theories and
Weyl geometry, Phys. Rev. D99, 064047 (2019) ,
arXiv:1905.04764 [gr-qc] .
[10] K. Bamba, S. D. Odintsov, and D. S´ aez-G´ omez,
Conformal symmetry and accelerating cosmology in
teleparallel gravity, Phys. Rev. D88, 084042 (2013) ,
arXiv:1308.5789 [gr-qc] .
[11] P. Gonz´ alez, S. Reyes, and Y. V´ asquez, Telepar-
allel Equivalent of Lovelock Gravity, Generaliza-
tions and Cosmological Applications, JCAP 07, 040 ,
arXiv:1905.07633 [gr-qc] .
[12] M. Krˇ sˇ s´ ak, R. J. van den Hoogen, J. G. Pereira,
C. G. B¨ ohmer, and A. A. Coley, Teleparallel the-
ories of gravity: illuminating a fully invariant
approach, Class. Quant. Grav. 36, 183001 (2019) ,
arXiv:1810.12932 [gr-qc] .
[13] M. Fontanini, E. Huguet, and M. Le Delliou,
Teleparallel gravity equivalent of general rela-
tivity as a gauge theory: Translation or Car-
tan connection?, Phys. Rev. D99, 064006 (2019) ,
arXiv:1811.03810 [gr-qc] .
[14] J. G. Pereira and Y. N. Obukhov, Gauge Structure of
Teleparallel Gravity, Proceedings, Teleparallel Universes
in Salamanca: Salamanca, Spain, November 26-28, 2018 ,
Universe 5, 139 (2019) , arXiv:1906.06287 [gr-qc] .
[15] M. Le Delliou, E. Huguet, and M. Fontanini, Telepar-
allel theory as a gauge theory of translations: Re-
marks and issues, Phys. Rev. D 101, 024059 (2020) ,
arXiv:1910.08471 [gr-qc] .
[16] S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of the General Theory of Relativity
(Wiley, New York, NY, 1972).
[17] D. Ivanenko and G. Sardanashvily, The Gauge Treatment
of Gravity, Phys. Rept. 94, 1 (1983) .
[18] M. Blagojevi´ c and F. W. Hehl, eds.,
Gauge Theories of Gravitation (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 2013).
[19] Fecko, M., Diﬀerential Geometry and Lie Groups for
Physicists (Cambridge University Press, 2006).
[20] C. J. Isham, Modern diﬀerential geometry for physicists
(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999).
[21] M. Nakahara, Geometry, topology and physics , 2nd ed.
(CRC press, 2003).
[22] S. Kobayashi and K. Nomizu, Foundations of Diﬀerential
Geometry, vol 1 (John Willey & Sons, New York, 1963).
[23] D. K. Wise, MacDowell–mansouri
gravity and cartan geometry,
Classical and Quantum Gravity 27, 155010 (2010) .
[24] G. Catren, Geometric founda-
tions of Cartan gauge gravity,
Int. J. Geom. Meth. Mod. Phys. 12, 1530002 (2015) ,
arXiv:1407.7814 [gr-qc] .
[25] R. Sharpe, Diﬀerential Geometry: Cartan ’s Generaliza-
tion of Klein ’s Erlangen Program (Springer, New York,
1997).
[26] R. P. Geroch, Spinor structure of space-times in genera l
relativity. I, J. Math. Phys. 9, 1739 (1968) .
[27] R. P. Geroch, Spinor structure of space-times in genera l
relativity. II, J. Math. Phys. 11, 343 (1970) .
[28] D. Bleecker, Gauge theories and variational principles
(Dover, 2005).
