===== PAGE 1 =====
Atom-interferometric test of the equivalence principle at the 10−12 level
Peter Asenbaum,∗ Chris Overstreet,∗ Minjeong Kim, Joseph Curti, and Mark A. Kasevich †
Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305
(Dated: June 25, 2020)
Does gravity inﬂuence local measurements? We use a dual-species atom interferometer with 2 s
of free-fall time to measure the relative acceleration between 85Rb and 87Rb wave packets in the
Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. Systematic errors arising from kinematic diﬀerences between the isotopes
are suppressed by calibrating the angles and frequencies of the interferometry beams. We ﬁnd an
E¨ otv¨ os parameter ofη = [1.6 ± 1.8 (stat) ± 3.4 (sys)]× 10−12, consistent with zero violation
of the equivalence principle. With a resolution of up to 1 .4× 10−11g per shot, we demonstrate a
sensitivity to η of 5.4× 10−11/
√
Hz.
The equivalence principle (EP), which posits that all
gravitational eﬀects disappear locally [1], is the founda-
tion of general relativity [2] and other geometric theories
of gravity. Most theoretical uniﬁcation attempts that
couple gravity to the Standard Model lead to EP viola-
tions [3]. In addition, tests of the equivalence principle
search for perturbations of geometric gravity and are sen-
sitive to exotic interactions [4, 5] that couple diﬀerently
to the test masses. These tests are complementary to
searches for large-scale variations of unknown ﬁelds [6]
and are carried out with local probes that can be pre-
cisely controlled.
EP tests are often characterized by the E¨ otv¨ os parame-
terη, which is the relative acceleration of the test masses
divided by the average acceleration between the test
masses and the nearby gravitational source. With clas-
sical accelerometers, EP violation has been constrained
to η < 1.8× 10−13 by torsion balances in a laboratory
setting [7] and to η <1.3×10−14 by the concluded space
mission MICROSCOPE [8].
We perform an equivalence principle test by interfer-
ometrically measuring the relative acceleration of freely
falling clouds of atoms. Atom clouds are well-suited test
masses because they spend 99 .9% of the interrogation
time in free fall and the remainder in precisely controlled
interactions with the interferometry lasers. In addition,
atoms have uniform and well-characterized physical prop-
erties. Compared to classical tests, atom-interferometric
(AI) EP tests are inﬂuenced by diﬀerent sources of sys-
tematic error [9]. AI EP tests can be performed between
isotopes that diﬀer only in neutron number, and quan-
tum tests are especially sensitive to particular violation
mechanisms [10]. However, previous AI EP tests [11–14]
have been limited to η <3× 10−8 in dual-species com-
parisons [14] and η <1.4× 10−9 in comparisons between
ground states of a single species [15], largely due to a lack
of sensitivity compared to classical experiments.
In this work, we report an atom-interferometric test of
the equivalence principle between 85Rb and 87Rb with
η = [1.6 ± 1.8 (stat) ± 3.4 (sys)]× 10−12, consistent
with zero violation at the 10 −12 level. This result im-
proves by four orders of magnitude on the best previous
dual-species EP test with atoms [14]. We achieve high
sensitivity by utilizing a long interferometer timeT and a
large momentum splitting between interferometer arms.
With a resolution of 1.4× 10−11g per shot and 15 s cycle
time, the interferometer attains the highest sensitivity to
η of any laboratory experiment to date [7].
The relative acceleration between 85Rb and 87Rb is
measured with a dual-species atom interferometer. The
experimental apparatus is described in [16]. We prepare
ultra-cold clouds of 85Rb and 87Rb by evaporative cool-
ing in a magnetic trap. The subsequent magnetic lensing
sequence lowers the horizontal kinetic energies to 25 nK
but introduces a 1.8 mm vertical oﬀset between the two
isotopes. The other kinematic degrees of freedom (DoFs)
remain matched. The clouds are then trapped in a verti-
cal 1D optical lattice and accelerated to 13 m/s in 20 ms.
This laser lattice launch transfers an even number of pho-
ton recoil momenta ℏk to the atoms. The ﬁnal velocity,
and therefore the launch height ( ∼ 8.5 m), is chosen to
match the vertical velocities of the two isotopes. To spa-
tially overlap the clouds, we apply species-selective Ra-
man transitions that kick the two isotopes in opposite
directions. After a 77 ms drift time and removal of un-
transferred atoms, the Raman transitions are reversed,
and the clouds are overlapped to better than 65µm. The
Raman pulses also provide velocity selection, and the de-
tunings of the Raman pulses allow the average vertical
velocity of each isotope to be individually controlled.
The interferometer beamsplitters consist of sequences
of two-photon Bragg transitions [16] that transfer 4 ℏk,
8ℏk, or 12 ℏk momentum. The pulses addressing each
interferometer arm are interleaved, and the time interval
between successive transitions is 3 ms. Collectively, these
pulses split the clouds symmetrically in the vertical direc-
tion. The symmetric interferometer geometry guarantees
that the midpoint trajectory [17] of each isotope remains
essentially unperturbed. The interferometer duration 2T
is 1910 ms, and the maximum wave packet separation for
12ℏk is 6.9 cm (6.7 cm) for 85Rb ( 87Rb). After a total
drift time of 2 .5 s, the output ports (separated by 2 ℏk
momentum) are imaged with two orthogonal CCD cam-
eras along the horizontal directions. One isotope is im-
aged with a time delay of 1 ms so that the two species
can be individually resolved. The phase of each inter-
arXiv:2005.11624v2  [physics.atom-ph]  12 Aug 2020

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
ferometer is given by the population ratio of its output
ports. Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic of the interferometer
sequence.
In an EP test conﬁguration, the diﬀerential phase be-
tween 85Rb and 87Rb is close to zero. To distinguish
small positive from small negative diﬀerential phases, a
precise phase oﬀset is needed. By adjusting the angles of
the interferometry beams, we imprint a horizontal phase
gradient so that each image contains a full interference
fringe. This “detection fringe” is highly common to both
isotopes and allows the contrast and phase of each inter-
ferometer to be extracted from a single shot. Fig. 1(b)
shows a ﬂuorescence image in which the detection fringe
is visible.
FIG. 1. (a) Schematic of simultaneous 85Rb and 87Rb interfer-
ometer. In pulse zone 1 ( t = 0), each atom cloud is split into
two interferometer paths with ℏk1 momentum diﬀerence. In
pulse zone 2 (t =T ), the paths are reﬂected toward each other
with wavevector k2. In pulse zone 3 ( t = 2T ), the paths are
recombined and interfered with wavevector k3. The eﬀective
wavevectors k1, k2, and k3 diﬀer slightly in orientation and
magnitude to create a tailored phase response to kinematic
initial conditions. The midpoint trajectory of each isotope
remains essentially unperturbed throughout the interferom-
eter. (b) Single ﬂuorescence image (14.8 mm x 25.6 mm) of
85Rb and 87Rb output ports (0ℏk and−2ℏk) with 8ℏk beam-
splitters. The detection fringe allows precise single-shot phase
extraction.
The diﬀerential phase shift ∆φ =nk ∆gT 2 is propor-
tional to the relative acceleration ∆g between the atoms.
We achieve a single-shot diﬀerential phase resolution of
8 mrad in an 8ℏk interferometer, which corresponds to a
relative acceleration sensitivity of 1.4× 10−11g per shot
with duty cycle 15 s. The observed noise is close to the
atomic shot-noise limit with ∼ 105 atoms per interfer-
ometer and interference contrast of 70%. In each data
run, the initial beamsplitter direction, number of photon
recoils n per beamsplitter (4, 8, or 12), detection fringe
direction, and imaging order are permuted. The diﬀeren-
tial phase is averaged over initial beamsplitter direction,
detection fringe direction, and imaging order to suppress
systematic errors. A full run consists of about 20 shots
in each conﬁguration (480 shots total). The statistical
sensitivity is derived from three full runs taken on three
separate days. Throughout the data-taking and analysis
process, the EP result was blinded by the addition of an
unknown oﬀset to each diﬀerential phase measurement.
Systematic errors arise from eﬀects that shift the 85Rb
interferometer phase relative to the 87Rb phase. In our
experiment, there are three signiﬁcant sources of system-
atic error: diﬀerences in kinematic DoFs, diﬀerences in
the interaction with the electromagnetic ﬁeld, and imag-
ing errors. A summary of the systematic errors is pre-
sented in Table I. The most signiﬁcant systematic eﬀects
are described in the text below, and additional errors are
discussed in the supplement.
The relevant kinematic DoFs are the initial position
and velocity of each species in the vertical and horizontal
directions. Each species is coupled by its kinematic DoFs
to the gravity gradient and to the wavefront of the inter-
ferometry beams. In order to reduce the associated sys-
tematic errors, we minimize diﬀerences in the kinematic
DoFs and suppress the sensitivity of the interferometer
to them. The phase sensitivity to the vertical DoFs can
be minimized by adjusting the frequency of the interfer-
ometry lasers between each pulse zone, and the phase
sensitivity to the horizontal DoFs can be minimized by
adjusting the angles of the lasers.
To be concrete, suppose that the average frequency of
the interferometry lasers during pulse zone 2 isf. Chang-
ing the average frequency of pulse zone 1 tof +∆f1 adds
a phase shift 2π/cn ∆f1z, wheren is the number of pho-
ton recoils andz is the initial vertical position. Similarly,
if the average frequency of pulse zone 3 is f + ∆f3, the
added phase shift 2π/cn ∆f3 (z + 2vzT ) depends on the
initial vertical velocity vz. Gravity gradients cause sys-
tematic errors that are proportional to the vertical initial
conditions [16, 18]. By choosing the appropriate combi-
nation of ∆f1 and ∆f3, we can simultaneously minimize
the phase sensitivity to z and vz, realizing a general-
ized version of the compensation technique reported in
[16, 19]. To calibrate the pulse zone frequencies, we ver-
tically displace the two isotopes in each DoF and choose
∆f1 and ∆f3 to minimize the dependence of the diﬀer-
ential phase on the displacement.
An analogous technique can be used to suppress the
sensitivity of the interferometer to horizontal DoFs. Sup-
pose that the beam angle during pulse zone 2 is θ2 = 0.
Setting the angle of pulse zone 1 to θ1 in the xz plane
adds the phase shift nkθ 1x, where x is the initial hor-
izontal position. Likewise, the angle θ3 in pulse zone 3
adds the phase shiftnkθ 3 (x+2vxT ), wherevx is the ini-
tial horizontal velocity. An appropriate choice of angles
in each horizontal direction provides complete compen-
sation of linear phase gradients from the interferometer
wavefront. Such phase gradients arise due to the rotation
of the Earth [20].
We control the angle of the interferometry lasers in
each pulse zone by setting the angle of the mirror that

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
retroreﬂects them. This angle is adjusted during the in-
terferometer to undo the velocity-dependent phase that
would otherwise be imprinted by the Earth’s rotation. To
calibrate the rotation rate, we add and subtract an addi-
tional velocity-dependent phase in a 87Rb interferometer
and null the fringe frequency diﬀerence [20]. This pro-
cedure suppresses phase shifts proportional to horizontal
velocity by a factor of 1000. For the EP test, we imprint
a horizontal phase that is proportional to the detected
position (a combination of initial position and initial ve-
locity; see supplement for additional information). The
use of a detection fringe for phase readout avoids system-
atic errors from initial horizontal displacements between
the isotopes.
FIG. 2. Compensation method for kinematic DoFs. Chang-
ing the angle (frequency) of pulse zone 1 creates a horizon-
tal (vertical) position-dependent phase. Changing the angle
(frequency) of pulse zone 1 by −θ (−∆f) and pulse zone 3
by θ (∆f) creates a horizontal (vertical) velocity-dependent
phase. The angle and frequency steps are calibrated to elim-
inate phase sensitivity to kinematic DoFs.
These compensation techniques allow us to suppress
all phase shifts that arise from linear horizontal or verti-
cal phase gradients. However, the atom clouds also have
a ﬁnite width that can couple to higher-order horizon-
tal wavefront perturbations. To bound this eﬀect, we
correlate the cloud width with the diﬀerential phase and
measure the phase diﬀerence between the middle and the
edge of each cloud.
To extract the relative acceleration between 85Rb and
87Rb, we compare the diﬀerential phase of interferom-
eters with beamsplitter momentum nℏk, where n ∈
{4, 8, 12}. The relative acceleration is given by the linear
dependence of the diﬀerential phase on n. We vary n
by adding additional 2ℏk pulses to each pulse zone. This
approach eliminates systematic errors that arise from the
ﬁnite duration and detuning of the initial and ﬁnal π/2
beamsplitter pulses [21, 22], which are the same for all n.
The direction of the initial and ﬁnal beamsplitters,
set by the frequency diﬀerence between interferometry
beams, determines the momenta of the interferometer
output ports (either {2ℏk, 0ℏk} or{0ℏk,−2ℏk} with re-
spect to the launched clouds). We switch the beamsplit-
ter direction to identify phase shifts that scale with k2.
Such phase shifts arise due to parasitic recoil interferome-
ters [23] that are caused by imperfect transfer eﬃciency.
The phase of a recoil-sensitive interferometer scales as
FIG. 3. EP data (1481 shots). Left: time series of the inter-
ferometer phase diﬀerence φ85−φ87, color-coded by interfer-
ometer order (4 ℏk red, 8 ℏk gray, 12ℏk blue). Hollow (solid)
points represent measurements with initial beamsplitter direc-
tion down (up). Right: Histogram of the phase diﬀerence as
a function of interferometer order, averaged over beamsplitter
direction, detection fringe direction, and imaging order.
ℏk2T/m, and the dependence on the mass m creates
a systematic error in the EP measurement. When the
beamsplitter direction is reversed, the recoil phase shifts
change sign relative to the acceleration-induced phase
shift, allowing the two eﬀects to be distinguished.
Electromagnetic interactions cause signiﬁcant system-
atic errors in two ways. First, a diﬀerential acceleration
arises from oﬀ-resonant forces (AC-Stark shifts) induced
by the interferometry lasers. This eﬀect is reduced by
using an optical spectrum that suppresses the shifts of
the 87Rb F = 2 and 85Rb F = 3 states. To lowest or-
der in the wavepacket separation, the diﬀerential Stark
shift ∆φS in our interferometer geometry is given by
∆φS = (f85/m85−f87/m87) 2π(n− 1)β (nℏkT ), where
β is the fractional intensity gradient at the height of the
middle pulse zone andfi is a factor that characterizes the
Stark shift suppression of isotope i. The interferometry
beams have a 1/e2 radius of 2 cm and are retroreﬂected
at an angle of 0.5 mrad to avoid etaloning, which creates
a fractional intensity gradient β = 1× 10−3/(5 cm). Re-
ducing the diﬀerential Stark shift to ∼ 1 mrad in a 12ℏk
interferometer requires fi∼ 10−2.
Our optical spectrum is designed to achieve fi∼ 10−2
for both isotopes simultaneously. The 780 nm spectrum
of each interferometry beam is created by frequency dou-
bling a 1560 nm laser that is phase modulated at 30 GHz.
After doubling, the spectrum consists of two strong side-
bands and a highly suppressed carrier with relative in-
tensity∼ 10−3. The carrier frequency is positioned be-
tween the 85Rb F = 3−→F′ transitions and the 87Rb
F = 2−→F′ transitions, which are separated by 1 GHz.
The blue-detuned sidebands are used to drive Bragg tran-
sitions, and the red-detuned sidebands compensate the
optical forces from the blue-detuned sidebands [24]. To
bound the magnitude of the residual AC-Stark eﬀect, we
add additional oﬀ-resonant pulses to an 8 ℏk interferom-
eter. We observe no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerential
phase shift with these additional pulses, which implies

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
that residual AC-Stark eﬀect induces a diﬀerential accel-
eration below 2.7× 10−12g.
Second, the two isotopes are diﬀerentially accelerated
by magnetic forces. This eﬀect is reduced by creating
a nearly uniform magnetic ﬁeld in the interferometry
region via a solenoid coil and three layers of magnetic
shielding [25]. The atoms enter the shielded region in
the magnetically sensitive states|F = 3,m F = 3⟩ (85Rb)
and |F = 2,m F = 2⟩ (87Rb). A series of microwave
pulses transfers the atoms to the magnetically insensi-
tive states|F = 3,m F = 0⟩ (85Rb) and|F = 2,m F = 0⟩
(87Rb). Nevertheless, the second-order Zeeman eﬀect
causes a phase shiftφi =−2(ℏ/mi)αiB(∂zB)kT 2 of each
isotope, where αi is the second-order Zeeman coeﬃcient
of isotope i, B is the magnetic ﬁeld magnitude, ∂zB is
the vertical magnetic ﬁeld gradient, and mi is the mass
of isotope i. To measure ∂zB, we compare the phase of
a 87Rb interferometer in state |F = 2,m F = 1⟩ with the
phase of a 87Rb interferometer in state|F = 2,m F = 0⟩.
At B = 41 mG, the |F = 2,m F = 1⟩ interferometer has
an increased sensitivity to magnetic ﬁeld gradients by ﬁve
orders of magnitude. The magnetic ﬁeld gradient in the
interferometry region averages to (−0.41±0.036) mG/m,
which corresponds to a diﬀerential acceleration of (5.9±
0.5)× 10−12g in the EP measurement.
The phase of each interferometer is encoded in the spa-
tial position of the imaged detection fringe. Therefore,
imaging diﬀerences between the isotopes can give rise
to systematic errors. To image both species in a single
CCD frame, the ﬂuorescence light for one species is de-
layed by 1 ms, during which the two isotopes drift apart
by 1 cm. The CCD axis is misaligned with respect to
the drift direction by 4 mrad, which causes a diﬀerential
phase shift of 40 mrad. To eliminate this phase shift, we
rotate the camera images in software. We also switch
the imaging order and reverse the direction in which the
detection fringe is imprinted, each of which changes the
sign of imaging-related phase shifts relative to the EP
signal. The imaging order and detection fringe direction
can each be reversed with ﬁdelity> 0.99. Together, these
reversals ensure that imaging eﬀects do not contribute
signiﬁcantly to the systematic error.
We have tested the equivalence principle between85Rb
and 87Rb at the level of 10 −12g. The result is consis-
tent with η = 0, which places generic constraints on new
interactions that would diﬀerentially accelerate the two
isotopes. The systematic uncertainty is primarily limited
by the AC-Stark shift, which can be reduced with an im-
proved laser system that operates at larger single-photon
detuning. Such a system would also allow the momentum
transfer in each pulse zone to be increased, improving the
single-shot sensitivity and reducing the time required to
characterize systematic errors. Uncertainties associated
with linear kinematic errors can be reduced to arbitrar-
ily small values by decreasing the statistical uncertainties
in the calibration of the compensating frequencies and
Parameter Shift Uncertainty
Total kinematic 1.5 2.0
∆z 1.0
∆vz 1.5 0.7
∆x 0.04
∆vx 0.04
∆y 0.2
∆vy 0.2
Width 1.6
AC-Stark shift 2.7
Magnetic gradient -5.9 0.5
Pulse timing 0.04
Blackbody radiation 0.01
Total systematic -4.4 3.4
Statistical 1.8
TABLE I. Error budget in units of 10−12g. The parameter ∆z
(∆vz) includes all errors that are linearly proportional to the
initial vertical position (velocity) diﬀerence between the two
isotopes. Likewise, ∆x (∆vx) includes all errors proportional
to the initial position (velocity) diﬀerence in the detection
fringe direction, and ∆y (∆vy) includes all errors proportional
to the initial position (velocity) diﬀerence in the orthogonal
horizontal direction. See main text and supplement for de-
scriptions of other systematic errors. All uncertainties are
1σ.
angles. The shift due to the magnetic gradient can be
reduced by tailoring the current through each segment
of the solenoid within the magnetic shield. By demon-
strating that the high sensitivity of large-area atom in-
terferometers can be utilized in precision measurement
applications, this work provides a proof of concept for
future AI EP tests in space [26] and gravitational wave
detectors [27, 28].
We acknowledge funding from the Defense Threat Re-
duction Agency, the Oﬃce of Naval Research, and the
Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship program. We thank
Robin Corgier, Salvador Gomez, Jason Hogan, Tim Ko-
vachy, Remy Notermans, and Stefan Seckmeyer for their
assistance with this work.
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† kasevich@stanford.edu
[1] W. Pauli, in Encyklop¨ adie der mathematischen Wis-
senschaften, mit Einschluss an ihrer Anwendung , Vol. 5,
edited by A. Sommerfeld (Teubner, Leipzig, 1921) pp.
539–775.
[2] S. Weinberg, Gravitation and cosmology: principles and
applications of the general theory of relativity. (Wiley,
New York, 1972).
[3] T. Damour, Classical and Quantum Gravity 13, A33
(1996).
[4] P. W. Graham, D. E. Kaplan, J. Mardon, S. Rajendran,
and W. A. Terrano, Phys. Rev. D 93, 075029 (2016).

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
[5] A. Hees, O. Minazzoli, E. Savalle, Y. V. Stadnik, and
P. Wolf, Phys. Rev. D 98, 064051 (2018).
[6] A. Arvanitaki, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, S. Rajen-
dran, and K. Van Tilburg, Phys. Rev. D 97, 075020
(2018).
[7] S. Schlamminger, K.-Y. Choi, T. A. Wagner, J. H. Gund-
lach, and E. G. Adelberger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 041101
(2008).
[8] P. Touboul et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 231101 (2017).
[9] J. M. Hogan, D. M. S. Johnson, and M. A. Kasevich,
in Proc. Int. Sch. Phys. ”Enrico Fermi” Atom Opt. Sp.
Phys., edited by E. Arimondo, W. Ertmer, and W. P.
Schleich (IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2009) pp. 411–447,
arXiv:0806.3261.
[10] E. G¨ okl¨ u and C. L¨ ammerzahl, Classical and Quantum
Gravity 25, 105012 (2008).
[11] A. Bonnin, N. Zahzam, Y. Bidel, and A. Bresson, Phys.
Rev. A 88, 43615 (2013).
[12] D. Schlippert et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 203002 (2014).
[13] M. G. Tarallo, T. Mazzoni, N. Poli, D. V. Sutyrin,
X. Zhang, and G. M. Tino, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 023005
(2014).
[14] L. Zhou et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 013004 (2015).
[15] G. Rosi et al. , Nat. Comm. 8, 15529 (2017).
[16] C. Overstreet, P. Asenbaum, T. Kovachy, R. Notermans,
J. M. Hogan, and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
183604 (2018).
[17] C. Antoine and C. J. Bord´ e, J. Opt. B Quantum Semi-
classical Opt. 5, S199 (2003).
[18] P. Asenbaum, C. Overstreet, T. Kovachy, D. D. Brown,
J. M. Hogan, and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118,
183602 (2017).
[19] A. Roura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 160401 (2017).
[20] A. Sugarbaker, S. M. Dickerson, J. M. Hogan, D. M. S.
Johnson, and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
113002 (2013).
[21] C. Antoine, Applied Physics B 84, 585 (2006).
[22] C. J. Bord´ e and C. L¨ ammerzahl, Annalen der Physik8,
83 (1999).
[23] P. A. Altin et al. , New Journal of Physics 15, 023009
(2013).
[24] T. Kovachy, P. Asenbaum, C. Overstreet, C. A. Donnelly,
S. M. Dickerson, A. Sugarbaker, J. M. Hogan, and M. A.
Kasevich, Nature 528, 530 (2015).
[25] S. Dickerson et al. , Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 83,
065108 (2012).
[26] D. Aguilera et al. , Classical and Quantum Gravity 31,
115010 (2014).
[27] B. Canuel et al. , Scientiﬁc reports 8, 1 (2018).
[28] J. Coleman, arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00482 (2018).

===== PAGE 6 =====
Atom-interferometric test of the equivalence principle at the 10−12 level
Supplemental Material
Peter Asenbaum,∗ Chris Overstreet, ∗ Minjeong Kim, Joseph Curti, and Mark A. Kasevich
Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305
(Dated: June 25, 2020)
DATA ANALYSIS
Each dual-species interferometer image contains four
output ports (two for each isotope) separated vertically
by∼ 2.5 mm on the CCD array. To analyze the images,
we bin each port in the vertical direction and construct
the asymmetry
A(x) = P1(x)−P2(x)
P1(x) +P2(x) (1)
of each interferometer, where Pi(x) is the number of
counts in the ith port as a function of horizontal pixel
number. Ideally, the asymmetry is given by
A1(x) =c cos [kx(x−x0) +φ] (2)
where c is the interferometer contrast, kx is the detec-
tion fringe frequency, x0 is a reference point chosen to
be in the center of the port, and φ is the interferome-
ter phase. Our asymmetry model incorporates two ad-
ditional eﬀects. First, the interferometer contrast varies
slowly as a function of horizontal position due to Rabi
frequency inhomogeneity. Second, the photon collection
eﬃciency of the imaging system varies as a function of
vertical position. We therefore use the model
A2(x) = (1−r) + (1 +r) exp
[
−(x−x0)2/(2σ2)
]
A1(x)
(1 +r) + (1−r) exp [−(x−x0)2/(2σ2)]A1(x)
(3)
where σ characterizes the length scale of the contrast
variation and r is the collection eﬃciency ratio between
the two output ports. As r−→1 and σ/(x−x0)−→∞,
this expression reduces to Eq. 2. A typical ﬁt of this
model to the data is shown in Fig. 1. We veriﬁed that the
ﬁtted interferometer phase φ is insensitive to the precise
form of the model.
Each interferometer is ﬁt independently, and the rele-
vant information from each image is the diﬀerential phase
φ85−φ87 between the two interferometers. The EP signal
is the linear dependence of the diﬀerential phase on the
number of photon recoils n, where n∈{ 4, 8, 12}. This
signal was blinded throughout the data-taking and anal-
ysis process by adding an unknown oﬀset n/4·φblind to
each diﬀerential phase, whereφblind was randomly chosen
from a Gaussian distribution with mean zero and stan-
dard deviation 2 mrad (corresponding to a 1 σ fractional
acceleration diﬀerence of 7× 10−12). After removing the
blind, the result was published without taking additional
data or altering the data analysis in any way.
FIG. 1. Asymmetries and ﬁts of a single shot. The x axis
represents the horizontal pixel number on the CCD array (1
pixel = 170µm).
DETECTION FRINGE
The angles of the interferometry beams are adjusted
to create a horizontal phase shift that is proportional to
the position at the time of detection. To ﬁx notation,
suppose that the initial beamsplitter, mirror, and ﬁnal
beamsplitter pulses occur at times t = 0, t = T , and
t = 2T , respectively, and that there is a time interval τ
between the ﬁnal beamsplitter pulse and the ﬂuorescence
detection. Then the horizontal phase shift φh is given by
φh =nkθ1x +nkθ3(x +vx· 2T ). (4)
Here x is the initial horizontal position, vx is the initial
horizontal velocity,θ1 andθ3 are the angles of the initial
and ﬁnal beamsplitter pulse, respectively, and we have
chosen coordinates so that the mirror pulse angle is zero.
arXiv:2005.11624v2  [physics.atom-ph]  12 Aug 2020

===== PAGE 7 =====
2
To create a detection fringe, we choose θ1 andθ3 so that
φh =αk
(
x +vx· (2T +τ)
)
(5)
whereα is a dimensionless number that sets the detection
fringe frequency. Comparing the coeﬃcients of x andvx,
we have
θ1 =−α
n· τ
2T (6)
and
θ3 = α
n· 2T +τ
2T . (7)
We use this technique to implement a detection fringe
in large momentum transfer interferometers, taking into
account the time interval between sequential pulses in
each pulse zone.
SYSTEMATIC ERRORS
I. Kinematic eﬀects
We suppress the linear phase gradients associated with
all six kinematic DoFs by adjusting the frequency and an-
gles of each pulse zone, as described in the main text. To
calibrate the compensation for a particular DoF, the two
clouds are diﬀerentially displaced in that DoF, and the
resulting diﬀerental phase shift is observed. The initial
position diﬀerence in the vertical direction is adjusted by
varying the time between the Raman velocity selection
pulses, during which the two isotopes have a diﬀerential
velocity of 2 ℏk/m. The initial velocity diﬀerence in the
vertical direction is adjusted by varying the frequencies of
the Raman velocity selection pulses. To change the initial
position and velocity diﬀerences in the horizontal direc-
tions, we adjust the position of the optical lattice that is
used to launch the atoms. During the EP measurement,
the uncertainties in the diﬀerential kinematic DoFs are
(65, 20, 20)µm for (∆z, ∆x, ∆y) and (60, 50, 40)µm/s for
(∆vz, ∆vx, ∆vy).
There is a nonzero shift associated with the vertical ve-
locity diﬀerence because the frequency of the Raman ve-
locity selection pulse for each species was chosen to opti-
mize the transfer eﬃciency of the ﬁrst beamsplitter pulse,
which selects distinct velocity classes of the two isotopes
due to the recoil velocity diﬀerence. This velocity diﬀer-
ence multiplies with a residual velocity-dependent phase
gradient that was observed after the EP data-taking was
completed.
In order to suppress phase shifts proportional to hor-
izontal velocity by a factor of 1000, the beam angles
are set with a precision of 50 nrad. The angle of the
retroreﬂection mirror is controlled by a feedback loop.
A position-sensitive detector measures the position of a
laser that is reﬂected oﬀ of the back of the mirror, and the
mirror angle is adjusted by changing the voltage across
the three piezoelectric actuators on which the mirror is
mounted.
Since the two species are ﬁt with the same weight-
ing function in the x direction, the diﬀerential phase is
insensitive to quadratic wavefront perturbations on that
axis. However, a quadratic wavefront perturbation in the
y direction induces a diﬀerential phase due to the cloud
width diﬀerence. We bound the magnitude of this eﬀect
by correlating the width diﬀerence in they direction with
the diﬀerential phase. In addition, we estimate the phase
shift in the y direction from the observed quadratic de-
pendence of the phase in the x direction. This estimate
provides the uncertainty quoted in Table I of the main
text.
II. AC-Stark shift
In a Bragg interferometer, each atom remains in a
single internal state throughout the interferometry se-
quence, so the interferometer is not sensitive to relative
energy shifts between internal states (as in [1]). However,
the AC-Stark eﬀect induces a diﬀerential phase shift if the
laser intensity on the interferometer arms diﬀers during
the middle pulse zone. As described in the main text, the
optical spectrum of the interferometry lasers is designed
to reduce the magnitude of the AC-Stark shift. Fig. 2
contains a schematic of the optical spectrum. About
25% of the power of each beam is transferred into the
second-order sidebands.
FIG. 2. Optical spectrum. The carriers, located between
the 85Rb and 87Rb transitions, are separated by 158 MHz.
The frequency diﬀerence between the blue sidebands (Bragg
pair) is adjusted to be resonant with the two-photon Bragg
transition for each pulse. The red sidebands (Compensation
pair) are separated by an additional 316 MHz and do not drive
Bragg transitions. AC-Stark compensation for both isotopes
is achieved by controlling the intensity ratio between carriers
and sidebands. Figure is not to scale.
We compute the Stark shift of the measured spectrum
and control the carrier frequencies, carrier amplitudes,
and sideband asymmetries to maintain Stark shift com-
pensation. The diﬀerential Stark shift depends primarily
on the amplitudes of the carriers, which are ideally sup-
pressed to a fractional intensity of 7 .5× 10−4 compared
to the sidebands.
To bound the systematic error associated with the AC-
Stark eﬀect, we operate a dual-species 8ℏk interferometer

===== PAGE 8 =====
3
with twice as many pulses in each pulse zone. The ad-
ditional pulses (“Stark shift zones”) are detuned from
the two-photon resonance and do not cause Bragg tran-
sitions, but they double the magnitude of the residual
Stark shift. The diﬀerence in the diﬀerential phase of the
8ℏk interferometer with and without Stark shift zones is
below 0.96 mrad, which limits the systematic uncertainty
in the EP measurement to 2.7× 10−12.
III. Magnetic gradient
As described in the main text, a magnetic ﬁeld gradient
induces a diﬀerential acceleration between the two iso-
topes through the second-order Zeeman eﬀect. We char-
acterize the magnetic gradient with a 4ℏk 87Rb gradiome-
ter in which one interferometer is in the magnetically sen-
sitive state |F = 2,m F = 1⟩. The other interferometer
is in the magnetically insensitive state |F = 2,m F = 0⟩
and acts as a phase reference. The two interferometers
are spatially overlapped to within 1 cm.
FIG. 3. Magnetically sensitive interferometry. Main plot:
phase diﬀerence between magnetically sensitive and insensi-
tive interferometer as a function of interferometer time. The
extrapolations used to estimate the phase shift at T = 955 ms
are also shown. Inset: measurements with small timing oﬀsets
near T = 655 ms.
Fig. 3 shows the diﬀerential phase of the 87Rb gra-
diometer as a function of interferometer time T . The
gradiometer phase varies by much more than 2 π as the
interferometer time is increased. To determine the scale
of the phase variation, we took data with small timing
oﬀsets near T = 655 ms.
The sub-quadratic scaling of the gradiometer phase
with T indicates that the magnetic gradient varies over
the interferometry region, and the gradiometer phase is
proportional to an average of the magnetic gradient on
the interferometer trajectory (see supplement of [2] for an
analogous calculation). To estimate the average magnetic
gradient for the EP measurement, we ﬁt several low-order
polynomials to the measured gradiometer phase and ex-
trapolate to T = 955 ms. Speciﬁcally, we use the model
y = ax3 +bx2 +cx +d, with various combinations of
{a,b,c,d } as free parameters. The quoted uncertainty
is derived from the range of values predicted by these
extrapolations.
IV. Pulse timing
The phase of an atom interferometer generally depends
on the time between each interferometer pulse. We op-
erate the interferometer with a ∼ 3 ms delay between
pulses, which improves contrast and suppresses spurious
interferometers associated with imperfect transfer eﬃ-
ciency. The pulses have a Gaussian temporal proﬁle and
a maximum Rabi frequency of 20 kHz. The pulse area is
controlled with a precision of 0.15% by a photodiode that
monitors the intensity of a sampled beam. A timing er-
rorδT in a single pulse produces a diﬀerential phase shift
of∼ 2k(∆vz + ∆r)δT , where ∆r = ℏk/m85− ℏk/m87 is
the recoil velocity diﬀerence between isotopes. The term
proportional to ∆vz is already included in the kinematic
error, but the term proportional to ∆ r is an additional
source of uncertainty if the timing error is not constant
when the beamsplitter direction is reversed.
We bound pulse timing errors by using an oscilloscope
to record the intensity of the interferometry lasers as a
function of time during the interferometry sequence. The
center of each pulse is identiﬁed by ﬁtting the temporal
proﬁle of the pulse to a Gaussian. There is a 40 ns oﬀ-
set between the expected and observed location of each
π/2 pulse, with the π/2 pulses occurring earlier than ex-
pected. This oﬀset may be caused by the ﬁnite band-
width of the acousto-optic modulator that is used to
control the pulse intensity. The associated phase shift
reverses with beamsplitter direction and does not scale
with interferometer order, so it does not contribute to
the EP uncertainty. The remaining pulses are correctly
timed to within 5 ns, which corresponds to an additional
uncertainty of 4× 10−14 in the EP result.
V. Blackbody radiation
A thermal gradient in the interferometry region cre-
ates a blackbody radiation gradient that exerts forces on
85Rb and 87Rb [3, 4]. Although the two isotopes have
the same ground-state polarizability, the resulting diﬀer-
ential acceleration is nonzero because of the mass diﬀer-
ence. We monitor the temperature in the interferometry
region with a series of thermocouples placed at ∼ 1 m
intervals along the length of the 10 m vacuum chamber.
The thermal gradient in the vertical direction is below
0.1◦C/m, and a numerical simulation indicates that the
resulting diﬀerential acceleration is below 10 −14g.

===== PAGE 9 =====
4
VI. Mean ﬁeld interaction
Cold intra- and inter-species collisions of 85Rb and
87Rb in the freely falling atom clouds lead to a density-
dependent energy shift [5, 6]. If the initial beamsplitter
transfer is unbalanced, the two interferometer arms will
experience diﬀerent mean ﬁeld energies. The Bragg lasers
are 3% less detuned from the 85Rb resonance than from
the 87Rb resonance, and the resulting Rabi frequency dif-
ference creates unbalanced 85Rb densities along the inter-
ferometer arms. At the ﬁrst pulse zone, the atom clouds
have a horizontal width of 1.5 mm and a vertical width of
0.7 mm (FWHM). The associated phase shift is estimated
to be 0.2 mrad, nearly independent of interferometer or-
der. As a function of interferometer order, the density
decreases due to spontaneous emission by 1.3% per 4 ℏk,
which leads to a relative error of less than 8 × 10−15 in
the EP result.
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
[1] L. Zhou et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 013004 (2015).
[2] C. Overstreet, P. Asenbaum, T. Kovachy, R. Notermans,
J. M. Hogan, and M. A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
183604 (2018).
[3] M. Sonnleitner, M. Ritsch-Marte, and H. Ritsch, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 111, 023601 (2013).
[4] P. Haslinger et al. , Nature Physics 14, 257 (2018).
[5] D. Aguilera et al. , Class. Quantum Gravity 31, 115010
(2014).
[6] J. E. Debs et al. , Phys. Rev. A 84, 033610 (2011).
