===== PAGE 1 =====
DRAFT VERSION SEPTEMBER 5, 2024
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631
Inferring Cosmological Parameters on SDSS via Domain-Generalized Neural Networks and Lightcone Simulations
JUN-YOUNG LEE
 ,1, 2 JI-HOON KIM
 ,1, 2, 3 MINYONG JUNG
 ,2 BOON KIAT OH
 ,4 YONGSEOK JO
 ,5, 6 SONGYOUN PARK ,2
JAEHYUN LEE
 ,7 YUAN-S EN TING
 ,8, 9, 10, 11 AND HO SEONG HWANG
 3, 12
1Institute for Data Innovation in Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
2Center for Theoretical Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
3Seoul National University Astronomy Research Center, Seoul 08826, Korea
4Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA
5Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
6Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY 10010, USA
7Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea
8Research School of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2611, Australia
9School of Computing, Australian National University, Acton ACT 2601, Australia
10Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
11Center for Cosmology and AstroParticle Physics (CCAPP), The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
12Astronomy Program, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
(Received July XX, 2024; Revised July XX, 2024; Accepted August XX, 2024)
ABSTRACT
We present a proof-of-concept simulation-based inference on Ωm and σ8 from the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC
catalog using neural networks and domain generalization techniques without the need of summary statistics. Us-
ing rapid lightcone simulations, L-PICOLA, mock galaxy catalogs are produced that fully incorporate the observa-
tional effects. The collection of galaxies is fed as input to a point cloud-based network,Minkowski-PointNet.
We also add relatively more accurate G ADGET mocks to obtain robust and generalizable neural networks. By
explicitly learning the representations which reduces the discrepancies between the two different datasets via
the semantic alignment loss term, we show that the latent space configuration aligns into a single plane in which
the two cosmological parameters form clear axes. Consequently, during inference, the SDSS BOSS LOWZ
NGC catalog maps onto the plane, demonstrating effective generalization and improving prediction accuracy
compared to non-generalized models. Results from the ensemble of 25 independently trained machines find
Ωm=0.339±0.056 and σ8=0.801±0.061, inferred only from the distribution of galaxies in the lightcone slices
without relying on any indirect summary statistics. A single machine that best adapts to the G ADGET mocks
yields a tighter prediction of Ωm=0.282±0.014 and σ8=0.786±0.036. We emphasize that adaptation across
multiple domains can enhance the robustness of the neural networks in observational data.
Keywords: N-body simulations (1083), Cosmological parameters from large-scale structure (340), Redshift
surveys (1378), Neural networks (1933)
1. INTRODUCTION
Following its success in explaining the clustering of mat-
ter over a wide range of scales, the ΛCDM model has now
ushered in the era of precision cosmology. The small pertur-
bations imprinted in the cosmic microwave background grow
Corresponding author: Ji-hoon Kim
mornkr@snu.ac.kr
as cold dark matter falls into and deepens potential wells.
Small structures gravitationally evolve to create the charac-
teristic cosmic webs and voids referred to as the large scale
structures (LSS; Peebles 1981; Davis et al. 1985; Bond et al.
1996), which are observable in galaxy surveys (de Lappar-
ent et al. 1986; Geller & Huchra 1989). The LSS serves as a
widely used probe for constraining the cosmological param-
eters constituting the ΛCDM model, as it maps the distribu-
tion and motion of matter throughout the universe over time.
Over the past few decades, a series of galaxy redshift surveys
arXiv:2409.02256v1  [astro-ph.CO]  3 Sep 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
have been conducted extensively to trace the distribution of
galaxies and the growth history of LSS across a large spa-
tial extent and depth (Huchra et al. 1983; York et al. 2000;
Colless et al. 2001; Sohn et al. 2023).
Considering the galaxy distribution as a (biased) proxy for
the total matter content of the universe, power spectrum mul-
tipoles and n-point correlation functions ( n-pCF) can be de-
rived to express matter clustering at different scales. These
summary statistics serve as essential components in the de-
velopment of mock catalogs and in the inference of cos-
mological parameters. The construction of survey-specific
mocks, which mimic similar summary statistics and the ge-
ometry of the survey, imposes constraints on certain cosmo-
logical parameters (Kitaura et al. 2016; White et al. 2014a;
Saito et al. 2016). Through high-resolution simulations in
large volumes and by assigning adequate band magnitudes
and spectroscopic information, generic catalogs applicable to
various observational surveys can also be generated (Fosalba
et al. 2015a; Crocce et al. 2015; Fosalba et al. 2015b; Dong-
P´aez et al. 2022). Other than producing the mocks that best
match the observational catalog, derived summary statistics
from realizations simulated with varying cosmology can be
compared with the observational counterpart to make infer-
ence on the cosmological parameters, an approach referred
to as simulation-based inference (Villaescusa-Navarro et al.
2020; Hahn & Villaescusa-Navarro 2021). While these cited
works rely on predefined summary statistics, the simulation-
based inference framework allows for the potential use of raw
inputs together with the neural networks’ flexible featuriza-
tions, which permits the exploration beyond summary statis-
tics.
With the advent of artificial intelligence and machine
learning, simulation-based inference of cosmological param-
eters has been accelerated. This involves inferring cosmo-
logical parameters from simulations by matching summary
statistics or features, with neural networks serving as an op-
tion alongside more traditional measures of statistical infer-
ence such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC; Alsing
et al. 2019; Jeffrey & Wandelt 2020). In particular, clas-
sic summary statistics such as the n-pCF and power spectra,
which convey limited information about the matter distribu-
tion of the universe, can be replaced with features extracted
by neural networks that capture much more complex infor-
mation engraved inside (Shao et al. 2023). Attributed to this
capability of extracting rich information not hinted at in the
summary statistics, simulation-based inference with neural
networks has shown the possibility of producing tight pre-
dictions on the cosmological parameters (Lemos et al. 2023).
Therefore, the importance of simulation-based inference is
being recognized as it can serve as an alternative for verifying
and possibly resolving tensions in the cosmological parame-
ters predicted from CMB observations and galaxy surveys,
especially concerning H0 and S8≡ σ8
p
Ωm/0.3 (Anchordo-
qui et al. 2021).
In this context, AI-driven projects have been launched
to perform diverse tasks, including parameter estimation
(Villaescusa-Navarro et al. 2022; Ni et al. 2023; Kreisch et al.
2022). Especially in the estimation of cosmological param-
eters, 21-cm tomography light cones (Neutsch et al. 2022),
weak lensing (WL) convergence and shear maps (Fluri et al.
2018; Fluri et al. 2019; Fluri et al. 2022; Kacprzak & Fluri
2022; Lu et al. 2023), dark matter density fields (Pan et al.
2020; Lazanu 2021; Giri et al. 2023; Hort ´ua et al. 2023),
and halo catalogs (Ravanbakhsh et al. 2016; Mathuriya et al.
2019; Ntampaka et al. 2020; Hwang et al. 2023; Shao et al.
2023) were utilized as inputs for various neural network
architectures, typically in a traditional supervised learning
setup. In contrast to the direct input of mocks, derived sum-
mary statistics such as the n-pCF, count-in-cell, void prob-
ability function, star formation rate density, and stellar mass
functions (SMF) were also used as inputs (Boruah et al. 2023;
Veronesi et al. 2023; Hahn et al. 2023a; Perez et al. 2022;
Jo et al. 2023). In addition, individual galaxy properties
(Villaescusa-Navarro et al. 2022), galaxy cluster properties
(Qiu et al. 2023), or snapshots of galaxy catalogs (de Santi
et al. 2023) were shown to be useful as inputs for neural net-
works.
Among the listed works, most tested their pipeline on sim-
ulated data sets, and only a few successfully generalized their
neural networks to the actual observational data. Hahn et al.
(2023a) and Hahn et al. (2023b) created a mask autoregres-
sive flow using the power spectrum and bispectrum as sum-
mary statistics to provide constraints on cosmological pa-
rameters, based on the SDSS BOSS CMASS catalog (Reid
et al. 2016). In contrast, Veronesi et al. (2023) leveraged 2-
pCF from lognormal mocks as input to fully connected lay-
ers (FCL). Jo et al. (2023) used FCL emulators to perform
implicit likelihood inference on observed SMF (Leja et al.
2020) and SFRD (Leja et al. 2022). Parameter inferences
using WL convergence maps as probes, including the Kilo
Degree Survey (Hildebrandt et al. 2017; Asgari et al. 2021)
and Subaru Hyper Suprime-Cam first-year surveys (HSC-
Y1; Hikage et al. 2019) were also performed with Convo-
lutional Neural Networks (CNNs) or Graph CNNs (GCNNs;
Fluri et al. 2019; Fluri et al. 2022; Lu et al. 2023). Notably,
recent studies regard neural networks’ outputs of predicted
parameters as summary statistics due to their centrally bi-
ased nature (Gupta et al. 2018; Ribli et al. 2019; Fluri et al.
2019; Lemos et al. 2023), and perform additional Bayesian
inferences.
In line with efforts to use deep learning for constraining
cosmological parameters, this paper aims to perform a proof-
of-concept test of conducting cosmological inference using
the galaxy redshift survey, without relying on any indirect

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
L-PICOLA Gadget-4
Galaxy-Halo Connection
Observational Effects
L-PICOLA 
Mocks Gadget Mocks
SDSS
BOSS 
LOWZ NGC
MD-PATCHY 
MOCKS
Minkowski-
PointNet
Training Strategy
Predictions
Source Domain
Target Domain
Unseen Domain
Figure 1. Diagram that exhibits the overall structure of this study with simulation and deep learning pipelines. We aim to infer cosmological
parameters from the observation-driven catalog, SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC. We produce two lightcone mock suites, L -PICOLA and GADGET
mocks, combining N-body simulations (sections 2.2 and 2.3) and galaxy-halo connection models (Section 2.5) while fully accounting for
observational effects (Section 2.6). We then utilize a point-cloud-based network, Minkowski-PointNet, which takes individual galaxies as
inputs to predict Ωm and σ8, and their errors (Section 3). The L -PICOLA mocks (source domain) are trained together with the G ADGET mocks
(target domain) using the training strategy for the domain adaptation and generalization techniques (see Section 4.3). In this process, we use
training strategies to align the representation of each mock (Section 4). The adapted machines are then applied to unseen domains including the
fine-tuned MD-PATCHYmocks and the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC sample. The main results including the predictions for the actual observation
are shown in Section 5.
summary statistics, but rather utilizing the total raw distribu-
tion of galaxies as input to the neural network. For this test,
we focus mainly on Ωm and σ8, which are directly related to
the S8≡ σ8
p
Ωm/0.3 tension as mentioned above. As men-
tioned in Hahn et al. (2023a), this choice is due to the fact
that Ωm and σ8 are the parameters that are sensitive to the
cosmological information of the clustering galaxies, while
others are less constrained. In order to reduce any artificial
priors arising from survey-specific observational biases, we
rapidly generate a large mock suite that fully includes ob-
servational effects such as redshift space distortion, survey
footprint, stellar mass incompleteness, radial selection, and
fiber collision in the SDSS BOSS LOWZ Northern Galactic
Cap (NGC) catalog. Then, using the position and mass in-
formation of individual and neighboring galaxies, we make
inference on Ωm and σ8, again without relying on any indi-
rect summary statistics.
The biggest difficulty in using the whole galaxy catalog as
input instead of the summary statistics is that the selection of
codes begets overall differences in the resultant realizations.
The differences are easily discernible and distinguishable by
complex neural networks. Consequently, naively merging
the different sets of mocks or domains limits the machines
to merely learning fragmented domain-specific knowledge.
Recent studies have tried to address such issues, as machines
failing to attain robustness exhibit poor performances and
lack predictability on unseen domains (Ni et al. 2023; Shao
et al. 2023; Roncoli et al. 2023). Moreover, as simulated cat-
alogs do not perfectly portray the actual universe, such dis-
crepancies may significantly aggravate the performance of
machines onto unseen observed data. Especially, the rapid
generation of mocks trades off with the inaccuracies com-
pared to the relatively time-consuming simulations, leading
to a clear deviation. In order to make effective inferences on
different types of simulation or domains, the neural network
must achieve generalizability. This study focuses mainly
on extracting and learning unified representations originat-

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
ing from distinct domains and exploiting generalized and in-
tegrated knowledge on the observational data.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we il-
lustrate the creation of our mock data that thoroughly in-
tegrate the observational effects. We produce two suites of
mocks using two distinct simulations, L -PICOLA and GADGET.
The footprint and lightcone slices are shown together with
the observational target, the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC cat-
alog, and its specific set of mock catalogs, MD- PATCHY, for
comparison. In Section 3, input features and the neural net-
work architecture are introduced together with the training
strategies in Section 4, to align the latent space representa-
tions of different mocks and achieve domain generalization
or robustness. In Section 5, implicit likelihood estimates in
Ωm and σ8 using the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog are
shown. We also discuss the impact of fine-tuned MD-PATCHY
mocks on the predictability and generalizability of the ma-
chine. Finally, the results and the following conclusions are
summarized in Section 7. The overall approach taken by the
paper is schematically shown in Figure 1.
2. GALAXY CATALOG: OBSERV ATION AND
SIMULATION
2.1. The Reference SDSS Catalog
In this study, we utilize the Baryon Oscillation Spectro-
scopic Survey (BOSS; Dawson et al. 2013), part of SDSS-III
(Eisenstein et al. 2011), which extends the previously stud-
ied distribution of luminous red galaxies (LRGs; Eisenstein
et al. 2001) from SDSS I/II, adding fainter galaxies and thus
larger number densities, for the purpose of measuring baryon
acoustic oscillations. The survey consists of the LOWZ (To-
jeiro et al. 2014) and CMASS (Reid et al. 2016) catalogs,
which have different color and magnitude cuts. The LOWZ
catalog targets galaxies at a low redshift of z ≲ 0.4, while
CMASS targets a higher redshift range of 0.4 ≲ z ≲ 0.7. The
LOWZ samples are roughly considered as volume-limited,
whereas the CMASS samples, representing ‘constant mass’,
are considered volume-limited within the mass and redshift
ranges of M⋆ > 1011.3M⊙ and z ≲ 0.6 (Reid et al. 2016;
Maraston et al. 2013). Using the MKSAMPLE code, the LSS
catalogs for both LOWZ and CMASS were created for BOSS
DR12, fully equipped with survey masks and random sam-
ples. These samples include completeness and weights cal-
culated for the analysis of large-scale structure (Reid et al.
2016).
To account for the stellar mass incompleteness of the sur-
vey and to incorporate cosmological information from the
stellar masses of galaxies later on, we obtain stellar mass data
from the value-added Portsmouth SED-fits catalog (Maras-
ton et al. 2013), assuming a passive evolution model with the
Kroupa IMF (Kroupa 2001). Since the Portsmouth SED-fits
catalog includes both BOSS and LEGACY targets, we need
to select those that are included in the LSS catalog. Follow-
ing Rodr´ıguez-Torres et al. (2016), we match galaxies using
the unique combination of tags MJD, PLATEID, and FIBERID, and
then assign the stellar masses from the matched galaxies in
the Portsmouth catalog to the corresponding entries in the
LSS catalog.
In this work, we use the Northern Galactic Cap (NGC)
of the LOWZ samples with RA=150 ◦–240◦ and DEC >0◦.
The selection of the LOWZ samples and the cropped regions
is due to the limited volume of the lightcone simulations
that will be used to generate mocks. Using this catalog as
a benchmark, we generate mocks that incorporate the same
observational effects: redshift space distortions, survey foot-
print geometry, stellar mass incompleteness, radial selection
matching, and fiber collision (see Section 2.6 for more infor-
mation).
2.2. Rapidly Generated Lightcone Mocks, L- PICOLA
L-PICOLA is a rapid dark matter simulation that employs the
COmoving Lagrangian Acceleration method (C OLA; Tassev
et al. 2013) and supports on-the-fly generation of lightcones.
At the expense of minute errors—2% in the power spectrum
and 5% in the bispectrum—the code allows for the rapid
generation of dark matter distributions in large box sizes
(Howlett et al. 2015a). Numerous studies have leveraged
on this computational efficiency to produce a vast amount of
mock catalogs aimed for diverse observations (Howlett et al.
2015b; Howlett et al. 2022; Ishikawa et al. 2023).
In a box volume of (1.2 h−1Gpc)3 we simulate the evo-
lution of 1200 3 dark matter particles on 1200 3 meshes.
Each particle has a mass of approximately Mp≈ 8.3×
1010  Ωm
0.3

h−1M⊙. The simulation starts with a 2LPT ini-
tial condition generated with 2LPT IC (Scoccimarro et al.
2012) at zinitial=9 and progresses in 10 steps to z=0.45, as
Howlett et al. (2015a) suggests for sufficient precision in
the resolution adopted here, with 10 lightcone slices gen-
erated from z=0.45 to z=0. A total of 1500 simulations
are produced, incorporating cosmic variance across vary-
ing Ωm and σ8. Each of the two parameters is randomly
sampled from a uniform distribution of Ωm∈[0.1,0.5] and
σ8∈[0.6,1.0]. We assume H0=100h km s−1 Mpc−1 with
h=0.674, ns=0.96 following the results from Planck Collab-
oration et al. (2020). We select a realization from one pair
of cosmological parameters most similar to the fiducial cos-
mology of MD- PATCHY with Ωm = 0.3067, σ8 = 0.8238 and
name it L-PICOLA fiducial . We obtain the halos using
the ROCKSTAR halo finder (Behroozi et al. 2013b) in lightcone
mode, considering a minimum number of 10 particles as a
seed halo (most detailed layer of subgroup hierarchy deter-
mined by the friends-of-friends algorithm). Thus, we impose
a cut in the halo mass of log (Mh/h−1M⊙)=11.45. Subse-
quently, the 1500 catalogs are rotated and reflected in six

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
directions following Ravanbakhsh et al. (2016), generating
a total of 9000 realizations referred to as L -PICOLA mocks.
These mocks will be further cropped and masked separately
according to the observational effects. From this we estab-
lish a one-to-one correspondence between the subhalos and
galaxies.
2.3. Adaptation: Gravitational N-body Simulation Mocks,
GADGET
The L-PICOLA mocks described in Section 2.2 lack accuracy
in the clustering statistics on small scales compared to full
N-body simulations (see Section 4.1). Therefore, we simi-
larly generate mocks using G ADGET-4 (Springel et al. 2021)
in lightcone mode, which we refer to as G ADGET mocks. Al-
though they require more computational time and resources
to generate than L -PICOLA mocks, GADGET mocks, are gener-
ally considered to offer higher fidelity at smaller scales (see
Howlett et al. 2015a). Consequently, we use G ADGET mocks
as adaptation standards of the neural networks, to refine the
code-specific knowledge from L -PICOLA mocks, implement-
ing a training strategy that aligns the neural networks’ ex-
tracted representations. For additional details, refer to Sec-
tion 4.
The simulation resolution is the same as that of mock suites
generated with L -PICOLA: a box volume of (1.2 h−1Gpc)3
and 1200 3 dark matter particles with a softening length of
10h−1kpc. The simulation initiates with a 2LPT initial con-
dition generated with N- GenIC (Springel 2015) at z initial =10,
similar to L-PICOLA, and ends at z=0.1 The cosmological pa-
rameters of the fiducial run, GADGET fiducial , are set to
be identical to those of MD- PATCHY mocks in Section 2.4:
Ωm=0.307115, σ8=0.8288, and h=0.6777, with other pa-
rameters fixed to the previously stated values. Furthermore,
in order to test the machine’s predictability for non-fiducial
mocks, we produce GADGET low with Ωm=0.2, σ8=0.7 and
GADGET high with Ωm=0.4, σ8=0.8. We generate 6 sam-
ples each by rotating and reflecting the three GADGET simula-
tions, totalling 18 samples.
2.4. Adaptation: Fine-Tuned Mocks, MD- PATCHY
MULTIDARK PATCHY Mocks (hereafter MD- PATCHY) are
mock galaxy catalogs designed to match the SDSS-III BOSS
survey (Kitaura et al. 2016; Rodr ´ıguez-Torres et al. 2016).
They referenced the BIGMULTIDARK simulation (Klypin et al.
2016), a N-body simulation run on G ADGET-2 (Springel
2005). The halos from the B IGMULTIDARK are populated us-
ing the stochastic halo abundance matching technique and
1 We acknowledge that starting a full N-body simulation, G ADGET, at low
redshifts may lead to inaccuracies, unlike L-PICOLA, despite the reduction
of computational resources. The choice of the initial redshift was based
on the comparative analyses presented in Howlett et al. (2015a). We leave
such improvements to be addressed in our future work.
0.2 0.3 0.4
redshift
2000
4000
6000
8000galaxy count
SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC
MD-PATCHY
L-PICOLA (FIDUCIAL)
GADGET (FIDUCIAL)
Figure 2. Count of galaxies per radial bins for SDSS BOSS LOWZ
NGC (red solid line), L-PICOLA fiducial (orange dashed line),
GADGET fiducial (green dashed line), and averaged count for all
2048 MD-PATCHY(blue dashed line). The radial bins from redshift
0.15 to 0.4 are defined to evenly divide the redshift space volume.
All lightcone mocks with fiducial cosmological parameters exhibit a
consistent number of galaxies across different radial bins compared
to the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog. See Section 2.6 for more
information.
the observational effects including redshift space distortion,
survey footprint, stellar mass incompleteness, radial selec-
tion, and fiber collision are considered using the SUGAR code
(Rodr´ıguez-Torres et al. 2016). The reference catalog is used
to calibrate PATCHY(Kitaura et al. 2013), which employs aug-
mented Lagrangian Perturbation Theory (ALPT; Kitaura &
Heß 2013) to generate dark matter fields. These fields are bi-
ased and the halo masses are identified using theHADRON code
(Zhao et al. 2015), which takes the halos’ environmental in-
formation into account. The halo catalog is further processed
into galaxy mocks using the halo abundance matching proce-
dure in the SUGAR code. Specifically, the clustering statistics
are fitted by fine-tuning a single parameter–the scatter in the
HAM procedure (σHAM(Vpeak|M⋆)), where M⋆ represents the
stellar mass and Vpeak the peak velocity observed throughout
the history of the halo. In total, 10240 MD-PATCHYmocks that
mimic the clustering statistics, stellar mass functions, and ob-
servational effects are produced. The cosmological param-
eters used are Ωm=0.307115, σ8=0.8288, and h=0.6777.
In this work, we focus on the 2048 mocks of the Northern
Galactic Cap (NGC) of the LOWZ samples. Similarly to the
GADGET mocks in Section 2.3, the MD-PATCHYmocks are used
as reference mocks for adaptation of the neural networks dur-
ing the training phase (see Section 4 for more information).
2.5. Galaxy-Halo Connection
The galaxy-halo connection is a crucial statistical relation
that summarizes the interplay between gravitational evolu-
tion and baryonic physics in galaxies and halos, widely stud-

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
Figure 3. The footprints of a single realization fromL-PICOLA fiducial (top left), GADGET fiducial (top right), MD-PATCHY(bottom left),
and SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog ( bottom right). The same acceptance and veto masks are employed to reproduce the overall topology.
We further cut the region into RA=150◦–240◦ and DEC>0◦. See Section 2.6 for more information.
ied in the fields of galaxy formation and cosmology (see
Wechsler & Tinker 2018, for review). Numerous approaches
in modeling are available, including the halo occupation dis-
tribution (HOD; Peacock & Smith 2000; Berlind et al. 2003),
subhalo abundance matching (SHAM; Kravtsov et al. 2004;
Conroy et al. 2006), and also the combined models such as
subhalo clustering and abundance matching (SCAM; Guo
et al. 2016; Ronconi et al. 2020). In the following, we in-
troduce the two galaxy-halo connection methods: the fixed
stellar-to-halo-mass relation and the SHAM.2
2.5.1. Fixed Stellar-to-Halo-Mass Relation
Here, we adopt the minimal model that connects N-body
simulations to galaxy catalogs. Assuming a one-to-one
2 The galaxy-halo connection models introduced here are indeed simplis-
tic. To account for the detailed connection relation, it may be necessary
to track the halo assembly history or apply varying population models by
introducing few additional parameters. Here, we focus on proof-of-concept
objective, rather than investigating deeply into this complex relation. Such
limitations are left for future work.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
Figure 4. Lightcone slices of Figure 3 from 0◦<DEC<6◦. See Section 2.6 for more information.
galaxy-subhalo correspondence as employed in the previous
works (e.g., Kim et al. 2008; Hwang et al. 2016), we impose
a fixed stellar-to-halo-mass relation (SHMR) across different
realizations. In other words, we assume that the star forma-
tion efficiency of galaxies in halos is equivalent across differ-
ent cosmologies, within the redshift range of this study.3
We use the SHMR obtained by Girelli et al. (2020), which
compares the DUSTGRAIN- pathfinder simulation (Giocoli
et al. 2018) with the SMF determined in (Ilbert et al. 2013)
3 This is a strong assumption made to derive the stellar masses of each sub-
halo identified from a dark matter-only simulation, and where cosmology-
dependent information intervenes. This is due to the impracticality of per-
forming full hydrodynamic simulations of such a spatial and temporal ex-
tent across varying cosmologies. Despite introducing weak dependency,
we emphasize that this assumption is made for a proof-of-concept test. For
a model free of cosmological priors, refer to the SHAM model in Section
2.5.2.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
from the Cosmological Evolution Survey (COSMOS) (Scov-
ille et al. 2007). The SHMR is analyzed per different redshift
bins to account for the temporal variability of the efficiency,
parameterized as
M⋆
Mh
(z)=2A(z)
" M⋆
MA(z)
−β (z)
+
 Mh
MA(z)
−γ(z)#−1
(1)
where Mh is the halo mass and A(z) is the normalization fac-
tor at MA, at which the double power-law breaks. Since our
mock galaxies are selected within 0 .15<z<0.40, we utilize
the SHMR parameters estimated for 0 .2<z<0.5. The best-
fit parameters are A(z)=0.0429, MA=11.87, β =0.99, and
γ=0.669 when scatter of σr=0.2 dex is introduced. We will
use these parameters, including the 0.2 dex scatter, for this
work.
2.5.2. Subhalo Abundance Matching
In Section 2.5.1, the Fixed SHMR establishes cosmologi-
cal priors as it selects the specific relation of connecting the
halo mass properties to the baryonic physics. To tackle this
issue, we alternatively utilize the non-parametric version of
SHAM—a well-known basic galaxy-halo connection, as previ-
ously discussed, which is also used for constraining cosmo-
logical parameters (Simha & Cole 2013). The halo catalogs
are painted with stellar masses using a monotonic relation be-
tween the simulated halo masses and the stellar masses iden-
tified from the observed SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog.
Therefore, the difference between mocks with different cos-
mologies arises from the clustering of the galaxies instead of
stellar mass itself as compared to the Fixed SHMR model.
We acknowledge that the prescription in our SHAM model
is simplistic and may not fully describe the galaxy-halo con-
nection. Numerous studies on SHAM have employed the
historical peak mass or circular velocity of the halo (Red-
dick et al. 2013; Behroozi et al. 2013a). However, the na-
ture of the on-the-fly generation of lightcones precludes the
possibility of utilizing historical information. In order to by-
pass such limitations, Ishikawa et al. (2023) use snapshots
instead of generating lightcones on-the-fly and employs post-
processing to generate lightcones. However, since our focus
here is on the proof-of-concept test of inferring cosmological
parameters without summary statistics and using neural net-
works, we accept the inherent crudeness in the galaxy-halo
connection model.
2.6. Observational Effects
We include the following observational effects of the SDSS
BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog into the L -PICOLA simulations:
redshift space distortions, survey footprint geometry, stel-
lar mass incompleteness, radial selection matching, and fiber
collision. By fully accounting for these observational effects,
we can assess how observables from realizations endowed
with different sets of cosmological parameters would have
deviated from the actual observation.
Firstly, the positions of the model galaxies are shifted using
their peculiar velocities to account for the redshift space dis-
tortion (RSD; Kaiser 1987). In order to match the footprint
geometry of our mocks to that of the SDSS BOSS LOWZ
NGC, we apply acceptance and veto masks. Galaxies are
filtered out by applying the M ANGLE masks (Swanson et al.
2008) using the M AKE SURVEY code (White et al. 2014b).
Next, for both Fixed SHMR and SHAM models, we restrict
the area of interest to RA=150◦–240◦ and DEC>0◦.4
For the Fixed SHMR model, we further apply the incom-
pleteness in the galaxy stellar mass function of the SDSS
BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog, a statistical bias due to the ob-
servational constraints of the survey. Here, we apply the
incompleteness of the LOWZ NGC sample, which is mod-
eled by Leauthaud et al. (2016), using the Stripe 82 Mas-
sive Galaxy Catalog to measure the SMF. The incomplete-
ness function is shown in Equation 2, where f , σ, and M1 are
free parameters for fitting. We calculate the interpolated in-
completeness using the stellar mass and redshift of the galax-
ies, and decide whether to use or discard a galaxy based on
the result.
c = f
2

1 + erf
logM⋆/M1
σ

(2)
After identifying the galaxies that are not observable due to
stellar mass incompleteness and survey geometry, we ran-
domly downsample the galaxies to match the radial selection.
This is achieved by finely dividing the redshift range into 260
radial bins with equal redshift space volume spacing.
For the SHAM model we perform massive downsampling.
Unlike the Fixed SHMR model, the SHAM model inher-
ently includes stellar mass incompleteness because we use
the observed galaxy catalog, which already has inherent in-
completeness, as our reference. Also, we perform massive
sampling instead of random sampling in order to match the
monotonicity of the SHAM process. Similarly to the Fixed
SHMR model, the sampled galaxies are filtered once more
through the fiber collision algorithm, and then finally as-
signed with the appropriate stellar masses.
Furthermore, we mimic the fiber collision in the SDSS
BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog. The SDSS galaxy spectra were
obtained from fibers inserted into perforated plates. Since the
fibers have a finite size with a collision radius of 62′′, a por-
tion of fiber-collided galaxies has not been assigned with any
4 The trimming of the footprint was necessary to accommodate the gener-
ation of lightcones in octants of the sphere. This adjustment results in a
slight deviation in the data used compared to earlier studies, such as those
of Ivanov et al. (2020) and Hahn et al. (2023a). Nonetheless, we expect
these differences to be minimal, given the modest nature of the change.

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
Figure 5. Architecture of the Minkowski-PointNet in this work. Each input is transformed into a sparse tensor with N galaxies, each with
features F, and passed through five consecutive linear layers for feature extraction. Global sum, average and max pooling are done to extract a
1536-dimensional feature vector. Then it passes through the regressor consisting of four linear and dropout layers to predict Ωm, σ8 and their
standard deviations. See Section 3.1 for more information.
fibers. Using NBODYKIT (Hand et al. 2018), we classify the
galaxies into two populations: decollided galaxies (D 1) and
potentially collided galaxies (D2) (Guo et al. 2012) using the
angular friends-of-friends algorithm as in Rodr ´ıguez-Torres
et al. (2016). The actual abundance matching of the SHAM
model is performed after accounting for the fiber collisions
in order to fully preserve the number of galaxies. However,
for the Fixed SHMR model, the stellar mass incompleteness
already includes the incompleteness due to fiber collisions.
Nevertheless, this reduction should be applied since fiber col-
lisions are an important systematic biases in the small-scale
geometry of the survey. We consider the potential double-
counting of fiber collisions within the stellar mass incom-
pleteness to have a negligible impact on our final results.
Figure 2 compares the galaxy count per radial bins
for SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC, MD- PATCHY, L-PICOLA
fiducial, and GADGET fiducial mocks generated with
the Fixed SHMR model. The similarity in the distributions
verify the consistency across all three mocks and the observa-
tional catalog. In realizations with low Ωm and σ8 generated
with the Fixed SHMR model, the absolute number of galax-
ies is relatively small, and thus the total number of galax-
ies may be less than that of the fiducial cosmology. Such a
deficit can provide critical information to inform the neural
network that the real universe is unlikely to have such cos-
mological parameters. However, the mocks produced by the
SHAM model does not have difference in the total number of
galaxies, as it directly matches the observed galaxy mass to
the halo catalog.
Finally, for both Fixed SHMR and SHAM models, we re-
strict the area of interest to RA=150 ◦–240◦ and DEC >0◦.
The four panels of Figure 3 show the footprint of the
L-PICOLA fiducial , GADGET fiducial , MD-PATCHY, and
the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog. Notice that the masks
are equally applied, showing the same apparent streaks and
holes. Figure 4 shows the lightcone slices from 0◦<DEC<6◦
for each of the four mocks, with the observational effects
fully taken into account.
3. NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
3.1. Backbone: Minkowski-PointNet
A large portion of the universe is empty, as galaxies are
predominantly clustered along the filaments of the LSS.
Therefore, depositing galaxies into uniform voxels can be
highly inefficient, resulting in many voxels with few or even
no galaxies assigned. To mitigate this problem, galaxies are
represented as point clouds, with each galaxy depicted as a
single point characterized by distinct positions and proper-
ties. This representation is then processed through a deep
neural network called Minkowski-PointNet, which is a
PointNet (Qi et al. 2016) implementation in the Minkowski
Engine (Choy et al. 2019).
PointNet is a neural network architecture that captures
the structure of point clouds, a simplified graph with no
edges. PointNet is an architecture that can be generalized
as DeepSets (Zaheer et al. 2017), which captures the permu-
tation invariance and equivariance of point clouds (Bronstein
et al. 2021). Such geometric priors are captured from the
1D convolution layers and the global pooling layers. De-

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
spite PointNet’s use of rotation and translation invariance to
handle point clouds, such procedures are omitted in our ap-
proach because of the redshift dependence of features and
clustering, as well as the (RA,DEC) dependence of masking.
Moreover, to explicitly introduce local properties, we apply
the k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) algorithm to survey the char-
acteristics of neighboring galaxies and explicitly add them to
the feature vector. Such a step is inevitable since we are not
able to perform message-passing between the nodes or the
points, as the computational costs involving calculation on
the edges are extremely demanding for the mocks compris-
ing more than 150,000 galaxies. Therefore, we add the local
information to the feature vector, to enrich the information
fed to the machine.5
The Minkowski Engine is a library that efficiently han-
dles sparse tensors, including operations such as auto-
differentiation and convolution. Galaxies are grouped and
quantized into sparse tensors based on their (RA, DEC, z)
positions using the engine, where z denotes the redshift. The
main advantage of this implementation lies in its ability to
handle a variable number of points as inputs to the machine,
whereas the original implementation of PointNet operates on
fixed sizes. Additionally, it efficiently utilizes memory by
grouping galaxies into sparse tensors. This approach results
in approximately 25% of the quantized cells containing more
than one galaxy, and around 5% containing more than two
galaxies. This strategy effectively preserves the local struc-
ture while ensuring better memory consumption and perfor-
mance.
The specific network layout is illustrated in Figure 5. The
Minkowski-PointNet is capable of receiving point clouds
of arbitrary size. The input catalog is transformed into a
sparse tensor and passes through a total of five linear lay-
ers. Each linear layer is followed by a batch normalization
layer (Ioffe & Szegedy 2015) and a leaky ReLU activation
function. The tensor is then passed through the global sum,
average, and max-pooling layers and concatenated to a 1536-
dimensional vector. Global aggregators are crucial to reflect-
ing the permutation invariance of the neural network. Un-
like the original implementation of PointNet, solely using the
global max-pooling as the aggregator, we add other aggrega-
tors to better capture the embedded information as suggested
in Corso et al. (2020). After four consecutive linear layers,
the machine predicts the Ωm, σ8, and their standard devia-
tions, which will be used for implicit likelihood inference.
During the training process, we use the ADAM optimizer
(Kingma & Ba 2014) with a learning rate of 10−7 and a Re-
5 In contrast to PointNet ++ (Qi et al. 2017), which uses kNN for grouping
and non-uniform sampling of points, we do not adopt such set abstraction
layers since the absolute number of galaxies comprising each realization
needs to be informed to the machine.
duceLRonPlateau scheduler, which reduces the learning rate
when the validation loss is not decreased, for a total of 20
epochs. We make use of 80% of the samples as a training
data set and 10% each as validation and test data sets. We
adopt the loss function for implicit likelihood inference as
described in Jeffrey & Wandelt (2020), which is the sum of
the following two loss functions, where y is the label and σ 2
the variance.
L1 = ln
"
∑
i∈batch
(yi,pred− yi,true )2
#
(3)
L2 = ln
"
∑
i∈batch
((yi,pred− yi,true )2− σ 2
i )2
#
(4)
By minimizing the combined loss function Lvanilla=L1+L2,
we optimize both prediction accuracy and enable the repre-
sentation of the second moment, which corresponds to the
standard deviation. Such approaches have recently been
utilized in many machine learning projects to estimate the
model’s error in the absence of likelihoods (Villaescusa-
Navarro et al. 2022; Villanueva-Domingo et al. 2022).
3.2. Input Features
The input features of galaxies should align with those
derivable from observational data. Thus, we utilize the po-
sition and stellar mass of each galaxy, as well as infor-
mation from its neighbors, to extract details about the lo-
cal environment, following the methodology presented in
Jo & Kim (2019). Moreover, it is important to note that
we do not provide the machine with physical or comov-
ing distances since they already imply a certain cosmology
when converted from observed redshifts. Instead, we intro-
duce a transformed position of each galaxy by (X,Y,Z) =
(zsin(DEC)cos(RA),zsin(DEC)sin(RA),zcos(DEC)). The
redshift will be re-introduced as one feature, allowing the ma-
chine to infer the redshift dependence of features.
Additionally, we explicitly incorporate information from
neighboring galaxies. This addresses the limitations of
Minkowski-PointNet, which does not support message-
passing between edges due to computational constraints aris-
ing from the large number of inputs. By introducing neigh-
boring information, we expect these features to serve as prox-
ies for relational local information. From the nine nearest
neighbors, four local features are selected: mean distance,
maximum distance, mean stellar mass, and maximum stellar
mass. Again, since we apply a metric in the redshift space,
the distances become unitless. The redshift and stellar mass
of each galaxy are used as point-specific features. In total,
the six features are aggregated per galaxy, combining both
local and point-specific characteristics. Figure 6 displays a
pair plot of features with contours for 1000 randomly sam-
pled galaxies for the mocks generated with the Fixed SHMR

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
11
12
Max Mass
11.0
11.5
Mean Mass
0.00
0.01
Max Dist
10 12
Stellar Mass
0.00
0.01
Mean Dist 11 12
Max Mass
11.0 11.5
Mean Mass
0.00 0.01
Max Dist
0.00 0.01
Mean Dist
Observation and Mocks
SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC
MD-PATCHY
L-PICOLA (Fiducial)
GADGET (Fiducial)
Figure 6. Pair plot of five features of a galaxy randomly sampled from each mock generated with the Fixed SHMR model: stellar mass
of itself, maximum and mean neighbor masses, and maximum and mean neighbor distances, for a single realization of SDSS BOSS LOWZ
NGC (red), MD-PATCHY(blue), L-PICOLA fiducial (orange), and GADGET fiducial (green). The plot shows for 1000 randomly sampled
galaxies for each mocks. Masses are in units of log (M⋆/h−1M⊙) and distances are expressed in terms of the newly assumed metric in redshift
space. The distribution exhibits fair consistency across the three mocks and the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog. See sections 3.1 and 3.2 for
more information.
model. The distribution exhibits fair consistency across the
three mocks and the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog. An-
other comparison between different cosmologies is available
in Appendix A. Although not displayed for brevity, theSHAM
models exhibit similar levels of consistency in the mocks.
4. TRAINING STRATEGIES
4.1. Why is Domain Shift Critical?
The small-scale clustering statistic and the low mass end of
a halo mass function may have distortion because of its ap-
proximate nature in the L-PICOLA code. This is due to the dis-
persive behavior of dark matter particles that leads to an im-
precise subhalo determination (Howlett et al. 2015b). More-
over, the on-the-fly lightcone simulation restricts us from ex-
ploiting the historical information of individual halos. The
evolution of individual subhalos can be tracked using merger
trees derived from simulation snapshots. From this, accu-
rate modeling of the galaxy-halo connection through SHAM
is feasible using Vpeak or Vmax, even for dark matter fields
generated with COLA simulations as opposed to the lightcone
simulation (Ding et al. 2023). In an attempt to mitigate the in-
trinsic limitation of the rapid lightcone simulation, L -PICOLA,
Howlett et al. (2022) introduce two free parameters to rep-
resent the subhalo number and mass ratio. These values are
tuned by fitting the power spectrum monopole of the obser-
vational catalog. However, since we aim at performing in-
ference rather than fine-tuning simulations to match observa-
tional data, such an adaptation step is inapplicable. We can
enhance the flexibility of the models by incorporating extra
free parameters and marginalizing over them during infer-
ence, particularly with the HOD framework. However, this
approach restricts the use of stellar mass information used in
modeling the stellar mass incompleteness and as features in
the neural networks. We plan to address such issues in future
work.
Minkowski-PointNet demonstrates strengths in its lack
of specific limits on clustering scale, allowing for analysis
across a wide range of scales, unlike most studies that impose
an upper bound kmax (Hahn et al. 2023a,b; Ivanov et al. 2020;
Philcox & Ivanov 2022). Even CNNs inherently impose an
effective clustering scale through voxelization (Lemos et al.
2023). However, our approach is sensitive to small scales, of-
fering rich clustering information while also being suscepti-
ble to small-scale distortions specific to each domain’s codes.
Therefore, it is critical to regularize the training of neural net-
works to acquire domain-agnostic knowledge.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
Addressing the domain shift is crucial to ensuring the ro-
bustness of machines and their applicability to real-world ob-
servations. We adapt the machines using prepared suites of
mocks: 9000 L-PICOLA mocks as the source, along with either
18 GADGET mocks or 2048 MD-PATCHY mocks as targets. By
training them with specific strategies aimed at achieving do-
main adaptation and generalization, we expect the machines
to learn domain-agnostic information. Consequently, they
will be capable of extracting representations that can be gen-
eralized to multiple domains, particularly observational data.
4.2. Training Objective: Domain Generalization
The primary goal of this research is to conduct simulation-
based inference on actual observational data using machines
robust across different codes for generating mocks. A crit-
ical question arises: Can we establish a unified approach to
forward modeling our universe and making fair inferences on
the cosmological parameters? Unfortunately, current neural
networks show apparent discrepancies when applied to other
domains (Ni et al. 2023; Shao et al. 2023). However, recent
trials in generating domain-adaptive graph neural networks
to incorporate various sources have shown the possibility of
achieving a more robust inference (Roncoli et al. 2023).
In the context of transfer learning, which involves the
transfer of knowledge from a set of task to relevant tasks,
each of the mock suites can be viewed as n mocks sampled
from individual domains Di, or Si =
n
(xi
j,yi
j)
on
j=1
∼ (Di)n,
where x∈ X ,y∈ Y . X is the feature space and Y is
the space for labels (cosmological parameters), while Di⊂
PX Y is a joint distribution onX and Y (Ganin et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2023). Our aim is to develop a machine that gen-
eralizes across multiple domains, even those unseen during
the training phase, particularly the observational catalog. At-
tempts to test the generalizability of a machine trained on a
single domain have been initiated by various projects in as-
tronomy using machine learning and deep learning, referred
to as “robustness tests” (Ni et al. 2023; Shao et al. 2023).
In the language of transfer learning, testing on uninvolved
domains in the training phase can be viewed as domain gen-
eralization (DG; Wang et al. 2023).
To achieve effective domain generalization, it is crucial
that the distributions of the target (unseen domains) and
source domains (domains involved in the training phase)
are similar, which can be achieved through accurate model-
ing of mocks and training strategies to extract common fea-
tures. Due to limitations in the accuracy of L -PICOLA mocks,
non-negligible discrepancies exist compared to G ADGET or
MD-PATCHY mocks. Such domain shift (expressed by H -
divergence, dH (·,·)) is crucial in setting the upper bound on
the empirical risk of any hypothesis (Ben-David et al. 2006,
2010; Albuquerque et al. 2019). Thus, achieving single-
domain generalization solely through training on L -PICOLA
mocks can be challenging.
To enhance the machine’s generalization capabilities, we
utilize GADGET or MD-PATCHY mocks, which enable the ma-
chine to acquire common knowledge. Unlike domain gen-
eralization, G ADGET or MD- PATCHY mocks are incorporated
during the training phase, hence, this approach is termed do-
main adaptation. By employing a training strategy to learn
from the relatively accurate mocks, the neural networks learn
consistent semantics from the two domains, and finally gen-
eralize on the observational data, unseen at training phase.
A method includes utilizing the domain-adversarial neu-
ral network (DANN; Ganin et al. 2016), which seeks to de-
rive domain-invariant features through the use of a domain
classifier as a regularizer. This technique has recently been
adopted for performing classification tasks in the field of as-
tronomy (Huertas-Company et al. 2023; ´Ciprijanovi´c et al.
2020). However, multiple trials show that DANN still suffers
from overfitting and there are discrepancies between domains
(see Appendix C for more information). We find that such is-
sues can be effectively mitigated by an alternative training
strategy, which will be explained in Section 4.3.
4.3. Training Strategy: Semantic Alignment
Our strategy explicitly aligns representations from differ-
ent domains with similar labels. In other words, given that
the samples have similar cosmological parameters, regard-
less of the selection of simulations, the neural networks ex-
tract features that are similar to each other. Aligning the rep-
resentations can explicitly bring about consistency in terms
of their semantics across domains and be effective in domain
generalization (Motiian et al. 2017). We adapt the semantic
alignment loss in Motiian et al. (2017) to a regression task
setup by adding the following loss term:
LSA= ∑
i∈BS
∑
j∈BT
1


yS
i−yT
j





g(xS
i )−g(xT
j )


 (5)
Here, BS and BT represent batches from domains S (source)
and T (target), respectively, with g(·) denoting the function
that maps input to the representation vector. We apply the se-
mantic alignment loss to the 16-dimensional representation,
which can be obtained just before the terminal layer of the

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ω m (Prediction)
R2=0.991
ϵ=2.9%
RMSE=0.011
L-PICOLA
GADGET
 0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
σ8 (Prediction)
R2=0.988
ϵ=1.17%
RMSE=0.013
−0.1
0.0
0.1
∆Ω m (Residual)
 −0.1
0.0
0.1
∆ σ8 (Residual)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ω m (Prediction)
R2=0.988
ϵ=3.2%
RMSE=0.013
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
σ8 (Prediction)
R2=0.983
ϵ=1.33%
RMSE=0.015
0.1 0.3 0.5
Ω m (Ground truth)
−0.1
0.0
0.1
∆Ω m (Residual)
0.6 0.8 1.0
σ8 (Ground truth)
−0.1
0.0
0.1
∆ σ8 (Residual)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ω m (Prediction)
R2=0.99
ϵ=3.2%
RMSE=0.012
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
σ8 (Prediction)
R2=0.986
ϵ=1.28%
RMSE=0.014
−0.1
0.0
0.1
∆Ω m (Residual)
−0.2
0.0
0.2
∆ σ8 (Residual)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Ω m (Prediction)
R2=0.992
ϵ=2.65%
RMSE=0.011
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
σ8 (Prediction)
R2=0.985
ϵ=1.34%
RMSE=0.014
0.1 0.3 0.5
Ω m (Ground truth)
−0.1
0.0
0.1
∆Ω m (Residual)
0.6 0.8 1.0
σ8 (Ground truth)
−0.2
0.0
0.2
∆ σ8 (Residual)
10−4
10−3
10−2
L-PICOLA
10−2
5×10−2
GADGET
Figure 7. Comparison of the ground truth and the predicted values of Ωm and σ8 on the test set. Predictions are made by
Minkowski-PointNet machines with L -PICOLA (red) and G ADGET (blue) mocks, trained with the semantic alignment strategy. The top two
panels display the results from theSHAM model and the bottom two panels display the results from theFixed SHMR model. The left two columns
show the results of a single arbitrarily selected machine, whilethe right two show the results for the 25 independently trained machines, with the
normalized count expressed in logarithmic color bars. R2, relative error (ε) and root-mean-squared-error (RMSE) metrics calculated altogether
are shown. Residuals ∆y=ytrue−ypred are depicted in thebottom panels. The machine is trained, validated and tested on the two suites of mocks:
L-PICOLA mocks and GADGET mocks. Error bars of the two left columns indicate the 1σ values derived from the implicit likelihood inference.
Black dotted lines depicts the complete match with null residual. The results from the ensemble of 25 machines for Ωm and σ8 show a relative
error of 3.20% and 1.28% for the SHAM model. The Fixed SHMR model yields 2.65% and 1.34%. See Section 5.1 for more information.
neural network, as depicted in Figure 5. 6 The generaliza-
tion strength can be modified by adjusting the weight αp in
Ltotal=Lvanilla+αpLSA. Here, we slightly modify the adapta-
tion parameter setup proposed by Ganin et al. (2016),
αp = α0
 2
1 + exp(−γ p)− 1

(6)
where p linearly increases from 0 to 1 as training epochs in-
crease, with γ=5 and α0=5. This gradual increase in the
strength of the adaptation term allows the machine to first
gain predictability on the labels before aligning the repre-
sentations’ semantics. Hyperparameters are chosen based on
6 In this study, we opted for a reduced representation of 16 dimensions in-
stead of the comprehensive 1536-dimensional representation due to chal-
lenges in balancing accuracy and adaptability within our machine learning
model. The use of the penultimate layer of linear networks as the represen-
tation vector was also used in Lin et al. (2022). Modifying the architecture
of the neural network and performing detailed fine-tuning of hyperparame-
ters are strategies that could enhance adaptability, which we aim to explore
in future research.
multiple trials to balance the trade-off between prediction ac-
curacy and the strength of domain adaptation. To observe the
effectiveness of the alignment process, or domain adaptation,
we do not include the samples from the target domain in cal-
culating the vanilla loss (see Equations 3 and 4). Therefore,
the labels of targets are only implied to the machine through
the semantic alignment loss. When incorporating G ADGET
mocks, we reserve 2/3 of the mocks for training and 1/3 for
testing. For MD- PATCHY mocks, we use 80% as a training
data set and 10% each for validation and test data sets, same
as L-PICOLA mocks.
5. PREDICTION OF Minkowski-PointNet
In this section, we conduct a series of performance tests of
Minkowski-PointNet and make predictions on the cosmo-
logical parameters of the observational catalog. Given the
stochastic nature of the training outcome arising from the
existing trade-off between domain adaptability and the ac-
curacy of individual predictions, we train 25 different ma-
chines, whose model parameters are randomly initialized.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
Table 1. Summary of Predictions on the Cosmological Parameters
Models Training Strategy Ωm σ8 εΩm(%) εσ8(%)
SHAM Semantic Alignment 0.339±0.056 0 .801±0.061 7 .6 1 .2
SHAM Vanilla 0 .357±0.044 0 .858±0.045 13 .3 5 .8
Fixed SHMR Semantic Alignment 0 .227±0.035 0 .743±0.039 27 .9 8 .4
Fixed SHMR Vanilla 0 .196±0.021 0 .705±0.019 37 .8 13 .1
Planck Collaboration et al. (2020) - 0 .315±0.007 0 .811±0.006 - -
Ivanov et al. (2020) - 0 .295±0.010 0 .721±0.043 - -
NOTE—Summary of cosmological parameter predictions from different models trained with L-PICOLA as source and GADGET mocks as target.
For this work, we refer to the galaxy-halo connection model as the model names, together with the two training strategies: Semantic Alignment
(with domain adaptation ) and Vanilla ( without domain adaptation ). The predicted values for each models are given with their respective
uncertainties, which include both the uncertainty of individual machine and all 25 independently trained machines combined. Together
with our main results, we also display the results from the CMB measurements (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) and the full-shape power
spectrum analyses of BOSS (Ivanov et al. 2020) for reference. Relative differences εΩm and εσ8, calculated with respect to the results of
Planck Collaboration et al. (2020), are displayed for the models studied in this work. See Section 5.2 for more information on the results, and
Section 6.1 for the discussion on the comparison between the two training strategies.
Before predicting on the actual SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC
data, we perform the same feature sampling by identifying
their neighbors, as explained in Section 3.2. The designated
local and global features are then fed to the trained machines.
We compare and discuss the results from a set of machines
adapted to different domains, as summarized in Table 1.
5.1. Performance Tests ofMinkowski-PointNet
Following the training procedures discussed in the previ-
ous sections 3 and 4, machines are trained to predict Ωm,
σ8 and their standard deviations. Figure 7 displays test re-
sults of machines trained with the semantic alignment strat-
egy on the L -PICOLA and GADGET mocks. We present results
for an arbitrarily selected single machine and for all 25 in-
dividually trained machines. The top two panels show the
results of the SHAM model, and the bottom two panels show
the results of theFixed SHMR model. In each case, the upper
panels show the comparison between the true and predicted
values, while the bottom shows the residual. The test results
are promising for both Ωm and σ8, regardless of the galaxy-
halo connection model. The results from the ensemble of 25
machines for Ωm and σ8 show a relative error of 3.20% and
1.28% for the SHAM model and ε=2.65% and 1.34% for the
Fixed SHMR model, respectively. A single machine shows a
relative error of 2 .90% and 1 .17% for the SHAM model, and
ε=3.20% and 1 .33% for the Fixed SHMR model. The dif-
ficulty in trying to accurately predict σ8 seen in recent stud-
ies (Villaescusa-Navarro et al. 2022; Villanueva-Domingo &
Villaescusa-Navarro 2022; de Santi et al. 2023) is not appar-
ent.
The blue markers and bins in Figure 7 show the domain
adaptation results in G ADGET mocks. Due to semantic loss,
we are able to marginalize the selection of domains, which
leads to the degradation of accuracy in each simulation set
(for more information on the error analysis, see Section 6.1).
Since the machine only implicitly infers the cosmological pa-
rameters of the G ADGET mocks through semantic alignment
loss during the training phase, a noticeable bias is observed in
the predictions when comparing G ADGET mocks to L -PICOLA
mocks. However, the fact that the machine can make predic-
tions solely by aligning the semantics of the source and target
domains is encouraging.
Moreover, considering that the parameter space of input
labels is constrained within a range of Ωm∈ [0.1,0.5] and
σ8∈ [0.6,1.0], samples like GADGET low and high may en-
counter asymmetry when calculating the semantic alignment
loss. In an extreme scenario, if a sample is characterized
by the cosmological parameters Ωm = 0.6 and σ8 = 1.0, it
may suffer from bias due to the lack of samples with larger
values of the cosmological parameters. This could lead to
center-biased predictions as their representations may expe-
rience excessive center-ward pull. Overall, the adaptation re-
sults remain quite promising, indicating effective alignment
of representations from the two domains by the machine.
5.2. Predictions on the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC Catalog
In this section, we present predictions on the SDSS BOSS
LOWZ NGC Catalog made by the Minkowski-PointNet
machines trained with different galaxy-halo connection mod-
els and training strategies. Table 1 summarizes the results of
the machines trained with L-PICOLA and GADGET mocks. Fig-
ure 8 illustrates the aggregated outcomes of 25 distinct ma-
chines, each trained using semantic alignment with L -PICOLA
and GADGET mocks, alongside benchmark values from Planck

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ω m
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
SHAM (L-PICOLA+GADGET; SA)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ω m
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
Fixed SHMR (L-PICOLA+GADGET; SA)
Planck2018
Ivanov2020
3σ
2σ
1σ
Prediction
Figure 8. Prediction on the actual SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog from the ensemble of 25 independently trained Minkowski-PointNet
machines. The left figure displays our results when using the SHAM model, and the right figure displays the results when using the Fixed
SHMR model. The machines are trained with L -PICOLA and GADGET mocks with the semantic alignment (SA) strategy, a domain adaptation
and generalization technique that enables the machines to extract consistent features regardless of their simulation domains (see Section 4.3).
Predictions are shown with error bars. A red star shows the result from the Planck 2018 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) measurements and a
blue star from Ivanov et al. (2020). Elliptic contours show the bounds of 1σ, 2σ, and 3σ bounds, calculated from the Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) to incorporate the individual errors. Our results yield Ωm=0.339±0.056, σ8=0.801±0.061 ( left, SHAM ), and Ωm=0.227±0.035,
σ8=0.743±0.039 (right, Fixed SHMR ). See Section 5.2 for more information.
Collaboration et al. (2020) and Ivanov et al. (2020). 7 Even
within a single training scheme, the predicted results vary
significantly between machines, illustrating the stochastic
nature of the training process. This suggests that there is de-
generacy in the final state of the machine, with multiple con-
figurations exhibiting similar, suboptimal performance. In
other words, although different machines demonstrate con-
sistent accuracy and precision on the test set, their predictions
on the observational catalog unseen during training phase
shows notable variability. This justifies our approach of train-
ing multiple machines instead of selecting only those with the
best performance.
Next, we compare how the machine predicts on
the observational data when trained with the domain-
adaptive training strategy (semantic alignment) and
when trained without it (vanilla). For the Fixed SHMR
model, the prediction of the ensemble of 25 machines
yield Ωm=0.196±0.021 and σ8=0.705±0.019 in vanilla
scheme, while after applying the semantic alignment
7 The main result from Ivanov et al. (2020), which we cite in Table 1 and fig-
ures 8, 11, 13, and 14, combines the likelihoods from the Northern Galac-
tic Cap (NGC) and the Southern Galactic Cap (SGC) across two redshift
ranges: low-z (zeff = 0.38) and high-z (zeff = 0.61). Although our LOWZ
NGC mocks differ from the low-z definition, having a lower effective red-
shift of zeff = 0.29, the results from the low-z NGC used in Ivanov et al.
(2020) yield Ωm = 0.290±0.017 and σ8 = 0.808±0.073 (see sections 5.2
and 6.2 for more information).
loss, Ωm=0.227±0.035 and σ8=0.743±0.039. The SHAM
model yields Ωm=0.357±0.044 and σ8=0.858±0.045
in the vanilla scheme, and Ωm=0.339±0.056 and
σ8=0.801±0.061 with semantic alignment. The seman-
tic alignment worsens the precision compared to when not
applied, despite increasing the accuracy of prediction, as-
suming Planck 2018 cosmology as the ground truth. Thus,
although the same data sets are being used, the differences in
how they are employed to train the machines severely affect
the accuracy and precision of prediction on unseen domains.
The predictions vary significantly depending on the
galaxy-halo connection model used to generate the mock
catalogs. Especially, Fixed SHMR models exhibit con-
siderable divergence from the Planck 2018 cosmology
(Ωm=0.315±0.007 and σ8=0.811±0.006), while SHAM
models are largely in agreement, within the 1 σ error. More-
over, the Ωm predicted by the SHAM models show consistent
values with the most recent dark energy survey, DES Col-
laboration et al. (2024), which yields Ωm=0.352±0.017 for
the flat ΛCDM model, a higher value than the Planck 2018
cosmology. Although SHAM is the most favorable in terms of
both accuracy and the absence of any cosmological priors in-
volved in the forward modeling processes, Fixed SHMR ex-
hibits better precision. This discrepancy likely stems from
the additional cosmological priors incorporated via stellar
masses in Fixed SHMR models, as opposed to SHAM models,
which rely solely on clustering information.

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
This discrepancy can be due to several factors, although
the precise cause of this bias in the Fixed SHMR model re-
mains unclear. One potential reason is that, for the Fixed
SHMR model, regardless of cosmology, any halo with a sim-
ilar mass will be assigned a similar stellar mass following
the SHMR. As discussed in Section 2.5.1, the SHMR from
Girelli et al. (2020) was obtained from a different survey,
COSMOS, which could also explain the variations. Addi-
tionally, the stellar masses of the galaxies in the observa-
tional catalog are determined on the basis of the Kroupa IMF
(Kroupa 2001) with passive evolution from Maraston et al.
(2013), whereas the SHMR we utilized is based on the SMF
adjusted for the Chabrier IMF (Chabrier 2003) and the stellar
population synthesis models from Bruzual & Charlot (2003),
which can result in such differences. The exact cause of this
discrepancy still being unclear, we stress the limitations of
our naive assumption in the Fixed SHMR model, and that
results may vary depending on the galaxy-halo-connection
models. Here, we aim to demonstrate the feasibility of in-
ferring without using summary statistics and leave further in-
vestigation into the impact of galaxy-halo connection models
for future studies.
As mentioned above, when calculating the uncertainty of
the inferred parameters, we adopt the most conservative ap-
proach. We consider both the error of individual predictions
and the 25 independently trained machines, without cherry-
picking. However, selecting a single machine that best adapts
to and predicts on GADGET mocks, characterized by the small-
est distance measured by
q
∆Ω2m + ∆σ 2
8 , yields results of
Ωm=0.267±0.020 and σ8=0.775±0.0003 for Fixed SHMR
and Ωm=0.282±0.014 and σ8=0.786±0.036 for SHAM. This
suggests further potential for performing more precise infer-
ence on the cosmological parameters, achieved through the
convergence of individual machines and enhanced robustness
(see Section 6.3 for a discussion).
6. DISCUSSION
6.1. Effect of Aligning Representations
The improvement in generalizability can be attributed to
the distribution of different domains aligned in the feature
space. To compare the extracted features from machines
trained by the vanilla scheme and the semantic alignment
strategy, we visually inspect the distributions of their repre-
sentations in a lower dimension (Jo et al. in prep). Figure
9 exhibits the latent space configuration of the targeted 16-
dimensional vector reduced to two dimensions, deduced by
the t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding algorithm
(t-SNE; van der Maaten & Hinton 2008). In the seman-
tic alignment strategy, the samples are evenly distributed in
the reduced dimensions and the parameters gradually change
along one direction, while being almost independent in the
other direction 8. This behavior naturally suggests that the
machine is extracting features and representing them ef-
fectively in a way that removes degeneracy and gains pre-
dictability in the two parameters.
The vanilla scheme fails to achieve an adaptation of the
GADGET mocks to the L -PICOLA mocks, resulting in a clear
separation between the distributions. The proximity of the
observation target to the GADGET mocks in comparison to the
L-PICOLA mocks demonstrates that the GADGET mocks provide
a more precise representation of our real universe for the
SHAM model. On the other hand, when the semantic align-
ment strategy is employed, the two distinct domains blend
into a single distribution. Consequently, this supports the
claim that the machine is extracting common features from
the two domains and less weighting on the domain-specific
information, which improves prediction accuracy on the ob-
servational data.
However, there exists a clear trade-off as the semantic
alignment loss degrades precision although showing better
accuracy. To analyze the effect of semantic alignment on
precision, we can first decompose the error into two sources:
the aleatoric (statistical) error and the epistemic (model or
systematic) error. The two distinct sources of errors can eas-
ily be seen in Figure 8—the aleatoric error estimated from
the individual error bars of the machines and the epistemic
error from the variance in the prediction from the ensemble
of machines.
Figure 10 shows the two sources of error for the test sets of
GADGET and L-PICOLA mocks, which are the domains seen dur-
ing training phase, and MD-PATCHYand SDSS BOSS LOWZ
NGC samples, unseen during training phase, for the SHAM
model. As we have applied the trained machines to the SDSS
BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog, we make inferences on the MD-
PATCHY mocks for further analysis (See Section 6.3 for more
information on the results). The epistemic errors are calcu-
lated by the standard deviation of the predictions on a single
input data from the ensemble of 25 machines. On the other
hand, the aleatoric errors are calculated by the root mean
square of the predicted errors (see Equation 4) of the indi-
vidual machines. Largely, the aleatoric and epistemic errors
have comparable values for both the L-PICOLA test set and the
SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog. However, the errors for
the GADGET test set show a larger epistemic error compared to
8 The gaps in the latent space can arise for several reasons. Firstly, the ran-
domness in sampling the parameter space disrupts the dataset’s uniformity.
Secondly, the dimension reduction technique relies on the distribution’s lo-
cal structure and is inherently nonlinear. Furthermore, because of the dis-
criminative nature of our neural networks, the distribution is not required
to be uniform. Generative models such as normalizing flows and varia-
tional autoencoders are better suited for accurately modeling the distribu-
tions within specific probability distribution functions.

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
SHAM, Vanilla
L-PICOLA
GADGET
SDSS
SHAM, Vanilla
SHAM, Semantic Alignment
 SHAM, Semantic Alignment
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
Ωm
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
Ωm
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
Figure 9. A visualization of the latent space configuration from a typical neural network trained with SHAM L-PICOLA and GADGET mocks
with the vanilla scheme ( upper panels) and the semantic alignment strategy ( lower panels). The 16-dimensional vectors are reduced to two
dimensions using the t-SNE algorithm (van der Maaten & Hinton 2008). L-PICOLA (circle) and GADGET (triangle) samples are colored according
to their cosmological parameters: Ωm (left) and σ8 (right), alongside with SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC ( red star). In the lower panels, where
the semantic alignment strategy is applied, two distinct axes are evident. Along one axis, the parameters gradually change in one direction,
while remaining almost independent along the other. This pattern indicates that the two cosmological parameters are effectively represented.
Moreover, the GADGET samples are effectively integrated and generalized in these two panels, in stark contrast to theupper panels of the vanilla
scheme which show apparent distinction in the distribution. See Section 6.1 for more information.
the aleatoric error for the semantic alignment training strat-
egy.
The alignment scheme has a positive effect in reducing
errors when predicting in L -PICOLA samples. In particular,
the epistemic and aleatoric errors in Ωm show improvements
by 23% and 4% each, respectively, and 17% and 33% for
σ8. Conversely for G ADGET samples, epistemic and aleatoric
errors on Ωm show degradation by 92% and 38% each re-
spectively, and 86% and 34% for σ8. Thus, we can inter-
pret that the domain-adapted machines exhibit weaker con-
straints, mostly due to the model-wise uncertainty on the tar-
get domain. In other words, the alignment scheme is unsta-
ble and can lead to significant variability in the machine’s
end-of-training state. This considerable variability in model
performance on the target domain after domain adaptation
can be attributed to the implicit provision of cosmological
parameters to the models via the semantic alignment loss, in
contrast to the vanilla models. However, the prediction on
the unseen observational target shows no significant inclina-
tion towards either of the two sources of error. Specifically,
the ratio of epistemic to aleatoric error increases by 21% for
Ωm and decreases by 23% for σ8 after adaptation. Likewise,
for the MD-PATCHY mocks, which are also unseen during the
training phase, both epistemic and aleatoric errors arise, but
the focus is on the aleatoric error, thus reducing the ratio of
epistemic to aleatoric error.
Seen from the analyses above, domain adaptation with se-
mantic alignment improves the overall generalizability on the
unseen domains and precision in the source domain while
sacrificing precision in target and unseen domains. Although
its detailed impact on the precisions are indeed complex,
the improvement on generalizability can be mathematically
modeled by the domain generalization error bound (Albu-
querque et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2023). The upper bound
of the domain generalization error can also be decomposed
into a few sources. Firstly, the machines have to perform
well in each of the source domains individually and jointly.
Moreover, the source domains should well depict the un-

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
10−2 10−1
10−2
10−1
Aleatoric Error
Vanilla, Ω m
10−2 10−1
10−2
10−1
Vanilla, σ8
Test Set (L-PICOLA)
MD-PATCHY
Test Set (GADGET)
SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC
y = x
10−2 10−1
Epistemic Error
10−2
10−1
Aleatoric Error
Semantic Alignment, Ω m
10−2 10−1
Epistemic Error
10−2
10−1
Semantic Alignment, σ8
Figure 10. Comparison of epistemic and aleatoric error in logarithmic scale, from the ensemble prediction of 25 machines, trained with the
vanilla scheme (upper panels) and the semantic alignment strategy (lower panels). The machines are trained in the two mock suites, L -PICOLA
+GADGET, with the SHAM model. The left two columns are the results for Ωm and the the right two are the results for σ8. Blue contours
represent the test set samples of L -PICOLA, red contours the MD-PATCHY mocks, dark purple circles the test set samples of G ADGET, and red
stars the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog. Black dotted lines depict the complete match between the two types of errors. The epistemic errors
are calculated by the standard deviation of the predictions on a single input data from the ensemble of 25 machines. The aleatoric errors are
calculated by the root mean square of the predicted errors from individual machines. See Section 6.1 for more information.
seen domain while reducing the discrepancy between the
source domains. The discrepancy between the source do-
mains can be explicitly reduced by the semantic alignment as
seen from Figure 9, while the discrepancy between the source
and the unseen domain can be reduced with the addition of
accurate mocks.9 The vanilla scheme has increased perfor-
mance on the target sources by distinguishing between the
domains, while semantic alignment aligns the distribution at
the expense of degraded performance on the target domains.
Thus, while domain adaptation shows a significant advan-
tage in that it enables generalization through the alignment
of domains, it still suffers from other trade-offs resulting in
variability in the machines’ end-of-training state, leading to
weaker constraints on the cosmological parameters.
9 Precisely, given multiple sources Di
S, we define a convex hull ΛS =
{ ¯D| ¯D= ∑N
i=1 πiDi
S, π∈ ∆N−1} with ∆N−1 being a N−1 dimensional sim-
plex. We can then find an optimal distribution D∗= ∑N
i=1 π∗
i Di
S where π∗
minimizes the distance between the optimal distribution D∗ and the tar-
get unseen distribution DU . Therefore, the domain discrepancy between
the optimal distribution D∗ and the unseen domain DU measured by the
H -divergence term (dH (D∗, DU )), and the discrepancy between the two
domains inside the convex hull (supD′,D′′∈ΛS dH (D′, D′′)) are the two ma-
jor sources of error. Refer to Albuquerque et al. (2019) and Wang et al.
(2023) for more information.
6.2. Comparison with Previous Studies Using the SDSS
BOSS Catalog
Our simulation-based inference with neural networks,
which replaces the use of summary statistics, yields results
that can be compared with several notable studies utiliz-
ing the SDSS BOSS catalog. This comparison provides a
broader context for evaluating the constraints on cosmolog-
ical parameters. In the following, we compare our results
with previous studies that used summary statistics from the
full-shape power spectrum and bispectrum, as well as neural
network-based approaches.
Compared to the full-shape power spectrum analyses that
yield Ωm = 0.295±0.010 and σ8 = 0.721±0.043 (Ivanov
et al. 2020) and the bispectrum analyses yielding Ωm =
0.338+0.016
−0.017 and σ8 = 0.692+0.035
−0.041 (Philcox & Ivanov 2022),
our main results from SHAM show weaker constraints of
Ωm=0.339±0.056 and σ8=0.801±0.061. However a direct
comparison is not possible as our analyses are limited to
the BOSS LOWZ NGC sample. In contrast, Ivanov et al.
(2020) utilizes the likelihoods combining from the Northern
Galactic Cap (NGC) and the Southern Galactic Cap (SGC)
across two redshift ranges: low-z (zeff = 0.38) and high-z
(zeff = 0.61), and Philcox & Ivanov (2022) both NGC and
SGC samples from CMASSLOWZTOT, which combine the
LOWZ, LOWZE2, LOWZE3 and CMASS catalogs. Al-

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ω m
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
SHAM (L-PICOLA+GADGET; SA)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ω m
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
Fixed SHMR (L-PICOLA+GADGET; SA)
Planck2018
Ivanov2020
MD-PATCHY Truth
3σ
2σ
1σ
Prediction
Figure 11. Prediction on the 2048 MD-PATCHYmocks from 25 independently trainedMinkowski-PointNet machines. The left figure displays
our results when using the SHAM model, and the right figure displays the results when using the Fixed SHMR model. The machines are trained
with L-PICOLA and GADGET mocks with the semantic alignment strategy, a domain adaptation and generalization technique that enables the
machines to extract consistent features regardless of their simulation domains (see Section 4.3). Predictions are shown with error bars. A red
star shows the result from the Planck 2018 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) measurements, a blue star from Ivanov et al. (2020), and a green
star the ground truth values of MD- PATCHY mocks. Individual error bars include the statistical error attributed to the cosmic variance of the
2048 MD-PATCHY mocks, which are calculated from the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Individual errors are once again combined by the
GMM for the elliptic contours, showing the 1σ, 2σ, and 3σ bounds. Our results yield Ωm=0.327±0.070, σ8=0.822±0.071 (left, SHAM ), and
Ωm=0.236±0.046, σ8=0.784±0.038 (right, Fixed SHMR ). See Section 6.3 for more information.
though our LOWZ NGC mocks differ from the low-z defi-
nition, having a lower effective redshift of zeff = 0.29, the
results from the low-z NGC used in Ivanov et al. (2020) yield
Ωm = 0.290±0.017 and σ8 = 0.808±0.073.
Next, we compare our results with the recently developed
simulation-based inference framework, S IMBIG, which uses
BOSS CMASS samples (Hahn et al. 2023a,b; Lemos et al.
2023). Hahn et al. (2023a) used the power spectrum informa-
tion up to kmax=0.5h/Mpc together with normalizing flows,
resulting in Ωm=0.292+0.055
−0.040 and σ8=0.812+0.067
−0.068. Com-
pared to these results, we obtain a slightly better constraint
on σ8. On the other hand, Hahn et al. (2023b) analyzed
the bispectrum monopole up to kmax = 0.5h/Mpc conducted
by using normalizing flows, yielding Ωm=0.293+0.027
−0.027 and
σ8=0.783+0.040
−0.038. Therefore, (Hahn et al. 2023a) and (Hahn
et al. 2023b) explicitly input the cosmological information
derived from the clustering statistics at various scales into
the machine. In contrast, Lemos et al. (2023) employ
a 3D CNN applied to voxelized galaxy positions in real
space, effectively capturing clustering characteristics up to
kmax = 0.28h/Mpc. CNN predictions serve as an intermedi-
ate summary statistic, which is then used to generate the fi-
nal predictions through a flow-based neural network, yielding
Ωm=0.267+0.033
−0.029 and σ8=0.762+0.036
−0.035. Our analysis suggests
a weaker constraining power compared to previous results.
However, our study implements a more direct form of
simulation-based inference using the embedding extracted by
Minkowski-PointNet. As Lemos et al. (2023) point out,
such direct inference from neural network embeddings shows
weaker constraints. Thus, recent studies consider the predic-
tions of neural networks as summary statistics and perform
additional Bayesian inferences (Gupta et al. 2018; Ribli et al.
2019; Fluri et al. 2019; Lemos et al. 2023). Moreover, the
major difference in our approach is that we adopt the most
conservative form of setting constraints, presenting the en-
semble results of 25 individually trained machines instead of
a single machine. This highlights the degeneracy of the ma-
chines, which show similar performances on known datasets
but produce varying predictions on unseen datasets. As men-
tioned above, using a single machine that is best adapted to
the target GADGET samples, we obtain comparably tight con-
straints of Ωm=0.282±0.014 and σ8=0.786±0.036.
6.3. Towards Improved Robustness
The ultimate goal of replacing summary statistics with raw
input from the mock catalogs for the inference of cosmo-
logical parameters would be to give tight and accurate con-
straints. However, since the neural networks capture the
complexities engraved in the input data regardless of the
physical importance, such methodology involves advantages
and disadvantages at the same time. To maximize the advan-
tage, one must consider building machines robust against the
choice of domains.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
An example of robustness is shown in Figure 11,
where our domain-adapted machines are applied to
the 2048 MD- PATCHY samples. The results show
Ωm=0.327±0.070 and σ8=0.822±0.071 for the SHAM
model, and Ωm=0.236±0.046 and σ8=0.784±0.038 for the
Fixed SHMR model. The uncertainties are increased com-
pared to the prediction results on SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC
catalog, partly due to the cosmic variance of the samples.
In particular, the predicted values show differences from the
SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog, despite the high degree
of similarity of the MD-PATCHYmocks in the summary statis-
tics. Especially, for the SHAM model, the machines cor-
rectly predict the lower value of Ωm and the higher value
of σ8 for MD- PATCHY compared to the observational coun-
terpart assuming Planck 2018 as the ground truth. In con-
trast to the domain-adapted machines, the vanilla machines
yield Ωm=0.365±0.055 and σ8=0.875±0.054 for the SHAM
model, and Ωm=0.199±0.024 and σ8=0.715±0.016 for the
Fixed SHMR model. Again, as we have seen from the predic-
tion results on the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog, domain
adaptation effectively boosts generalizability at the expense
of precision.
To enhance the robustness of neural networks across di-
verse simulation and observation domains with varying cos-
mological parameters, we need more samples from the target
domains. Currently, insufficient target domain data affects
our ability to adapt and generalize effectively, resulting in
increased epistemic or model uncertainties, as discussed in
Section 6.1. This in turn leads to degraded precision in the
final predictions, as shown in figures 7 and 10. Moreover,
biases may arise from the discriminative nature of our cur-
rent neural network model as seen for the GADGET samples in
Figure 7. Generative models such as normalizing flows and
its variants can be helpful in mitigating such biases and bet-
ter approximate posterior distributions (Tang & Ting 2022).
Addressing these biases is crucial to making reliable infer-
ences in data-driven approaches, as emphasized by Lin et al.
(2022).
To accommodate a broader range of cosmological param-
eters while retaining robustness, not only do we require
more sophisticated neural network architectures, but also a
focus on the accuracy and correctness of input data. In
such data-driven approaches using highly sophisticated neu-
ral networks, unreliable input data will distort the extracted
domain-agnostic representation. Furthermore, as demon-
strated in Section 5.2, achieving both precision and accuracy
in individual predictions is critical. By improving domain
adaptation strategies and utilizing augmented target data, we
can potentially enhance the precise inference of cosmologi-
cal parameters, especially by focusing on reducing the model
uncertainties. We plan to explore this potential further in fu-
ture work.
6.4. Limatations and Considerations
We have demonstrated a proof-of-concept test of inferring
cosmological parameters without relying on summary statis-
tics, yet there are several limitations and considerations that
merit discussion. L-PICOLA mocks, which are our main source
domain, show inaccuracies, especially in modeling the halo
mass function and small-scale clustering. These inaccuracies
are worsened by the simplified assumptions in our galaxy-
halo connection models, SHAM and Fixed SHMR . Our ma-
chine learning models, particularly Minkowski-PointNet,
do not enforce explicit cut-offs, making them sensitive to
such inaccuracies. Although we introduced G ADGET mocks
and performed domain adaptation to address these issues and
improved the models’ generalizability, this method involves
trade-offs in precision.
To tackle these challenges, we suggest several strategies.
To begin with, enhancing the flexibility of our galaxy-halo
connection models by incorporating additional modeling pa-
rameters may improve both accuracy and robustness. Sec-
ondly, our target domain samples currently lack diversity in
the domains and cosmologies, which might limit the general-
izability of our models. Addressing this issue involves con-
sidering the inclusion of more mock samples from diverse
codes, despite the higher computational costs. Additionally,
exploring alternative techniques for domain adaptation and
generalization could foster improvements in model perfor-
mance across various datasets.
Additionally, it is essential to explore the application of
our new methodology to a range of galaxy redshift surveys,
which vary in observational effects such as color magnitude
cuts, survey depths, completeness, and footprints. Given that
our mocks are explicitly modeled to include observational
effects unique to the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog, our
present neural network cannot be applied to other observa-
tional surveys. In order to enhance the neural network’s ro-
bustness against varying observations, we could augment our
mock dataset with random cuts and masks, along with mod-
ifying radial selection functions. We plan to explore these
strategies in our upcoming research.
7. SUMMARY & CONCLUSION
We propose a novel approach to rapidly model vast quan-
tities of galaxy catalogs through lightcone simulations, while
fully incorporating the observational effects of the SDSS
BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog and inferringΩm and σ8 from the
actual observations using trained neural networks. This ad-
dresses the question of whether performing simulation-based
inference on observed galaxy redshift surveys using neural
networks is feasible in the absence of summary statistics,
but only with the position and mass information of individ-
ual galaxies. Our method extends previous works that per-
form “robust field-level inference” on different codes without

===== PAGE 21 =====
21
adopting summary statistics (Shao et al. 2023; de Santi et al.
2023), and works that use summary statistics to infer values
from the actual galaxy redshift surveys (Hahn et al. 2023a).
Using lightcone simulation L -PICOLA, we generate 9000
galaxy catalogs with varying cosmological parameters in
a volume of (1.2 h−1Gpc)3. Subhalos are identified using
ROCKSTAR, with each subhalo assumed to host a single galaxy.
We propose two models of galaxy-halo connection, Fixed
SHMR and SHAM. The Fixed SHMR model assumes a constant
star formation efficiency is assumed within a certain halo
mass range across different cosmologies, allowing us to iden-
tify stellar masses with varying values across different red-
shift bins. However, the Fixed SHMR model suffers from the
inclusion of cosmological priors, since they are determined
from simulations assuming fiducial cosmology. Therefore,
we introduce the SHAM model, free of cosmological priors,
which paints the halo catalog by assuming a monotonic rela-
tion with the observed catalog. The catalogs undergo further
processing to mimic the observational effects of the SDSS
BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog, including RSD, survey footprint
using the M ANGLE masks, stellar mass incompleteness (for
Fixed SHMR ), radial selection, and fiber collision (Section
2).
The results and key takeaways are summarized below.
Without employing summary statistics and using galaxies as
point cloud inputs (Section 3), we perform implicit likeli-
hood inference (Jeffrey & Wandelt 2020) and derive con-
straints on Ωm and σ8 from the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC
sample. Rapidly generated L -PICOLA mock representations
can be aligned with the more accurate G ADGET mocks to
achieve effective domain generalization using the semantic
alignment loss (Section 4). Machines trained and adapted
independently with L-PICOLA and GADGET mocks infer values
of Ωm=0.227±0.035 and σ8=0.743±0.039 for the Fixed
SHMR model and Ωm=0.339±0.056 and σ8=0.801±0.061
for the SHAM model, when applied to the SDSS BOSS LOWZ
NGC catalog. Despite the divergence in the prediction results
from the Fixed SHMR model, the SHAM model, which is free
of cosmological priors, agrees with the Planck Collaboration
et al. (2020) results within 1σ (Section 5.2 and Figure 8).
Although the constraints highlighted in Section 6.4 ex-
ist, we have demonstrated advancements in performing
simulation-based inference on observations without the use
of any summary statistics. This was primarily achieved by
adapting across two different code domains, to extract a uni-
fied knowledge applicable to real-world observations. Mov-
ing forward, we aim to incorporate precise data from various
fields and utilize more advanced models to enhance the ro-
bustness of our models. This could potentially establish the
new method as a competitive approach in precisely constrain-
ing cosmological parameters.
Jun-Young Lee would like to thank Aleksandra
´Ciprijanovi´c, Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro, Yong-uk Cho,
Cullan Howlett, Hyeonyong Kim, Seungjae Lee, Jubee
Sohn, Jun Yong Park, and Eun-jin Shin for insightful dis-
cussions. He would also like to thank Francisco-Shu Kitaura
and Cheng Zhao for providing the MD- PATCHY mocks. Jun-
Young Lee’s work was supported by Korea Institute for
Advancement of Technology (KIAT) grant funded by the
Korean Government (Ministry of Education) (P0025681-
G02P22450002201-10054408, Semiconductor–Specialized
University). Ji-hoon Kim’s work was supported by the
Global-LAMP Program of the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Ministry of Education
(No. RS-2023-00301976). His work was also supported
by the NRF grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT)
(No. 2022M3K3A1093827 and No. 2023R1A2C1003244).
His work was also supported by the National Institute of
Supercomputing and Network/Korea Institute of Science
and Technology Information with supercomputing resources
including technical support, grants KSC-2020-CRE-0219,
KSC-2021-CRE-0442 and KSC-2022-CRE-0355. Jaehyun
Lee is supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF-2021R1C1C2011626). HSH acknowledges the
support by Samsung Electronic Co., Ltd. (Project Number
IO220811-01945-01) and by the National Research Founda-
tion of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government
(MSIT), NRF-2021R1A2C1094577.
Funding for SDSS-III has been provided by the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation, the Participating Institutions, the Na-
tional Science Foundation, and the U.S. Department of
Energy Office of Science. The SDSS-III web site is
http://www.sdss3.org/. SDSS-III is managed by the Astro-
physical Research Consortium for the Participating Institu-
tions of the SDSS-III Collaboration including the University
of Arizona, the Brazilian Participation Group, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon University, Univer-
sity of Florida, the French Participation Group, the German
Participation Group, Harvard University, the Instituto de As-
trofisica de Canarias, the Michigan State/Notre Dame/JINA
Participation Group, Johns Hopkins University, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for As-
trophysics, Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics,
New Mexico State University, New York University, Ohio
State University, Pennsylvania State University, University of
Portsmouth, Princeton University, the Spanish Participation
Group, University of Tokyo, University of Utah, Vanderbilt
University, University of Virginia, University of Washington,
and Yale University.

===== PAGE 22 =====
22
REFERENCES
Albuquerque, I., Monteiro, J., Darvishi, M., Falk, T. H., &
Mitliagkas, I. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1911.00804,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1911.00804
Alsing, J., Charnock, T., Feeney, S., & Wandelt, B. 2019, MNRAS,
488, 4440, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1960
Anchordoqui, L. A., Di Valentino, E., Pan, S., & Yang, W. 2021,
Journal of High Energy Astrophysics, 32, 28,
doi: 10.1016/j.jheap.2021.08.001
Asgari, M., Lin, C.-A., Joachimi, B., et al. 2021, A&A, 645, A104,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039070
Behroozi, P. S., Wechsler, R. H., & Conroy, C. 2013a, ApJ, 770,
57, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/770/1/57
Behroozi, P. S., Wechsler, R. H., & Wu, H.-Y . 2013b, ApJ, 762,
109, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/762/2/109
Ben-David, S., Blitzer, J., Crammer, K., et al. 2010, Machine
Learning, 79, 151, doi: 10.1007/s10994-009-5152-4
Ben-David, S., Blitzer, J., Crammer, K., & Pereira, F. 2006, in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, ed.
B. Sch¨olkopf, J. Platt, & T. Hoffman, V ol. 19 (MIT Press).
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2006/file/
b1b0432ceafb0ce714426e9114852ac7-Paper.pdf
Berlind, A. A., Weinberg, D. H., Benson, A. J., et al. 2003, ApJ,
593, 1, doi: 10.1086/376517
Bond, J. R., Kofman, L., & Pogosyan, D. 1996, Nature, 380, 603,
doi: 10.1038/380603a0
Boruah, S. S., Eifler, T., Miranda, V ., & Krishanth, P. M. S. 2023,
MNRAS, 518, 4818, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3417
Bronstein, M. M., Bruna, J., Cohen, T., & Veliˇckovi´c, P. 2021,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2104.13478,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2104.13478
Bruzual, G., & Charlot, S. 2003, MNRAS, 344, 1000,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2003.06897.x
Chabrier, G. 2003, PASP, 115, 763, doi: 10.1086/376392
Choy, C., Gwak, J., & Savarese, S. 2019, in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
3075–3084
´Ciprijanovi´c, A., Kafkes, D., Jenkins, S., et al. 2020, in 34th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.03591
Colless, M., Dalton, G., Maddox, S., et al. 2001, MNRAS, 328,
1039, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04902.x
Conroy, C., Wechsler, R. H., & Kravtsov, A. V . 2006, ApJ, 647,
201, doi: 10.1086/503602
Corso, G., Cavalleri, L., Beaini, D., Li`o, P., & Veliˇckovi´c, P. 2020,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2004.05718,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2004.05718
Crocce, M., Castander, F. J., Gazta˜naga, E., Fosalba, P., &
Carretero, J. 2015, MNRAS, 453, 1513,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1708
Davis, M., Efstathiou, G., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 1985,
ApJ, 292, 371, doi: 10.1086/163168
Dawson, K. S., Schlegel, D. J., Ahn, C. P., et al. 2013, AJ, 145, 10,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/145/1/10
de Lapparent, V ., Geller, M. J., & Huchra, J. P. 1986, ApJL, 302,
L1, doi: 10.1086/184625
de Santi, N. S. M., Shao, H., Villaescusa-Navarro, F., et al. 2023,
ApJ, 952, 69, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acd1e2
DES Collaboration, Abbott, T. M. C., Acevedo, M., et al. 2024,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2401.02929,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2401.02929
Ding, J., Li, S., Zheng, Y ., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2311.00981, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2311.00981
Dong-P´aez, C. A., Smith, A., Szewciw, A. O., et al. 2022, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2208.00540, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2208.00540
Eisenstein, D. J., Annis, J., Gunn, J. E., et al. 2001, AJ, 122, 2267,
doi: 10.1086/323717
Eisenstein, D. J., Weinberg, D. H., Agol, E., et al. 2011, AJ, 142,
72, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/142/3/72
Fluri, J., Kacprzak, T., Lucchi, A., et al. 2019, PhRvD, 100,
063514, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.100.063514
Fluri, J., Kacprzak, T., Lucchi, A., et al. 2022, Phys. Rev. D, 105,
083518, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.105.083518
Fluri, J., Kacprzak, T., Refregier, A., et al. 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 98,
123518, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.98.123518
Fosalba, P., Crocce, M., Gazta˜naga, E., & Castander, F. J. 2015a,
MNRAS, 448, 2987, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv138
Fosalba, P., Gazta˜naga, E., Castander, F. J., & Crocce, M. 2015b,
MNRAS, 447, 1319, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2464
Ganin, Y ., Ustinova, E., Ajakan, H., et al. 2016, Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 17, 1.
http://jmlr.org/papers/v17/15-239.html
Geller, M. J., & Huchra, J. P. 1989, Science, 246, 897,
doi: 10.1126/science.246.4932.897
Giocoli, C., Baldi, M., & Moscardini, L. 2018, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 481, 2813,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2465
Girelli, G., Pozzetti, L., Bolzonella, M., et al. 2020, A&A, 634,
A135, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201936329
Giri, U., M¨unchmeyer, M., & Smith, K. M. 2023, Phys. Rev. D,
107, L061301, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.107.L061301
Guo, H., Zehavi, I., & Zheng, Z. 2012, ApJ, 756, 127,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/756/2/127
Guo, H., Zheng, Z., Behroozi, P. S., et al. 2016, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society, 459, 3040,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw845
Gupta, A., Matilla, J. M. Z., Hsu, D., & Haiman, Z. 2018, Phys.
Rev. D, 97, 103515, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.97.103515

===== PAGE 23 =====
23
Hahn, C., & Villaescusa-Navarro, F. 2021, JCAP, 2021, 029,
doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2021/04/029
Hahn, C., Eickenberg, M., Ho, S., et al. 2023a, JCAP, 2023, 010,
doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2023/04/010
Hahn, C., Lemos, P., Parker, L., et al. 2023b, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2310.15246, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.15246
Hand, N., Feng, Y ., Beutler, F., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 160,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aadae0
Hikage, C., Oguri, M., Hamana, T., et al. 2019, Publications of the
Astronomical Society of Japan, 71, 43, doi: 10.1093/pasj/psz010
Hildebrandt, H., Viola, M., Heymans, C., et al. 2017, MNRAS,
465, 1454, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2805
Hort´ua, H. J., Garc´ıa, L. ´A., & Casta˜neda C., L. 2023, Frontiers in
Astronomy and Space Sciences, 10, 1139120,
doi: 10.3389/fspas.2023.1139120
Howlett, C., Manera, M., & Percival, W. J. 2015a, Astronomy and
Computing, 12, 109, doi: 10.1016/j.ascom.2015.07.003
Howlett, C., Ross, A. J., Samushia, L., Percival, W. J., & Manera,
M. 2015b, MNRAS, 449, 848, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2693
Howlett, C., Said, K., Lucey, J. R., et al. 2022, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 515, 953,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1681
Huchra, J., Davis, M., Latham, D., & Tonry, J. 1983, ApJS, 52, 89,
doi: 10.1086/190860
Huertas-Company, M., Iyer, K. G., Angeloudi, E., et al. 2023,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2305.02478,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.02478
Hwang, H. S., Geller, M. J., Park, C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 818, 173,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/2/173
Hwang, S. Y ., Sabiu, C. G., Park, I., & Hong, S. E. 2023, The
Universe is worth 643 pixels: Convolution Neural Network and
Vision Transformers for Cosmology.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08192
Ilbert, O., McCracken, H. J., Le F`evre, O., et al. 2013, A&A, 556,
A55, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321100
Ioffe, S., & Szegedy, C. 2015, in Proceedings of the 32nd
International Conference on International Conference on
Machine Learning - V olume 37, ICML’15 (JMLR.org), 448–456
Ishikawa, S., Okumura, T., & Nishimichi, T. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2308.03871, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.03871
Ivanov, M. M., Simonovi´c, M., & Zaldarriaga, M. 2020, Journal of
Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, 2020, 042,
doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2020/05/042
Jeffrey, N., & Wandelt, B. D. 2020, in 34th Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.05991
Jo, Y ., & Kim, J.-h. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 489, 3565, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2304
Jo, Y ., Genel, S., Wandelt, B., et al. 2023, ApJ, 944, 67,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca8fe
Kacprzak, T., & Fluri, J. 2022, Physical Review X, 12, 031029,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.12.031029
Kaiser, N. 1987, MNRAS, 227, 1, doi: 10.1093/mnras/227.1.1
Kim, J., Park, C., & Choi, Y .-Y . 2008, ApJ, 683, 123,
doi: 10.1086/589566
Kingma, D., & Ba, J. 2014, International Conference on Learning
Representations
Kitaura, F.-S., & Heß, S. 2013, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society: Letters, 435, L78,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slt101
Kitaura, F.-S., Yepes, G., & Prada, F. 2013, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, 439, L21,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slt172
Kitaura, F.-S., Rodr´ıguez-Torres, S., Chuang, C.-H., et al. 2016,
MNRAS, 456, 4156, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2826
Klypin, A., Yepes, G., Gottl¨ober, S., Prada, F., & Heß, S. 2016,
MNRAS, 457, 4340, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw248
Kravtsov, A. V ., Berlind, A. A., Wechsler, R. H., et al. 2004, ApJ,
609, 35, doi: 10.1086/420959
Kreisch, C. D., Pisani, A., Villaescusa-Navarro, F., et al. 2022,
ApJ, 935, 100, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7d4b
Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04022.x
Lazanu, A. 2021, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics,
09, 039, doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2021/09/039
Leauthaud, A., Bundy, K., Saito, S., et al. 2016, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society, 457, 4021,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw117
Leja, J., Speagle, J. S., Johnson, B. D., et al. 2020, ApJ, 893, 111,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7e27
Leja, J., Speagle, J. S., Ting, Y .-S., et al. 2022, ApJ, 936, 165,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac887d
Lemos, P., Parker, L. H., Hahn, C., et al. 2023, in Machine
Learning for Astrophysics, 18, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.15256
Lin, Q., Fouchez, D., Pasquet, J., et al. 2022, A&A, 662, A36,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202142751
Lu, T., Haiman, Z., & Li, X. 2023, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 521, 2050, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad686
Maraston, C., Pforr, J., Henriques, B. M., et al. 2013, MNRAS,
435, 2764, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1424
Mathuriya, A., Bard, D., Mendygral, P., et al. 2019, in Proceedings
of the International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis, SC ’18 (IEEE
Press), doi: 10.1109/SC.2018.00068
Motiian, S., Piccirilli, M., Adjeroh, D. A., & Doretto, G. 2017, in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV)
Neutsch, S., Heneka, C., & Br¨uggen, M. 2022, MNRAS, 511,
3446, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac218

===== PAGE 24 =====
24
Ni, Y ., Genel, S., Angl´es-Alc´azar, D., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2304.02096, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2304.02096
Ntampaka, M., Eisenstein, D. J., Yuan, S., & Garrison, L. H. 2020,
ApJ, 889, 151, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5f5e
Pan, S., Liu, M., Forero-Romero, J., et al. 2020, Science China
Physics, Mechanics & Astronomy, 63,
doi: 10.1007/s11433-020-1586-3
Peacock, J. A., & Smith, R. E. 2000, MNRAS, 318, 1144,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2000.03779.x
Peebles, P. J. E. 1981, The Large-Scale Structure of the Universe
(Princeton: Princeton University Press),
doi: doi:10.1515/9780691206714
Perez, L. A., Genel, S., Villaescusa-Navarro, F., et al. 2022, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2204.02408, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.02408
Philcox, O. H. E., & Ivanov, M. M. 2022, Phys. Rev. D, 105,
043517, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.105.043517
Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y ., et al. 2020, A&A,
641, A6, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833910
Qi, C. R., Su, H., Mo, K., & Guibas, L. J. 2016, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.00593
Qi, C. R., Yi, L., Su, H., & Guibas, L. J. 2017, in Proceedings of
the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, NIPS’17 (Red Hook, NY , USA: Curran
Associates Inc.), 5105–5114
Qiu, L., Napolitano, N. R., Borgani, S., et al. 2023, Cosmology
with Galaxy Cluster Properties using Machine Learning.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09142
Ravanbakhsh, S., Oliva, J. B., Fromenteau, S., et al. 2016, in
International Conference on Machine Learning.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2360303
Reddick, R. M., Wechsler, R. H., Tinker, J. L., & Behroozi, P. S.
2013, ApJ, 771, 30, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/771/1/30
Reid, B., Ho, S., Padmanabhan, N., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 455,
1553, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2382
Ribli, D., Pataki, B. A., Zorrilla Matilla, J. M., et al. 2019, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 490, 1843,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2610
Rodr´ıguez-Torres, S. A., Chuang, C.-H., Prada, F., et al. 2016,
MNRAS, 460, 1173, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1014
Roncoli, A., ´Ciprijanovi´c, A., V oetberg, M., Villaescusa-Navarro,
F., & Nord, B. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2311.01588,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2311.01588
Ronconi, T., Lapi, A., Viel, M., & Sartori, A. 2020, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 498, 2095,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2201
Saito, S., Leauthaud, A., Hearin, A. P., et al. 2016, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 460, 1457,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1080
Scoccimarro, R., Hui, L., Manera, M., & Chan, K. C. 2012,
PhRvD, 85, 083002, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.85.083002
Scoville, N., Aussel, H., Brusa, M., et al. 2007, ApJS, 172, 1,
doi: 10.1086/516585
Shao, H., Villaescusa-Navarro, F., Villanueva-Domingo, P., et al.
2023, ApJ, 944, 27, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acac7a
Simha, V ., & Cole, S. 2013, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 436,
1142, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1643
Sohn, J., Geller, M. J., Hwang, H. S., et al. 2023, ApJ, 945, 94,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acb925
Springel, V . 2005, MNRAS, 364, 1105,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09655.x
—. 2015, N-GenIC: Cosmological structure initial conditions,
Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1502.003
Springel, V ., Pakmor, R., Zier, O., & Reinecke, M. 2021, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 506, 2871,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1855
Swanson, M. E. C., Tegmark, M., Hamilton, A. J. S., & Hill, J. C.
2008, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 387,
1391, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13296.x
Tang, K. S., & Ting, Y .-S. 2022, in Machine Learning for
Astrophysics, 13, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2207.02786
Tassev, S., Zaldarriaga, M., & Eisenstein, D. J. 2013, JCAP, 2013,
036, doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2013/06/036
Tojeiro, R., Ross, A. J., Burden, A., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 440,
2222, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu371
van der Maaten, L., & Hinton, G. 2008, Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 9, 2579.
http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/vandermaaten08a.html
Veronesi, N., Marulli, F., Veropalumbo, A., & Moscardini, L. 2023,
Astronomy and Computing, 42, 100692,
doi: 10.1016/j.ascom.2023.100692
Villaescusa-Navarro, F., Hahn, C., Massara, E., et al. 2020, ApJS,
250, 2, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab9d82
Villaescusa-Navarro, F., Genel, S., Angl´es-Alc´azar, D., et al. 2022,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2201.01300.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.01300
Villaescusa-Navarro, F., Ding, J., Genel, S., et al. 2022, The
Astrophysical Journal, 929, 132, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac5d3f
Villanueva-Domingo, P., & Villaescusa-Navarro, F. 2022, ApJ,
937, 115, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8930
Villanueva-Domingo, P., Villaescusa-Navarro, F., Angl´es-Alc´azar,
D., et al. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 935, 30,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7aa3
Wang, J., Lan, C., Liu, C., et al. 2023, IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge & Data Engineering, 35, 8052,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2022.3178128
Wechsler, R. H., & Tinker, J. L. 2018, Annual Review of
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 56, 435,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081817-051756
White, M., Tinker, J. L., & McBride, C. K. 2014a, MNRAS, 437,
2594, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt2071

===== PAGE 25 =====
25
—. 2014b, MNRAS, 437, 2594, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt2071
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, John E., J., et al. 2000, AJ,
120, 1579, doi: 10.1086/301513
Zaheer, M., Kottur, S., Ravanbakhsh, S., et al. 2017, in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, ed. I. Guyon, U. V .
Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, &
R. Garnett, V ol. 30 (Curran Associates, Inc.).
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2017/file/
f22e4747da1aa27e363d86d40ff442fe-Paper.pdf
Zhao, C., Kitaura, F.-S., Chuang, C.-H., et al. 2015, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 451, 4266,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1262

===== PAGE 26 =====
26
APPENDIX
A. FEATURES OF REALIZATIONS WITH DIFFERENT COSMOLOGICAL PARAMETERS
Features of individual and neighboring galaxies differ across realizations with varying cosmological parameters. In Figure 12,
we provide the same pair plot as Figure 6 but for the Fixed SHMR model of the L-PICOLA mock suite with different cosmologies:
high (Ωm=0.4772, σ8=0.9639), low (Ωm=0.1185, σ8=0.6163), and fiducial (Ωm=0.3067, σ8=0.8238). Notice that low
deviates the most from fiducial, while high shows a better agreement in all features. This tendency becomes most extreme
for distances to neighboring galaxies. This is due to the deficit of the total number of galaxies for low, which severely affects
the separation between the galaxies. Although not displayed for brevity, the SHAM models exhibit consistency despite differences
in the cosmological parameters. Such behavior arises from the fact that, in contrast to the Fixed SHMR model, the SHAM model
matches the total galaxy count of the mocks to the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog.
11
12
Max Mass
11.0
11.5
Mean Mass
0.00
0.02
Max Dist
11 12
Stellar Mass
0.00
0.02
Mean Dist
11 12
Max Mass
11.0 11.5
Mean Mass
0.000 0.025
Max Dist
0.00 0.02
Mean Dist
L-PICOLA Mocks
ﬁducial
low
high
Figure 12. Pair plot of five features of a galaxy randomly sampled from each mock generated with the Fixed SHMR model, simi-
lar to Figure 6, but this time for three realizations of different cosmologies named high (red; Ωm=0.4772, σ8=0.9639), low (green;
Ωm=0.1185, σ8=0.6163) and fiducial (blue; Ωm=0.3067, σ8=0.8238). The plot shows for 1000 randomly sampled galaxies for each
mocks. Masses are in units of log (M⋆/h−1M⊙) and distances are expressed in terms of the newly assumed metric in redshift space
(X,Y,Z) = (zsin(DEC)cos(RA),zsin(DEC)sin(RA),zcos(DEC)). See Appendix A for more information.
B. EFFECT OF FINE-TUNED MOCKS MD- PATCHY
We further investigate the possibility of increasing the accuracy and precision via the incorporation of fine-tuned MD- PATCHY
mock samples. Similarly to machines trained with L -PICOLA and GADGET mocks, we train 25 different machines using L -PICOLA
and MD- PATCHY with the semantic alignment loss applied. As shown in Figure 13, the results yield Ωm=0.307±0.035 and
σ8=0.767±0.035 for the Fixed SHMR model, and Ωm=0.343±0.053 and σ8=0.796±0.051 for the SHAM model. Compared to

===== PAGE 27 =====
27
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ω m
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
SHAM (L-PICOLA+PATCHY; SA)
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ω m
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
Fixed SHMR (L-PICOLA+PATCHY; SA)
Planck2018
Ivanov2020
3σ
2σ
1σ
Prediction
Figure 13. Prediction on the actual SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog from the ensemble of 25 independently trained Minkowski-PointNet
machines. The left figure displays our results when using the SHAM model, and the right figure displays the results when using the Fixed SHMR
model. The machines are trained with L -PICOLA and MD-PATCHY mocks without domain adaptation strategy (Vanilla), a domain adaptation
and generalization technique that enables the machines to extract consistent features regardless of their simulation domains (see Section 4.3).
Predictions are shown with error bars. A red star shows the result from the Planck 2018 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) measurements
and a blue star from Ivanov et al. (2020). Elliptic contours show the 1σ, 2σ, and 3 σ bounds, calculated from the Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) to incorporate the individual errors. Our results yield Ωm=0.343±0.053, σ8=0.796±0.051 ( left, SHAM ), and Ωm=0.307±0.035,
σ8=0.767±0.035 (left, Fixed SHMR ). See Section 6.1 for more information.
when applying the G ADGET mocks, better precision is achieved for both galaxy-halo connection models. Moreover, especially
for the Fixed SHMR model, the accuracy drastically increases. Indeed, such behavior is well expected, as the machine can learn
from the fine-tuned mocks, which better depict the observational sample.
Semantic alignment loss plays an explicit role in reducing the divergence of representations originating from different domains.
For example, aligning the representations of DL−PICOLA and DMD−PATCHY to be close enough, adding MD-PATCHYmock samples
will have a small impact on increasing the diameter of the convex hull of the domains. Moreover, assuming that the marginal
distribution of MD-PATCHYis relatively similar to the SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog, the optimal domain,D∗, will be weighted
towards DMD−PATCHY and will effectively reduce the generalization risk. Therefore, this confirms not only the importance of
aligning the representations from different domains but also the inclusion of accurate mocks involved in the training phase. This
effect is maximized for the Fixed SHMR model, where the initially biased prediction, when trained with the L-PICOLA and GADGET
domains, significantly alters to produce more accurate results assuming the Planck 2018 cosmology as the ground truth.
However, since MD- PATCHY mocks are based on a single cosmology, generalization is only effective locally. To train the
machines to be globally robust, it is necessary that a multitude of high-fidelity mocks with diverse cosmologies are included as
in Section 6.1. Such inclusion must be made across varying cosmological parameters, unlike the fine-tuned mocks with a single
targeted value, as generalization is only performed locally in this case. We leave these aspects of improvement for future work.
C. ALTERNATIVE TRAINING STRATEGY: DOMAIN ADVERSARIAL TRAINING
An alternative training strategy for domain adaptation and generalization is to extract domain-invariant features through adver-
sarial training. The essence of such a training strategy is to prevent the machine from learning domain-specific information. Here,
we employ domain adversarial neural networks (DANN; Ganin et al. 2016), which adds a domain classifier to the backbone of
the machine illustrated in Figure 5. The domain classifier is trained to classify whether the input originates from L-PICOLA mocks
or MD-PATCHYmocks. Moreover, the preceding gradient reversal layer (GRL) enables forward propagation of the domain loss to
the feature extractor. Consequently, the feature extractor weights are updated to produce domain-invariant features sufficient to
deceive the domain classifier.

===== PAGE 28 =====
28
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ω m
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
σ8
1σ
2σ
3σ
Planck2018
Ivanov2020
Prediction
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P (DL−PICOLA|xSDSS)
Figure 14. Prediction on the actual SDSS BOSS LOWZ NGC catalog from 25 independently trained Minkowski-PointNet machines,
similar to Figure 8, but this time with the domain adversarial neural networks (DANN; Ganin et al. 2016) instead of the semantic alignment
strategy. Predictions with error bars are shown and in different colors indicating the probability that the domain classifier classifies as L-PICOLA,
P(DL−PICOLA|xSDSS). A red star shows the result from the Planck 2018 (Planck Collaboration et al. 2020) measurements and ablue star from
Ivanov et al. (2020). Elliptic contours show the bounds of 1σ, 2σ, and 3σ bounds. The results yield Ωm=0.304±0.033 and σ8=0.795±0.057.
See Appendix C for more information.
In this approach, we leverage the DANN strategy to perform regression tasks in a supervised domain adaptation setup using
L-PICOLA and MD-PATCHYmocks. The loss function of the supervised DANN setup can be mathematically expressed as follows:
L(θ f , θr, θd; x)=Lvanilla(Gr(θr; (G f (θ f ; x))), y)
+αLdomain(Gd(θd; R((G f (θ f ; x)))),d) (C1)
where θ f , θr, θd denote the parameters and G f (θ f ,·), Gr(θr,·), Gd(θd,·) represent the function of the feature extractor, regressor,
and domain classifier. Here, x represents the input, y represents the cosmological parameters, and d represents the domain. The
GRL R(x) is a pseudo-function with properties R(x)=x and R′(x)=− I. Introducing GRL reduces the DANN setup to a single
minimization problem.
The terminal layer of the domain classifier passes through a sigmoid activation function, classifying input as L-PICOLA (“1”) or
MD-PATCHY(“0”) based on a threshold of 0.5. The domain confusion lossLdomain is calculated using the binary cross-entropy loss
with logits, accounting for the imbalance in the size of the data set between each domain. After training, we further train new
domain classifiers, each with two trainable layers, for every machine while keeping the weights of the feature extractor frozen.
This process allows us to evaluate the classifiability of the extracted features.
Figure 14 displays the results of the 25 independently trained DANN machines. Individual predictions are colored based
on their probabilities as classified by the domain classifier, indicating whether they originated from L -PICOLA, denoted as
P(DL−PICOLA|xSDSS). The results show Ωm=0.304±0.033 and σ8=0.795±0.057. However, we observe that compared to the
semantic alignment strategy, the distribution between the two domains is not effectively reduced, making it susceptible to over-
fitting. Consequently, the adequacy of the training scheme can vary depending on the characteristics of the sources and targets
and must be used judiciously.
