===== PAGE 1 =====
Einstein’s 1935 papers: EPR=ER?
Gerd Ch.Krizek 1
1University of Vienna - Faculty of physics - Quantum particle
Workgroup
1UAS Technikum Wien - Department of Applied Mathematics and
Sciences
May 31, 2017
Abstract
In May of 1935, Einstein published with two co-authors the famous EPR-
paper about entangled particles, which questioned the completeness of
Quantum Mechanics by means of a gedankenexperiment. Only one month
later, he published a work that seems unconnected to the EPR-paper at
ﬁrst, the so called Einstein-Rosen-paper, that presented a solution of the
ﬁeld equations for particles in the framework of general relativity. Both
papers ask for the conception of completeness in a theory and, from a
modern perspective, it is easy to believe that there is a connection be-
tween these topics. We question whether Einstein might have considered
that a correlation between nonlocal features of Quantum Mechanics and
the Einstein-Rosen bridge can be used to explain entanglement. We anal-
yse this question by discussing the used conceptions of ”completeness,”
”atomistic structure of matter,” and ”quantum phenomena.” We discuss
the historical embedding of the two works and the context to modern
research. Recent approaches are presented that formulate an EPR=ER
principle and claim an equivalence of the basic principles of these two
papers.
1 Introduction
The historical approach to the foundations of physics is often misunderstood as
a historical work alone. To study speciﬁc questions in the history of physics is a
method of introspection about problems that are still relevant to recent physics.
This work is not intended to be a historical work alone. Recent aspects of dif-
ferent conceptions of completeness will be discussed, starting from a historical
perspective. The connection between these two papers (which at ﬁrst look seem
to be independent) is presented and provides important insights into Einstein’s
conception of reality and the recent advent of the EPR=ER concept.
1
arXiv:1704.04648v2  [physics.hist-ph]  29 May 2017

===== PAGE 2 =====
The year 1935 is a remarkable year in the context of Quantum Mechanics. The
discussion on the incompleteness of Quantum Mechanics found its culmination
in the famous EPR paper [Einstein et al., 1935] and the reply by [Bohr, 1935].
Further, [Schr¨ odinger, 1935] expressed his criticism on the oddities of Quantum
Mechanics with his famous Gedankenexperiment of a cat in a box.
At ﬁrst view unconnected to the discussion in Quantum Mechanics, [Einstein
and Rosen, 1935b] published one month later an article which is famous as well,
but in a completely diﬀerent ﬁeld of physics. It is the paper that presented
the Einstein-Rosen bridge solution in General Relativity, which later became
well-known as “wormhole” in popular science and science ﬁction.
We will show that the EPR paper cannot be seen as stand-alone, but must be
seen in context with the [Einstein, 1934] paper and the [Einstein and Rosen,
1935b] paper.
In 1934, Einstein expressed his point of view on physical theories in general, the
formation of new theories, the connection to an ontology, and the concept of
reality. Later articles and letters from Einstein will help to complete the picture
about his views on the nature of reality and his notion of completeness.
It is tempting to think that the problem Einstein illustrated with the EPR
paper is meant to be solved with the Einstein-Rosen bridge solution by solving
the occurring nonlocality 1 in Quantum Mechanics with a two-sheet wormhole
that represents the entangled particles. After analysing the EPR paper and
the notions of reality and completeness, the idea of a connection between those
papers will be discussed in context with recent developments in the ﬁeld.
2 Einstein’s view on theories and theory forma-
tion
In 1934 Einstein was driven by the long-lasting debates on the foundations of
Quantum Mechanics to clarify his views on the method of theoretical physics
in general. He emphasized the nature of the constituents of a theory used in
physics [Einstein, 1934]:
“For to the discoverer in that ﬁeld, the constructions of his imagina-
tion appear so necessary and so natural that he is apt to treat them
not as the creations of his thoughts but as given realities.”
and
“He is in just the same plight as the historian, who also, even though
unconsciously, disposes events of the past around ideals that he has
formed about human society.”
1It is still a matter of dispute in the interpretations of Quantum Mechanics if there is
nonlocality in Quantum Mechanics. We deﬁne a nonlocal theory as a theory that violates the
Bell inequalities.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
This already indicates that the objection that Einstein was a proponent of a
naive realism2 has to be reconsidered. His ontology is, of course, not at trivial
one, and we have to deﬁne what is meant exactly by naive realism. We will
come back later to that discussion.
Einstein then mentions the second elementary truth science is based upon; its
dependency on experience, the need for empirical veriﬁcation:
“Pure logical thinking can give us no knowledge whatsoever of the
world of experience; all knowledge about reality begins with experi-
ence and terminates in it.”
It is remarkable that Einstein proposed his views parallel to [Popper, 2005], and
they agree on several points. We will see later that their views are connected
more deeply. What are those ideals that Einstein is referring to? In his view, a
theory is built upon concepts and laws and has to obey certain requirements:
“The basic concepts and laws which are not logically further reducible
constitute the indispensable and not rationally deducible part of the
theory. It can scarcely be denied that the supreme goal of all theory
is to make the irreducible basic elements as simple and as few as
possible without having to surrender the adequate representation of
a single datum of experience”
Einstein is referring to Ockham 's razor principle in this statement on the econ-
omy that the theory building process has to comply with. A detailed analysis
of Ockham's razor in context to Quantum Mechanics is given by [Krizek, 2017b].
Einstein’s ideas on theory building are guided by the structure of the general
Theory of Relativity and its success. To Einstein, it was representative to show
the incorrectness of the induction principle as a theory building process and,
to the contrary, consolidated his beliefs in a more top-down-orientated theory
building process out of principles.
By rejecting induction as theory building principle and taking up the position
that the elements of theories are creations of human thoughts, the question
arises if there is a correct way to ﬁnd insights about nature. And here Einstein
makes clear that to him there is such a way [Einstein, 1934]:
“ To this I answer with complete assurance, that in my opinion there
is the correct path and, moreover, that it is in our power to ﬁnd it.
Our experience up to date justiﬁes us in feeling sure that in Nature
is actualized the ideal of mathematical simplicity. It is my convic-
tion that pure mathematical construction enables us to discover the
concepts and the laws connecting them which give us the key to the
understanding of the phenomena of Nature.”
2See[Janssen and Lehner, 2014, page 309ﬀ]
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
His argument in favour of this position is the huge success of mathematics as
a tool to describe our experiences about nature. It is this unreasonable eﬀec-
tiveness of mathematics that led Eugene Wigner to publish his paper [Wigner,
1960] of the same title. On the other hand, Einstein identiﬁed a problem in the
above argument, when he stated that this mentioned success is claimed as well
by theories that cannot deliver a deeper ontological insight, such as classical
mechanics.
“Have we any right to hope that experience will guide us aright,
when there are theories (like classical mechanics) which agree with
experience to a very great extent, even without comprehending the
subject in its depths?”
Einstein ignores this objection and heads for a worldview with a distinguished
position of mathematics: 3
“...the truly creative principle resides in mathematics. In a certain
sense, therefore, I hold it to be true that pure thought is competent
to comprehend the real, as the ancients dreamed.”
It reﬂects a kind of mathematical realism, which is in one aspect contradictory,
when Einstein pointed out that the elements of the theory are ideals, are pure
constructions of human thoughts, but on the other hand represent a “correct
way,” reﬂecting a truth about nature.
As a basic entity of this worldview, he adopts the four dimensional continuum,
which already was extremely successful for uniﬁcation of physics during the end
of the 19th century. He refers to this success and the principle of simplicity and
states:
“It is essential for our point of view that we can arrive at these con-
structions and the laws relating them one with another by adhering
to the principle of searching for the mathematically simplest concepts
and their connections. In the paucity of the mathematically existent
simple ﬁeld-types and of the relations between them, lies the justiﬁ-
cation for the theorist’s hope that he may comprehend reality in its
depths.”
Einstein presented and clariﬁed his ideas on theory formation in general, about
his ontological ideas and the scientiﬁc method in general. He presented ﬁeld
theories as candidates for this simple new theory that describes the real. His
concern was mostly about how to integrate the atomistic structure 4 of matter
and energy.
3Wigner will refer to Einstein 's objection 25 years later.
4In today’s notion, we would call it quantum nature
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
We will see later that he used this wording again in his 1935 papers, and it is
relevant to see what he meant exactly:
“...the theory 5 in its basic principles is not an atomic one in so
far as it operates exclusively with continuous functions of space, in
contrast to classical mechanics whose most important feature, the
material point, squares with the atomistic structure of matter.”
What Einstein understands as “atomic theory” or “atomistic structure” is dis-
crete localization in space, in contrast to continuous functions of ﬁelds in space.
And he emphasizes the importance of this idea in the conclusion of the paper:
“Thus in a continuum theory, the atomistic character could be sat-
isfactorily expressed by integral propositions without localizing the
particles which constitute the atomistic system. Only if this sort of
representation of the atomistic structure be obtained could I regard
the quantum problem within the framework of a continuum theory as
solved.”
To Einstein, this concept is of great importance to represent particles in a ﬁeld
theory. The singularity-free localization of particles is a core element of a suc-
cessful theory. Some aspects of Einstein’s views on the structure of theoretical
physics directly relate to the nature of reality. We will now analyse the notions
of Einstein’s reality and the structure of theories.
5He refers to the ﬁeld theory
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
3 Einstein‘s not-naive realism and the notions
of reality
3.1 A classiﬁcation scheme for physical theories
A classiﬁcation scheme is presented to categorize diﬀerent aspects of a theory.
Therefore, we deﬁne graphical representations of physical quantities, physical
laws, physical concepts and elements of reality.
Physical quantity
Law between physical quantities
Concept connecting laws and physical quantities
Elements of objective reality
Table 1: Icons used in the classiﬁcation scheme
Out of these icons, we can construct a depiction for a theory and for elements
of reality inside objective reality.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Figure 1: Elements of reality and the structure of a theory
Formally, we deﬁne a set of elements of a theory TPR and a set of elements of
realityPR .
TPR ={ti} ={A,B,C} (1)
PR ={ϵi} ={ϵA,ϵB,ϵC} (2)
We will make use of them in the analysis of the reality criterion and the con-
ceptions of completeness.
For classiﬁcation, we propose four levels in a theory to classify physical the-
ories regarding their diﬀerent aspects. The intention is to compare diﬀerent
interpretations of Quantum Mechanics regarding their formalism, concepts and
ontologies.
• The ﬁrst level contains the mathematical formalism of the theory, math-
ematical symbols and the connecting laws. The mathematical symbols
can be identiﬁed with symbols for physical quantities, so we will speak of
physical quantities, although we mean only their symbolic representations.
• The second level contains the assignment of the previously deﬁned physi-
cal quantities to sensations. Physical quantities consist of quantities and
units, and need a procedure to be measured. All these assignments are
contained in the second level.
• The third level contains concepts and principles that give reason and struc-
ture to the theory. First principles, such as extremal principles or conser-
vation principles, belong to this level.
• The fourth level is the ontological embedding of the theory; it deﬁnes how
physical quantities and concepts are related to ontological elements. Even
if there are no ontological elements, such as in a positivistic philosophy of
science, this would be deﬁned here. Here, the elements of reality Einstein
refers to are located. They are parts of the objective reality.
We will use the classiﬁcation scheme for the discussion of the concept of com-
pleteness, the criterion of reality, and in the analysis of naive realism in the
chapter 3.2. A detailed proposal of the classiﬁcation scheme can found in Krizek
[2017a].
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
3.2 Naive realism
Naive realism, or direct realism, is the view that the perception delivers a full
mapping between the elements of reality and the sensations. There are a lot of
subtleties that could be discussed in that regard; some views of naive realism
will require the spatiotemporal reference frame, some views will assume mate-
rialistic ideas. We will conﬁne ourselves to those aspects that are of interest for
our discussion.
We already mentioned the objection that Einstein was a proponent of naive
realism. The term ”naive” is depreciative inherently and includes prejudices,
though will we make use of it due to the historical account, but we distance
ourselves from a depreciative intent of this term. To get a better idea about the
concept of naive realism, we present the deﬁnition by [Russell, 1940]:
“We all start from naive realism, i.e., the doctrine that things are
what they seem. We think that grass is green, that stones are hard,
and that snow is cold. But physics assures us that the greenness of
grass, the hardness of stones, and the coldness of snow are not the
greenness, hardness, and coldness that we know in our own experi-
ence, but something very diﬀerent. The observer, when he seems to
himself to be observing a stone, is really, if physics is to be believed,
observing the eﬀects of the stone upon himself.”
Another statement of naive realism by [Einstein, 1946] shows Einstein’s position
on this question:
“...naive realism,... according to which things are as they are per-
ceived by us through the senses. This illusion dominates the daily
life of men and of animals; it is also the point of departure in all of
the sciences, especially of the natural sciences. ... The overcoming
of naive realism has been relatively simple.”
Figure 2: Naive realism and an ontology for quantities and concepts
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
This last remark in [Einstein, 1946] shows that Einstein would not consider
himself as a proponent of naive realism.
If we apply the classiﬁcation scheme presented before on a deﬁnition of naive
realism, one would conclude that there are identities between the physical quan-
tities, or the physical concepts with the ontological elements of reality.
In the context of materialism, this would mean that the rigid bodies we experi-
ence through sensations and we model as a concept within Newtonian mechanics
would be assumed to exist as experienced. This view is rejected by physics and
philosophy of science. A detailed discussion on the rejection of direct and naive
realism can be found in [Le Morvan, 2004].
But still, a kind of naive realism is discussed in recent physics, the mathematical
universe hypothesis(MUH) [Tegmark, 2004]:
“Let us now digest the idea that physical world (speciﬁcally, the Level
III multiverse) is a mathematical structure. Although traditionally
taken for granted by many theoretical physicists, this is a deep and
far-reaching notion. It means that mathematical equations describe
not merely some limited aspects of the physical world, but all aspects
of it. It means that there is some mathematical structure that is
what mathematicians call isomorphic (and hence equivalent) to our
physical world, with each physical entity having a unique counterpart
in the mathematical structure and vice versa.”
It is not our goal to discuss the MUH here, but we have seen before that Einstein
had in mind a kind of mathematical realism. We will discuss the notions of
Einstein’s realism later, after clarifying some subtleties in the EPR paper.
3.3 Subtleties in the EPR paper
When we discuss reality, we have to clarify the used terms, and there we imme-
diately face one subtlety. In the handwritten note for the talk he held in Oxford
at the Herbert Spencer lecture on the method of theoretical physics, [Einstein,
1933] made use of the two synonymical terms “Wirklichkeit” and “Realit¨ at”. In
the English translation and published paper [Einstein, 1934] both terms merge
to the term “reality.” It is clear from the context in which Einstein made use of
these terms that “Wirklichkeit” stands for the objectively given facts in nature,
independent of observation. “Wirklichkeit” refers to the ontology in the world.
He makes use of “Realit¨ at”only once in the context of an allegory to explain his
personal struggle with philosophy of science [Einstein, 1934]:
“ For to the discoverer in that ﬁeld 6, the constructions of his imag-
ination appear so necessary and so natural that he is apt to treat
them not as the creations of his thoughts but as given realities.”
6Theoretical physics
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
In [Einstein et al., 1935], we ﬁnd three wordings, but the paper was written
originally in English: “objective reality,” “physical reality” and “reality.” The
latter is just used as a short form for “physical reality”. The deﬁnition of
“objective reality” can be found in the introduction of the paper:
“Any serious consideration of a physical theory must take into ac-
count the distinction between the objective reality, which is indepen-
dent of any theory, and the physical concepts with which the theory
operates.”
It is noticeable that Einstein deﬁnes the term “objective reality” and then in
the deﬁnition of completeness makes use of “physical reality” (see citation in
Section 4.3), which has not been deﬁned before [Einstein et al., 1935]:
“Whatever the meaning assigned to the term complete, the following
requirement for a complete theory seems to be a necessary one: every
element of the physical reality must have a counterpart in the physical
theory”
Out of how the reality criterion refers to this “physical reality” and the elements
of reality, and the lack of further deﬁnition of “physical reality” we conclude that
“physical reality” is synonymous with “objective reality”.
Out of Einstein’s dissatisfaction with the precipitate submission of the manuscript
by Boris Podolsky [von Meyenn, 2010, letter 206, p.537], we conjecture that some
ﬂaws remained in the paper.
One more of these ﬂaws is the sloppy use of the assignment of physical quan-
tities to elements of physical reality, which we demonstrate by means of three
statements from the paper.
Statement 1
“... there is an element of physical reality corresponding to the phys-
ical quantity A.”
Statement 2
“The usual conclusion from this in Quantum Mechanics is that when
the momentum of a particle is known, its coordinate has no physical
reality.”
Statement 3
“In accordance with our criterion of reality, in the ﬁrst case we must
consider the quantity P as being an element of reality, in the second
case the quantity Q is an element of reality.”
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
There is a big diﬀerence in the nature of reality in the diﬀerent statements
above. If we apply the classiﬁcation scheme for the structure of theories given
by [Krizek, 2017a], we see that the latter statements would represent a naive
realism where the referred physical quantity would be identical with the ontol-
ogy of the theory.
The ﬁrst statement that uses the correspondence between the physical quan-
tity and the element of reality is more subtle. There ,the physical quantity is
a mathematical object with interpretation and corresponds to an independent
ontological element of reality (see Table 3). The element of reality itself is only
comprehensible through sensations, though it is expected to exist in the physical
reality but never accessible to us in its whole nature.
It is coherent with Einstein’s views on philosophy of science we presented above,
and with the context of the EPR-paper, that he did not favour the point of view
presented in statements 2 and 3.
3.4 Notions of reality
Elements of reality
In the EPR argument and the reality criterion speciﬁcally, a term is used to
describe and speak about properties of objective reality: ”element of reality.” It
is interesting to trace back the term ”element” to a letter from Einstein to the
philosopher Moritz Schlick in which he refers to Ernst Mach [Hentschel, 1986]:
“Es scheint mir nun, daß das Wort ’wirklich’ in verschiedenem
Sinne genommen wird, je nachdem es von Empﬁndungen oder von
Ereignissen bzw. Thatbest¨ anden in physikalischem Sinne ausgesprochen
wird. Wenn zwei verschiedene V¨ olker unabh¨ angig voneinander Physik
treiben, werden sie Systeme schaﬀen, die bez¨ uglich der Empﬁnd-
ungen (’Elemente’ im Sinne Machs) gewiss ¨ ubereinstimmen. Die
gedankliche Konstruktion, die die beiden zur Verknf¨ upfung dieser
’Elemente’ ersonnen, k¨ onnen weitgehend verschieden sein.”
“It seems to me that the term ”real” 7 is used in diﬀerent meaning,
depending on whether used in physical context with sensations or on
the other hand events respectively facts. When two nations pursue
physics independently from each other, they will create systems that
agree concerning the sensations(elements in the meaning of Mach).
The construction of ideas both of them developed to connect these
elements can diﬀer widely. 8”
Is this identiﬁcation of the Machian elements mentioned by Einstein in the letter
to Morith Schlick and the elements used in the EPR argument justiﬁed? In the
7Refer to the discussion before on the terms ”wirklich” und ”real”.
8Translation by the author
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Machian sense, an element is deﬁned as sensation, as a representation for events
[Mach, 1922]:
“Die Ansicht, welche sich allm¨ ahlich Bahn bricht, da die Wissenschaft
sich auf die ¨ ubersichtliche Darstellung des Tats¨ achlichen zu beschr¨ anken
habe, f¨ uhrt folgerichtig zur Ausscheidung aller m¨ ußigen, durch die
Erfahrung nicht kontrollierbaren Annahmen, vor allem der metaph-
ysischen (im Kantschen Sinne). H¨ alt man diesen Gesichtspunkt in
dem weitesten, das Physische und Psychische umfassenden Gebiete
fest, so ergibt sich als erster und n¨ achster Schritt die Auﬀassung
der Empﬁndungen” als gemeinsame Elemente” aller m¨ oglichen ph-
ysischen und psychischen Erlebnisse, die lediglich in der verschiede-
nen Art der Verbindung dieser Elemente, in deren Abh¨ angigkeit
voneinander bestehen.”
“ The view that wins recognition step by step, that science has to con-
ﬁne to clearly arranged representations of facts, leads to the exclusion
of all dispensable, through experience not-controllable assumptions,
speciﬁcally the metaphysical ones(in the meaning of Kant). Apply-
ing this view to physical and psychical ﬁelds, as ﬁrst and next con-
sequence results the view of sensations as common ”elements” of all
possible physical and psychical experiences. These sensations only
exist in their diﬀerent ways of connection between them and their
mutual dependence of each other. 9 ”
and further
“Berkeley10 sieht die Elemente” als durch etwas außer denselben
Liegendes, Unbekanntes (Gott) bedingt an, wof¨ ur Kant, um als n¨ uchterner
Realist zu erscheinen, das Ding an sich” erﬁndet, w¨ ahrend die hier
vertretene Anschauung mit einer Abh¨ angigkeit der Elemente” von
einander praktisch und theoretisch das Auskommen zu ﬁnden glaubt.”
“ Berkley sees the ”elements” as caused by something unknown(god)
beyond them, Kant on the other hand, to appear as a down-to-earth
realist, invents ”the thing itself”, while the here presented approach
of mutual depending elements claims to get along for practical and
theoretical purposes.11”
Machs philosophy of science is a positivistic one, an Empirio-criticism [Avenarius
and Avenarius, 1905] and [Avenarius, 1906]. Metaphysical parts of the theory
are rejected as non-physical and unnecessary, also with regard to a principle of
economy of thought all theories have to comply with. The elements Einstein
is referring to are those parts of the theory that are indisputable because they
9Translation by the author
10Mach means the philosopher George Berkley
11Translation by the author
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
represent the experiences, which are independent of the type of physical theory,
in Einstein’s relativistic context the invariants of a theory.
It is irony that Einstein refers to the originally positivistic assigned term ”ele-
ments” to defend his realistic point of view, but he mentions also the Machian
elements and gives a clear distinction between Machian elements and elements
of reality [Einstein et al., 1935]:
“In a complete theory there is an element corresponding to each el-
ement of reality.”
The ”element” in the theory is an element in the sense of Mach. The correspond-
ing ”element of reality” is not part of the theory; it is part of the ontology, part
of the objective reality independent of our perception.
It is strange that the term ”element” is never again used by Einstein; not in his
explanation of the EPR argument in a letter to Schr¨ odinger [von Meyenn, 2010,
Letter 206, p.537], nor in the explanation in a letter to Popper[Popper, 2005],
nor in the reformulation of the EPR argument in [Einstein, 1948]. This could
give rise to the objection that the term ”element” was coined by Podolsky who
wrote most of the article as pointed out by[Kiefer, 2015, Chapter 2.4] and in
[von Meyenn, 2010, Letter 206, p.537].
The content of the EPR argument has been formulated after long discussions 12
of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, so it seems feasible that the cornerstones of
the paper were clearly deﬁned before by all authors.
Secondly, though Einstein did not use the term in this context again, he men-
tions the ”elements” before in the 1917 letter to Moritz Schlick [Hentschel,
1986]:
“...a gap which widens progressively with the developing uniﬁcation
of the logical structure, that is with the reduction in the number of
the logically independent conceptual elements required for the basis
of the whole system.”
He further makes use of them in [Einstein, 1934]:
“It can scarcely be denied that the supreme goal of all theory is to
make the irreducible basic elements as simple and as few as possi-
ble...”
12[von Meyenn, 2010, Letter 206, p.537]
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
It seems that Einstein had not agreed upon the way the EPR argument was con-
structed, paired with Podolsky’s not-agreed submission of the EPR paper, and
a parallel press statement raised Einstein’s anger [Kiefer, 2015]. It is therefore
plausible that the elements are indeed a reference by Einstein to the positivistic
Machian ”elements,” amending them with ontological counterparts, the realistic
”elements of reality,” but Einstein did not want to refer to the EPR-paper and
its terminology again.
The reality criterion
The reality criterion is deﬁned at the begin of the EPR paper to start the line of
argument and identify physical quantities and concepts that have a counterpart
in the objective reality. The problem is to ﬁnd those quantities and concepts that
refer to reality and have a corresponding element in reality. For example, the
concept of centre of mass of a body is not useful to describe some fundamental
real property of the rigid body. It is merely a concept in the theory that is helpful
to construct a plain theory and has some practical and technical advantages.
So it is needed to ﬁnd a way to identify elements in the theory that refer to
an element in reality. Einstein admits that in his letter to Schr¨ odinger [von
Meyenn, 2010, letter 206, p.537]:
“Die eigentliche Schwierigkeit liegt darin, daß die Physik eine Art
Metaphysik ist; Physik beschreibt Wirklichkeit. Aber wir wissen nicht,
was Wirklichkeit ist; wir kennen sie nur durch die physikalische
Beschreibung!”13
“The diﬃculty is due to that physics is a kind of metaphysics; physics
describes ”reality”. But we do not know what ”reality” is; we only
know it through the physical description!”
The identiﬁed physical quantities that refer to the elements of reality are then
chosen to show the incompleteness of Quantum Mechanics [Einstein et al., 1935]:
“If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with cer-
tainty (i.e., with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical
quantity, then there exists an element of physical reality correspond-
ing to this physical quantity.”
We can deﬁne the reality criterion more formally by using the deﬁnitions from
equations 1 and 2.
13Translation by the author
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Figure 3: Elements of reality
One has to deﬁne a probability measure P (ti) for the elements of the theory.
Then the reality criterion can be formally expressed as:
∀ti∈TPR∧P (ti) = 1 :∃ϵi∈PR (3)
We will have a mapping φ that connects the element of the theory with the
corresponding element of reality.
φ:TPR→PR
φ(tA) =ϵA
The remarkable thing in the way the reality criterion is deﬁned is the working
direction. Out of a probability statement in the theory, the reality criterion
identiﬁes corresponding elements of reality. If we assume classical physics that
fulﬁlls determinism, all physical quantities obey a probability 14 measure of one.
Therefore, in classical physics, all physical quantities should have an correspond-
ing element of reality. The situation is not that trivial, as an example will show.
Let us assume Newtonian mechanics in one dimension to describe the motion;
i.e. that is, the position of a particle A in reference to a second particle B. The
particle is assumed to have a constant mass and is described by a mass point.
Our theory then contains the following elements: Occurring forces, the mass of
the particle, the position coordinate of particle A and the position coordinate
of particle B.
TPR ={F, m, xA(t), xB(t)} (4)
The theory will connect these elements with Newton’s second law to describe
the motion of particle A
F =md2xA(t)
dt (5)
14We neglect all interpretational issues concerning probability here and consider probability
in classical physics as a propensity.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Let us assume the most simple situation; the force vanishes and becomes zero.
This diﬀerential equation delivers the equation of motion with two independent
constants that refer to the initial conditions. They turn out to be the initial
speed of particle A and the initial position of particle A.
xA(t) =vAo·t +xAo (6)
Our theory is deterministic; therefore, the probability measure is equal to one,
so by applying the criterion of reality we can map all elements of the theory to
elements of reality with a mapping φ. That way we have identiﬁed correspond-
ing elements of reality PR ={ϵF,ϵm,ϵxA(t),ϵxB (t)}.
Figure 4: Newton’s theory mapped to elements of reality
But there is a problem. Coordinates can be transformed to a diﬀerent reference
frame. Let us apply Galilean transformations on the elements of our theory.
x′ =x(t) +v·t +a (7)
Without going into details, it turns out that force and mass will be invariant
under Galilean transformation, but we will receive transformed elements of the
theory for xA(t) and xB(t). A mapping of the transformed theory T ′ delivers
new elements of reality.
Figure 5: Newton’s theory mapped to elements of reality
This mapping shows us that only by using deterministic elements of the theory,
and therefore fulﬁlling Einstein’s criterion of reality, we are not able to identify
elements of reality that are really satisfying, because they cannot be identiﬁed
as unambiguous.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
What can be done to resolve this unsatisfying situation is to choose the elements
of the theory diﬀerently. The position of the particle A can also be described
by the distance to the particle B.
d(t) =xA(t)−xB(t) (8)
It turns out that this distance d(t) is invariant under Galilean transformation
and the mappingφ andφ′ of the theoryT and its Galilean-transformed alterna-
tiveT ′. We therefore obtain elements of reality that are satisfying due to their
invariance.
Figure 6: Newtons theory mapped to elements of reality with invariants
The chosen example was simple to demonstrate this idea, but can be transferred
to the theory of relativity or any other classical theory. Especially in the theory
of relativity, the concept of invariance(covariance) will play a foundational role
in the conception of the theory. Einstein refers to this invariance principle when
he states [Einstein, 1936]:
“Nur solche Gleichungen sind als Ausdruck allgemeiner Naturgesetze
sinnvoll, welche bez¨ uglich in diesem Sinne beliebiger Transformatio-
nen kovariant sind. (Postulat der allgemeinen Kovarianz).”
“Only such equations that fulﬁl covariance regarding any transforma-
tion are resaonable to represent laws of nature. (Postulate of general
covariance).15”
The reality criterion is a method to ﬁnd those invariant elements in the theory
to identify corresponding elements of reality that have ontological character.
Lehner emphasizes the role of invariants in [Lehner, 2014, p.313]:
“The association of descriptive invariants with objective reality has
become a methodological standard in modern physics: it is the con-
ceptual basis not only of general relativity, but of all forms of gauge
theories, also in their quantum forms.”
15Translation by the author
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
This key role of invariances will encourage Lehner to deﬁne a methodological
realism he ascribes to Einstein’s philosophy of physics, which we will discuss in
section 3.4.
Another aspect of the reality criterion is worth a discussion. [Fine, 2009] states
that the reality criterion can only be found in the EPR paper and was not used
by Einstein in any other presentation of the EPR argument:
“...one should note that although Einstein himself later published
several versions of EPR, none of them makes any reference to or
use of that reality criterion.”
We can show that this is not correct. In his letter to Karl Popper, Einstein
presented the EPR argument in a compact way, but clearly made use of the
reality criterion when he states [Popper, 2005]:
“For if, upon freely choosing to do so [that is, without interfering
with it], I am able to predict something, then this something must
exist in reality.” 16
The reality criterion is basic to one main agenda in the EPR paper; to criticise
the statistical character of Quantum Mechanics.
16 The original wording is slightly diﬀerent and we would prefer to give a diﬀerent transla-
tion:
“Denn was ich nach freier Wahl prophezeien kann, das muss auch in der Wirk-
lichkeit existieren”
“What can be predicted and freely choosen with conviction, that has to exist in
reality.”
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
The statistical character of Quantum Mechanics
In the EPR paper, no direct reference can be found to answer the question if in
the EPR argument the quantum-mechanical description refers to a statistical
ensemble or to single events, to a single quantum-mechanical object. It is not
discussed explicitly, though one can conclude for good reason that a single object
is meant when they repeatedly speak about a particle’s behaviour [Einstein
et al., 1935, p.779]:
“The fundamental concept of the theory is the concept of state, which
is supposed to be completely characterized by the wave function ψ,
which is a function of the variables chosen to describe the particle’s
behaviour.”
“For this purpose let us suppose that we have two systems, I and
II,... We can then calculate with the help of Schr¨ odinger’s equation
the state of the combined system I + II at any subsequent time;”
Using the term ”system,” the authors left open whether they apply the quantum-
mechanical description to an statistical ensemble or to a single quantum-mechanical
object. One year later, after several discussions and after a reply paper by Bohr,
Einstein had chosen a clear position on this question [Einstein, 1936]:
“Es scheint mir deshalb klar, dass die Born ’sche statistische Deu-
tung der Aussagen der Quantentheorie die einzig m¨ ogliche ist: Die
ψ-Funktion beschreibt ¨ uberhaupt nicht einen Zustand, der einem
einzelnen System zukommen k¨ onnte; sie bezieht sich vielmehr auf
so viele Systeme, eine ”System-Gesamtheit” im Sinne der statistis-
chen Mechanik.”
“It is obvious to me that the statistical interpretation of quantum
theory by Born is the only way: The ψ-function does not describe a
state that represents one single system; It refers to many systems,
to a system-totality in the sense of statistical mechanics.” 17
Even more, he refers to the EPR paper and states that the ensemble interpre-
tation solves any diﬃculty [Einstein, 1936]:
“Eine solche Interpretation beseitigt auch eine yon mir zusammen
mit zwei Mitarbeitern j¨ ungst dargestellte Paradoxie ... Die Zuord-
nung der ψ-Funktion zu einer System-Gesamtheit beseitigt auch hier
jede Schwierigkeit.”
“Such an interpretation also removes a recently by me and two col-
leagues presented paradox ... The assignment of the ψ-function to a
system-totality here also eliminates all diﬃculties.” 18
17Translation by the author
18Translation by the author
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
It is not clearly deﬁned what Einstein had in mind with these ”diﬃculties”,
but it is most likely that he refers to critiques on the EPR paper [Bohr, 1935];
[Ruark, 1935]. Without any doubt the diﬃculties do not refer to the question
if Quantum Mechanics is complete or incomplete. That position of Einstein is
unchanged as one can see from the presented statement concerning the EPR
argument one year later [Einstein, 1936]:
“Diese Zuordnung mehrerer ψ-Funktionen zu demselben physikalis-
chen Zustande des Systems B zeigt wieder, dass die ψ-Funktion
nicht als (vollst¨ andige) Beschreibung eines physikalischen Zustandes
(eines Eingelsystems) gedeutet werden kann.”
“This assignment of several ψ-functions to one physical state of the
system B demonstrates that the ψ-function cannot be interpreted as
a (complete)description of a physical state (of a single quantum me-
chanical object)”19
Einstein changed his position on the statistical character on Quantum Mechanics
due to critique. Of course, he was aware of the statistical character of Quantum
Mechanics before, 20 but the Born interpretation was an argument for incom-
pleteness that was much easier to defend than the EPR argument.
The statistical character of Quantum Mechanics is connected to the notion of
completeness. We will see in 4.3 that there are several deﬁnitions of complete-
ness and there is a deep connection to the statistical character of Quantum
Mechanics. Before discussing the connection between EPR and ER paper, and
based to the previously presented aspects, before we will analyse cornerstones
of Einstein’s realism.
19Translation by the author
20In his letter to Schr¨ odinger where he explained the EPR argument, he also refers to the
statistical character[von Meyenn, 2010, letter 206,p.537]:
“Nun beschreibe ich einen Zustand so: Die Wahrscheinlichkeit dafr, da die
Kugel in der ersten Schachtel ist, ist 1
2 Ist dies eine vollst¨ andige Beschreibung?
Nein: Eine vollst¨ andige Aussage ist: die Kugel ist in der ersten Schachtel (oder
ist nicht). So mu also die Charakterisierung des Zustandes bei vollst¨ andiger
Beschreibung aussehen.”
“I describe a state this way: The probability for a ball being in the ﬁrst box is
1
2 . Is that a complete description? No: A complete description is: The ball is
in the ﬁrst box (or is not). The representation of a complete state has to be that
way.” Translation by the author.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
Cornerstones of Einstein’s realism
The term reality cannot be seen isolated; it is connected to several conceptions
that accompany reality. Neither can a conception of reality of a scientist be seen
as unvarying; it is subject to change and variation and often inconsistent 21.
A thorough discussion of Einstein realism would go beyond the scope of this
paper; therefore, we will only present aspects or cornerstones of the ideas of
reality that Einstein had in mind. For a more detailed analysis of the evolution
of Einstein’s philosophical position over the years, refer to [Howard, 1993], an
in-depth discussion on Einstein’s view on realism and philosophy of science is
given by [Janssen and Lehner, 2014].
• Objectivity - There is a world outside, independent of our experiences,
descriptions and ideas, a given reality that awaits to be uncovered. Con-
nected to that, Einstein also has in mind that there is a description that
reﬂects this truth about nature. In that sense, this view is contradictory
in its claim to represent elements of the theory as human thoughts and
ideals and simultaneously follow a correct path, as Einstein calls it. See
section 2 ”Einstein’s view on theories and theory formation”.
• (Mathematical) - Simplicity: Einstein has in mind that a physical theory
has to fulﬁll simplicity [Einstein, 1934, p.165]:
“It can scarcely be denied that the supreme goal of all theory is
to make the irreducible basic elements 22 as simple and as few as
possible without having to surrender the adequate representation
of a single datum of experience.”
Moreover, he assumed this simplicity is something that is realised in nature
as well [Einstein, 1934, p.165]:
“Our experience up to date justiﬁes us in feeling sure that in
Nature is actualized the ideal of mathematical simplicity.”
This is a contradiction in the understanding of simplicity, because the ideas
and elements of the theory should fulﬁll simplicity, but they are merely a
construction by human minds, so this simplicity is nothing fundamental
and cannot be the same simplicity he mentions in the second quotation.
We presented a discussion of the concept of simplicity in context with
interpretations of Quantum Mechanics and its peculiarities in [Krizek,
2017b]. For an account on Einstein’s conception of simplicity, refer to
[Howard, 1993, p.230].
21By this inconsistency we mean the contradiction between several ontological statements
or concepts that refer to reality.
22By elements he refers to the Machian elements of the theory.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
• Mathematical entities - Einstein favours the four dimensional continuum
over algebraic structures with arbitrary or even inﬁnite dimensionality.
Out of some statements, one could conclude that he took the position of
naive realism in a sense of taking mathematical entities as elements of
reality, a mathematical realism.
• Methodological and phenomenal realism - According to [Lehner, 2014],
Einstein advanced a view on the role of invariants in theoretical models;
he calls that position methodological realism. The role of invariants in
a theory is a distinguished one; the invariants represent elements of the
theory that are assumed to have a strong connection to objective reality.
This conception is based on the theory of relativity, but also found appli-
cation in modern theoretical physics like in Gauge theories. In contrast to
methodological realism, he sees phenomenal realism [Lehner, 2014, p.313]:
“By contrast, physical measurements do not reveal those objec-
tive entities themselves, but their representations in local coor-
dinate frames, that is, noninvariant quantities. Such measure-
ments are no less real, but they are real in a diﬀerent sense:
their reality is phenomenal, dependent on an observer situated
in a speciﬁc way.”
Following Lehners reading, it was Einstein’s attempt to apply method-
ological realism to Quantum Mechanics, and the failure of this attempt
was reason for rejecting Quantum Mechanics as a foundational theory.
• Deterministic character - Einstein was very clear about that point. To
him, a theory with statistical character is only provisional and cannot
represent real events. Refer also to the discussion in section 3.4.
• Non-localizability: In some sense, this non-localizability is a nonlocality
feature, but not in the sense of an action-at-a-distance; more in the sense
of the notion of a non-absolute localization of particles. The concept of
non-localization was familiar to Einstein from the way the gravitational
energy behaves in general theory of relativity. We will give a more detailed
discussion of Non-localizability in section 4.2.
• Singularity-free - To Einstein the representation of particles in a ﬁeld the-
ory implied the problem of singularities of the ﬁeld. To him a reasonable
representation of particles has to be free from such singularities in the
ﬁeld. Refer also to the discussion in section 4.2.
• Separability: The physical reality allows separation of the world into parts
that can be handled independently. To Einstein, this is a prerequisite for
scientiﬁc reasoning per se (See Don Howard [Howard, 1993, p.234ﬀ] and
[Howard, 2005, p.39]). The spatiotemporal separability consists of locality
and separability of systems, per se. There is also a separability without
a spatiotemporal aspect, which is realised, for instance, by linear systems
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
that can be decomposed into systems that evolve independently of each
other, even if they share a position in spacetime. Fourier analysis is a
good example of this superposition principle that allows decomposition of
systems into separable subsystems.
• Locality and causality - In Einstein’s view, reality obeys locality in the
sense of local realism: Events in two spacelike separated areas cannot
aﬀect each other. Therefore, all meaningful descriptions of nature have to
obey local realism as well.
• Unambiguity or uniqueness: A complete description 23 leaves no room for
ambiguity. This is connected to Aristotelian ideas of physics - basically
the contradiction principle - which is based on common sense experience.
This view reﬂects also in the EPR argument, in the condition of complete-
ness [Einstein et al., 1935] and in later variations of the EPR argument
[von Meyenn, 2010, p.537]; [Popper, 2005, p.482]; [Einstein, 1936, p.341];
[Einstein, 1948].
23See section 4.3 for an overview on several deﬁnitions of completeness. This completeness
will be deﬁned as theory completeness and will refer to the elements of the theory.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
4 EPR=ER in 1935 and its revival
In this chapter, we provide an answer to the question of whether there is a
connection between the EPR and ER paper and, if yes, in what kind of way.
In a modern context, where in some interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
nonlocality plays a crucial role, and the imprint by popular culture, it is a
tempting thought to put the nonlocality features of Quantum Mechanics in
connection to nonlocal structures like wormholes. It is even more surprising to
ﬁnd out that the ﬁrst wormhole paper 24 was written by the same persons that
challenged the completeness of Quantum Mechanics with the EPR argument,
namely Einstein and Rosen. The conclusion one could draw at ﬁrst glance is
close-at-hand: Einstein and Rosen could have had in mind to solving the issue
with nonlocalities in Quantum Mechanics by wormholes. This conclusion is
wrong due to several reasons we present now.
4.1 Nonlocality
At ﬁrst, one has to say that there was no issue with nonlocality to solve; at least,
not for Einstein. Einstein recognised the nonlocality of Quantum Mechanics,
which basically occurred in context with the projection postulate, but to him
it was untenable to accept nonlocalities in physics, so he was not searching
for a way to explain nonlocalities by an underlying theory. It is this following
statement that makes clear that nonlocality, for the authors of the EPR-paper,
and it can be assumed especially for Einstein, was not considered to be a possible
or even thinkable part of ontology [Einstein et al., 1935]:
“This makes the reality of P and Q depend upon the process of mea-
surement carried out on the ﬁrst system, which does, not disturb the
second system in any way. No reasonable deﬁnition of reality could
be expected to permit this.”
The action-at-a-distance eﬀects in Newtonian mechanics were already a problem
to Newton and entail a lot of philosophical problems, such as diﬃculties with
causality. It is comprehensible that Einstein was not considering to give up the
beautiful new and self-consistent formulation of a causal structure. To him,
there must have been a diﬀerent solution that would integrate the quantum
eﬀects in the framework of ﬁeld theory with its complete 25 character. But ﬁeld
theory had its problems as well, and Einstein was full aware of them.
If nonlocality was not the pursued goal of the ER-paper, what was it then?
In his paper on the method of theoretical physics, he clariﬁes one of the main
diﬃculties in ﬁeld theory [Einstein, 1934]:
“The most diﬃcult point for such a ﬁeld-theory at present is how to
include the atomic structure of matter and energy. For the theory
24Before the ER paper, only speculations by Flamm and Weyl can be found. As pointed
out by [Visser, 1996] which coined the term ”ﬁrst wormhole paper”.
25In the sense of theory completeness
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
in its basic principles is not an atomic one in so far as it operates
exclusively with continuous functions of space, in contrast to classical
mechanics whose most important feature, the material point, squares
with the atomistic structure of matter.”
The absolute localization of particles was an open question to Einstein, and we
will see the connection to the ER-paper in section 4.2.
4.2 Localizability of particles
In section 2 we presented what Einstein understood as the term “atomic struc-
ture”: The singularity-free representation of particles in space. To him, it was
not only a problem of ﬁeld theory, but had a deep connection to quantum theory
[Einstein, 1934]:
“... it seems to me certain that we have to give up the notion of
an absolute localization of the particles in a theoretical model. This
seems to me to be the correct theoretical interpretation of Heisen-
berg’s indeterminacy relation.”
Not only that the particle is represented singularity-free, the refutation of an
absolute localization of the particle was the goal of this concept 26. To Einstein,
it promised the reconstruction of quantum eﬀects by general theory of relativity.
The ER-paper opens in the abstract with reference to this atomistic theory of
matter [Einstein and Rosen, 1935b]:
“The writers investigate the possibility of an atomistic theory of mat-
ter and electricity which, while excluding singularities of the ﬁeld,
makes use of no other variables than the gµν of the general relativity
theory and the φµν of the Maxwell theory.”
In the model of the Einstein-Rosen bridge, the bridge is a representation of a
particle, but the position of the particle is smeared out. The position is in con-
trast to the external Schwarzschild-solution not given by the position coordinate
of the singularity. The metric around the particle is deﬁned by the Einstein-
Rosen-bridge solution; still, there is no account of the particles exact position.
This is satisfying in the sense of Einstein’s requirement for solving the quantum
problem within a continuum theory presented in section 2 [Einstein, 1934].
It is comprehensible that the goal of the ER-paper was to present a ﬁeld theory
that solves the localisation problem for particles. Even more, is was pursued
to reconstruct quantum theory with a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory that can claim to be
complete. The deﬁnition of completeness and its peculiarities will be presented
in section 4.3.
For a more detailed discussion concerning the philosophical implications of the
concept of particles, refer to [Achinstein, 1991] and [Kuhlmann, 2010].
26It is noticeable that this highly non-classical idea has been proposed by Einstein, who
repeatedly had to face critique on his inﬂexible position and his adherence to classical physics.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
4.3 Completeness
The completeness used in the EPR argument, ER paper and accompanying
sources is a peculiar concept. At ﬁrst hand, one has a clear idea what is under-
stood by completeness, but we will see that a clear deﬁnition is needed for the
discussion of the context on the EPR argument. We will show that there are
several deﬁnitions of completeness involved. The connection to the ER-paper
will be presented.
4.3.1 Theory completeness
In 1934, Einstein deﬁned the meaning of the term completeness [Einstein, 1934]:
“A complete system of theoretical physics consists of concepts and
basic laws to interrelate those concepts and of consequences to be
derived by logical deduction.”
In section 3.1 a notion of the structure of a physical theory has been presented.
By using physical quantities, laws to connect them, and concepts to give struc-
ture and principles to the theory, a complete theory in this sense can be pictured
as following:
Figure 7: Structure of a theory
The mentioned elements (physical quantities, laws and concepts/principles) are
meant in the Machian sense and not connected, per se, to an ontology. Einstein
emphasized that these elements are “...free inventions of the human mind...”
[Einstein, 1934] and therefore pure constructions of thought. Therefore, this
deﬁnition of completeness can be understood more as a consistency in the the-
oretical system. In any sense, it forgoes to provide ontological statements. We
will call this completeness theory completeness.
An application of this theory completeness is given in [Einstein and Rosen,
1935b]:
“One of the imperfections of the original relativistic theory of grav-
itation was that as a ﬁeld theory it was not complete; it introduced
the independent postulate that the law of motion of a particle is given
by the equation of the geodesic. A complete ﬁeld theory knows only
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
ﬁelds and not the concepts of particle and motion. For these must
not exist independently of the ﬁeld but are to be treated as part of
it.”
We want to give a deﬁnition for theory completeness that gets as close as possible
to the concept Einstein had in mind:
Deﬁnition 1. A theory fulﬁlls theory completeness if its physical quantities
and laws are connected by concepts that relate only to each other, and the theory
renounces extra assumptions of concepts that exceed the framework of the theory.
Theory completeness does not refer to an ontology. It only refers to elements of
the theory, and requests a consistency in the used concepts. Einstein refers to
it in [Einstein and Rosen, 1935b] as Closeness(Vollst¨ andigkeit).
Figure 8: Completeness - Closeness [Einstein and Rosen, 1935a]
References to theory completeness can be found in: [Einstein, 1934, p.164,166];
[Einstein et al., 1935, p.778]; [Einstein and Rosen, 1935b, p.76, p.77]; [Einstein,
1936, p.316, p.344]; [Einstein, 1948, p.320, p.323].
4.3.2 Bijective completeness
The EPR paper posed a question on completeness, but is it theory completeness
that is challenged? If we refer to the EPR paper, a deﬁnition of completeness
is given [Einstein et al., 1935]:
“Whatever the meaning assigned to the term complete, the following
requirement for a complete theory seems to be a necessary one: every
element of the physical reality must have a counterpart in the physical
theory”
As can be seen immediately, this deﬁnition of completeness diﬀers from the
deﬁnition of theory completeness; it even further extends the term completeness
to the ontological level, whereas the theory completeness deﬁnition refers only
to the theory and its elements. The latter relates the elements of reality to the
elements of a theory. [Fine, 2009] calls this completeness bijective completeness.
Following [Einstein et al., 1935], a deﬁnition would be:
Deﬁnition 2. Bijective completeness means that every element of the physical
realityϵi must have a counterpart ti in the physical theory.
Though bijective completeness is a Bijection between elements of the theory and
elements of reality, it starts with the latter ones. Starting at elements of reality
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
Figure 9: Bijective completeness
causes the problem how of to identify them and the corresponding elements of
the theory. For this purpose, [Einstein et al., 1935] had to assume a criterion of
reality to identify these elements of reality 27.
From an accompanying source, one more aspect about bijective completeness
can be seen. Karl Popper received a letter from Einstein in September of 1935,
where Einstein explained the idea of the EPR paper in a short and very clear
way. One more aspect of Einstein’s notion of bijective completeness can be
found there [Popper, 2005, p.413]:
“Since a complete description of a physical state must necessarily
be an unambiguous description (apart from superﬁcialities such as
units, choice of the co-ordinates etc.), it is therefore not possible to
regard theψ-function as the complete description of the state of the
system.”
He concludes that a bijective completeness description has to be unambiguous,
so if every element of the physical reality has to have a (one) correspondence
in the theory, it must be vice versa. This unambiguousness assumption is not
presented explicitly as with the reality criterion, the completeness criterion, or
separability/locality, though it plays an important role in the EPR argument.
It is further interesting that Einstein seems to have seen a problem with the pure
bijective completeness argument in the EPR paper. Superﬁcialities as choice of
coordinates, as we have presented them before in section 3.4 would not fulﬁll
bijective completeness, so Einstein clariﬁes this to Popper [Popper, 2005, p.413].
Einstein gives no exact deﬁnition of completeness in the EPR paper, but states
that deﬁnition 2 of bijective completeness is a necessary requirement for his con-
cept of completeness. Is it possible that theory completeness is the completeness
27See also Section 3.4.
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
Figure 10: Bijective completeness and unambiguousness
Einstein had in mind? Theory completeness is only deﬁned by elements of the
theory, and makes no statement about the ontology of the theory; therefore it
can be ruled out that bijective completeness is a necessary requirement of the-
ory completeness. Bijective completeness would have to be true, so that theory
completeness could be true, but it is obvious that the structure of the elements
of a theory is completely independent of any mappingφ between the elements of
the theory and elements of reality. Theory completeness is not the completeness
Einstein had in mind, for which he used bijective completeness as a necessary
requirement.
References to the bijective completeness can be found in [Einstein et al., 1935,
p.777, p.778, p.780] and [Einstein, 1936, p.341].
4.3.3 Born completeness
Since theory completeness is excluded from being the completeness meant in
the EPR paper, there must be a diﬀerent deﬁnition of completeness. [Fine,
2009] identiﬁes two further concepts of completeness: Born completeness and
Schr¨ odinger completeness:
“According to the Bornian conception, a complete description is es-
sentially nonprobabilistic; genuinely probabilistic assertions are nec-
essarily incomplete.”
These conceptions of completeness can be identiﬁed in letters from Einstein to
Schr¨ odinger, where Einstein also stated the ”Einstein’s boxes” Gedankenexper-
iment, which discusses the probabilities of ﬁnding a ball in a box [von Meyenn,
2010, letter 206, p.537].
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
Deﬁnition 3. Born completeness for a theory is fulﬁlled if the theory contains
no probabilistic elements. A theory which contains statistical accounts and prob-
abilistic statements is considered to be incomplete.
Following this deﬁnition, Quantum mechanics is incomplete per deﬁnition. No
further arguments are needed.
Is Born completeness the completeness Einstein meant in the EPR paper? If
Born completeness would be addressed, it would mean that the authors of the
EPR paper had in mind that without bijective completeness, Born completeness
could not be true. That follows of the EPR condition of completeness.
On the other hand, the statement “Quantum mechanics fulﬁlls Born complete-
ness” is false. In this case, out of the rules for the material conditional, it follows
that independent of the truth value of the bijective completeness, the statement
“theory completeness is a necessary requirement for Born completeness” is true.
To show the truth value of bijective completeness is therefore meaningless, and
we can rule out that Born completeness is meant as the conception of complete-
ness in the EPR paper.
References to the Born completeness can be found in [Einstein, 1936, p.339,
p.341, p.343, p.347].
4.3.4 Schr¨ odinger completeness
[Fine, 2009, p.71] gives an analysis of Schr¨ odinger completeness:
“By contrast the Schr¨ odinger view is that probabilities can be funda-
mental, not to be reduced to something else. Thus the Schr¨ odinger
conception is that a complete description of a state of aﬀairs can
be a probabilistic assertion, with probability less than unity, which
(somehow) tells the whole truth about that state of aﬀairs. If there
were some further truth to be told, then the probabilistic assertion
would be an incomplete description”
It’s getting a bit vague with Schr¨ odinger completenessbecause it seems that
Einstein’s conception of it is not a very clear one; at least, he did not deﬁne
it explicitly. What can be seen immediately is that the deﬁnitions of proba-
bility in context with Born completeness and Schr¨ odinger completenessdiﬀer
vastly. Whereas the concept of the probability of occurrence of outcomes in an
ensemble of events is used in the ﬁrst conception, the latter deﬁnes probability
as fundamental and related to single events. The interpretation of probability
will go beyond the scope of this work. We will therefore stick to an operational
deﬁnition of Schr¨ odinger completenessthat is based on Einstein’s considerations
in his letter to Schr¨ odinger [von Meyenn, 2010, letter 206, p.537]:
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Deﬁnition 4. Schr¨ odinger completeness for a theory is fulﬁlled if the theory
contains probabilistic statements about elements of the theory. The probabilistic
statements refer not to the statistical ensemble of many events, but to one single
event. The probabilistic statements are fundamental in the sense that nothing
more can be said about the system. The theory is considered to be incomplete if
there are potential new elements 28 in the theory that would abandon the proba-
bilistic character of the theory.
The deﬁnition of Schr¨ odinger completenessrefers to what we would nowadays
call ”hidden variables.”
It is diﬃcult to decide if Schr¨ odinger completenessis the completeness Einstein
is referring to in the EPR paper. If we carefully analyse the argument in the
letter to Schr¨ odinger from the 19th of June 1935, we ﬁnd a self-reference in the
deﬁnition of completeness [von Meyenn, 2010, letter206, p.537]:
“Nun beschreibe ich einen Zustand so: Die Wahrscheinlichkeit daf¨ ur,
da die Kugel in der ersten Schachtel ist, ist 1
2 Ist dies eine vollst¨ andige
Beschreibung? Nein: ... Ja: ... Der Zustand vor dem Aufklappen
ist durch die Zahl 1
2 vollst¨ andig charakterisiert, deren Sinn sich bei
Vornahme von Beobachtungen allerdings nur als statistischer Befund
manifestiert.”
“I describe a state this way: The probability for a ball being in the
ﬁrst box is 1
2. Is that a complete description? No: ... Yes: ...
The state before opening the box is completely characterised by the
number 1
2, whose meaning becomes manifest as statistical account by
applying measurements on the system.
What is meant by this complete characterisation by the number 1
2? If we as-
sume it to be bijective completeness in a way that the number is ascribed to an
element of reality, and the number is interpreted as probability in an epistemic
way, this would represent an epistemic account of the situation. Depending
on the interpretation of probability, it would represent propensity, knowledge
about the state of the ball, or degrees of belief on its state.
In principle, this would be a description that would fulﬁll bijective complete-
ness, because one can give a Bijection to elements of reality in each of these
accounts. Therefore, it is plausible to identify Schr¨ odinger completenessas the
completeness Einstein challenged in the EPR paper.
28Einstein calls them ”fremde Faktoren”(external factors). The translation of ”fremd” is
peculiar, since in the literal translation it would be ”strange”, ”weird”, ”alien” or ”diﬀerent.”
But in context, it refers to factors that are not considered in the theory. They are not part of
the theory, so we decided to use the non-literal translation ”external.” In our modern context,
these factors could be understood as ”hidden variables.”
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
4.3.5 ψ - completeness
In an account to classify hidden variable models, [Harrigan and Spekkens, 2010]
proposed a deﬁnition of ψ-completeness:
“An ontological model is ψ-complete if the ontic state space Λ is
isomorphic to the projective Hilbert space PH (the space of rays of
Hilbert space) and if every preparation procedure Pψ associated in
quantum theory with a given ray ψ is associated in the ontological
model with a Dirac delta function centered at the ontic state Λ that
is isomorphic to Ψ, p(λ|Pψ) =δ(λ−λψ).”
This deﬁnition of ψ-completeness is claimed to be identical with bijective com-
pleteness [Harrigan and Spekkens, 2010, p.147]:
“It is quite clear that by ”real state of the real system”, Einstein is
referring to the ontic state pertaining to a system. Bearing this in
mind, his deﬁnition of completeness can be identiﬁed as precisely our
notion of ψ-completeness given in Deﬁnition 2”
This is a misunderstanding of Einstein’s view on completeness and elements
of reality. Einstein is not using the wording ”elements of reality” in his letter
to Schr¨ odinger[von Meyenn, 2010, letter206, p.538], but referring to bijective
completeness:
“Man beschreibt in der Quantentheorie einen wirklichen Zustand
eines Systems durch eine normierte Funktion ψ der Koordinaten
(des Konﬁgurationsraumes).Die zeitliche ¨Anderung ist durch die Schr¨ odinger-
Gleichung eindeutig gegeben. Man m¨ ochte nun gerne folgendes sagen:
ψ ist dem wirklichen Zustand des wirklichen Systems eindeutig zu-
geordnet. Der statistische Charakter der Meßergebnisse f¨ allt auss-
chlielich auf das Konto der Messapparate bzw. des Prozesses der
Messung. Wenn dies geht rede ich von einer vollst¨ andigen Beschrei-
bung der Wirklichkeit durch die Theorie. Wenn aber eine solche In-
terpretation nicht durchf¨ uhrbar ist, nenne ich die theoretische Beschrei-
bung unvollst¨ andig.”
“In quantum theory a real state of a system is described by a normed
function ψ of coordinates (of conﬁguration space). The evolution in
time is given by Schr¨ odinger equation uniquely. One would like to
say: ψ is corresponding to the real state of the real system uniquely.
The statistical character of the measurement results is a consequence
of the measurement apparatus respectively the measurement process.
If this works, I speak about a complete description of reality by a
theory. If such an interpretation is not possible, I call the theoretical
description incomplete.29”
29Translation by the author
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
[Harrigan and Spekkens, 2010] conclude out of these statements that Einstein’s
bijective completeness is identical to their psi-completeness, but the latter one
is setting up an Isomorphism between the projective Hilbert space and an on-
tic state space, whereas bijective completeness is a Bijection between elements
of a theory and elements of reality. These elements of reality have no deﬁned
mathematical structure, per se. In our proposed classiﬁcation scheme for inter-
pretations of Quantum Mechanics, the elements of reality are located in level
four, the ontological level. Assuming that the elements of reality are elements
of an ontic state space, is a kind of mathematical realism, but we think that is
not the intention of the claim.
On the other hand, [Harrigan and Spekkens, 2010] have good reasons to assume
that Einstein, by referring to the ”real state of the real system” [von Meyenn,
2010, letter 206, p. 538], means elements of a theory that would replace Quan-
tum Mechanics. They propose an argument for Einstein’s preference for the
EPR argument, in contrast to his incompleteness argument from 1927. One
aim, according to them, was Einstein’s goal to emphasize the epistemic charac-
ter of the state vector and to look out for hidden variable theories.
ψ-completeness is a useful classiﬁcation tool for hidden variable theories, but we
refuse the identity of ψ-completeness and bijective completeness based on the
involvement of completely diﬀerent structures in these two conceptions. This
does not aﬀect any applications of ψ-completeness in [Harrigan and Spekkens,
2010].
4.3.6 Standard completeness
The following completeness criterion is not part of the original EPR discussion,
and is presented here to amend the overview on accounts on completeness.
[Held, 2012] gives an argument against standard completeness. He brings the
timeframe of the involved events into consideration and claim a conﬂict between
standard completeness and the principle that ”QM should deliver probabilities
for physical systems possessing properties at deﬁnite times” [Held, 2015].
4.3.7 Remarks on completeness and the EPR-ER connection
The targets of the EPR paper are manifold; one aim is to show that Schr¨ odinger
completeness does not hold for the unitary core of Quantum Mechanics itself.
Einstein claimed that Quantum Mechanics did not receive its statistical charac-
ter out of the measurement process. The unitary evolution of the state vector
itself is, according to him, incomplete in the sense of Schr¨ odinger completeness.
The critique on Quantum Mechanics is one story, but more interesting in our
context is the motivation for showing this incompleteness. Replacing a suc-
cessful theory with a new unknown theory without a good reason encounters
opposition. Einstein had to convince the community of the incompleteness of
Quantum Mechanics to present a new program [Einstein et al., 1935]:
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
“While we have thus shown that the wave function does not provide a
complete description of the physical reality, we left open the question
of whether or not such a description exists. We believe, however,
that such a theory is possible.”
Einstein retreated quickly, already in 1936, to the position of Born complete-
ness, which to him was suﬃcient to show the need for a theory that fulﬁlls his
requirements. Referring to his article [Einstein, 1948], he notes in a letter to
Besso [Speziali et al., 1972, p.403]:
“Es freut mich dass Du meinen kleinen Aufsatz gelesen hast. Hast
Du auch gemerkt wie unlogisch Pauli darauf geantwortet hat? Er
leugnet es, dass diese Art der Beschreibung unvollst¨ andig sei, sagt
aber im selben Atemzuge, dass dieψ Funktion eine statistische Beschrei-
bung des Systems sei, die Beschreibung einer System-Gesamtheit.
Dies ist doch nur eine andere Form der Aussage. Die Beschreibung
des (individuellen) Einzelsystems ist unvollst¨ andig! ”
“ I am pleased to hear that you read my little article. Have you
recognised also how illogical Pauli responded? He denies that this
description is incomplete, but states in the same breath that the ψ
function is a statistical description of the system, the description of a
system-totality. This is just a diﬀerent formulation of the statement:
The description of an (individual) single-system is incomplete! 30”
This statement is the essence of Born completeness. And it shows that the EPR
arguments and all its successor arguments by Einstein had one main purpose:
To show the incompleteness of Quantum Mechanics for the speciﬁc purpose of
justifying the need for a new ﬁeld theory to replace Quantum Mechanics.
Despite the ambiguous notions of completeness, it is fair to conclude that it
was the idea to present this new complete theory in the next published work
following two months after the EPR paper; the Einstein-Rosen bridge paper.
We presented the meaning of the terms ”completeness” and ”reality” and pointed
out which aspects of reality were specially relevant to Einstein in context with
the 1935 papers. In the following chapter, we will make use of these clariﬁca-
tions to discuss the connection of the 1935 papers in the context of the uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory program.
30Translation by the author
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
4.4 The Uniﬁed ﬁeld theory program
Einstein had in mind to resolve the incomplete 31 statistical character of quan-
tum theory with a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. Even in 1934, one of the conclusive
statements of his paper on the method of theoretical physics addresses the sta-
tistical character [Einstein, 1934]:
“I still believe in the possibility of giving a model of reality, a theory,
that is to say, which shall represent events themselves and not merely
the probability of their occurrence.”
We have seen before that to Einstein the concept of completeness is strongly con-
nected to the statistical character of quantum theory. In the original EPR argu-
ment in [Einstein et al., 1935], he used the reality criterion, locality(Trennungsprinzip
- separation principle), and the contradiction principle to conclude the incom-
pleteness of Quantum Mechanics. In [Einstein, 1936], he no longer referred to
those principles, instead, he argued for the ensemble interpretation, which is
an indirect use of the Born completeness. According to the ensemble interpre-
tation, Quantum Mechanics only refers to a statistical ensemble to events, not
to a single event itself. To Einstein, this argument was suﬃcient to show the
incomplete character of Quantum Mechanics and to head for an underlying the-
ory. We can see that this is one of the main agendas of the EPR paper [Einstein
et al., 1935]:
“While we have thus shown that the wave function does not provide a
complete description of the physical reality, we left open the question
of whether or not such a description exists. We believe, however,
that such a theory is possible.”
This new theory he presented in the ER-paper, at ﬁrst independent of the EPR
critique, was meant to solve the problem of the atomistic character of matter
and fulﬁls Einstein’s requirement of completeness [Einstein and Rosen, 1935b]:
“In favor of the theory 32 one can say that it explains the atomistic
character of matter as well as the circumstance that there exist no
negative neutral masses, that it introduces no new variables other
than thegµν andφµν, and that in principle it can claim to be complete
(or closed). On the other hand one does not see a priori whether the
theory contains the quantum phenomena.” [our underlining]
Here he means theory completeness, which is evident when he puts the term
”closed” in brackets to underline that it refers to the closeness of a uniﬁed ﬁeld
theory that hopefully solves the particle problem.
It is remarkable that Einstein diﬀers between the atomistic character of the the-
ory and the question if the theory contains quantum phenomena. We have seen
31The completeness refers to Born completeness
32The Einstein-Rosen bridge model for elementary particles
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
before what he means exactly by “atomistic character”, it refers to the problem
of the localization of particles without accepting singularities of the ﬁeld. The
Einstein-Rosen bridge would have solved this in a way satisfactory to Einstein.
It is not exactly clear what Einstein understands by the term “quantum phe-
nomena” and how the theory could contain them. It is comprehensible that
he means the quantum states and the formalism of Quantum Mechanics, which
cannot be found in the Einstein-Rosen bridge representation for a particle, but
it certainly was Einstein’s hope that the quantum eﬀects would emerge out of
this new model.
In [Einstein, 1936], he presented the EPR argument in a modiﬁed form in line
with the ER-bridge. Here, the connection of these two papers as part of a
program is evident:
“Es wird aber gezeigt, dass die ¨Uberzeugung von der Unf¨ ahigkeit
der Feldtheorie, diese Probleme mit ihren Methoden zu 1¨ osen, auf
Vorurteilen beruht.”
“It will be shown that the conviction of the inability of ﬁeld theory
to solve these problems 33 rests on a prejudice.”
and
“Angesichts dieser Sachlage erscheint es mir durchaus gerechtfertigt,
die Frage ernsthaft zu erw¨ agen, ob nicht doch die Grundlage der
Feldphysik mit den Quanten-Tatsachen vereinbar ist.”
“In view of this situation it seems appropriate to me to reconsider
the question if a uniﬁcation of the foundations of ﬁeld theory and
quantum facts is possible 34.”
This sums up the scientiﬁc program Einstein attempted to present. At the be-
ginning, he refers to a comparison between Quantum Mechanics and statistical
mechanics, and states that a statistical or eﬀective theory is not an appropriate
starting point to develop a complete 35 theory. In his view, Quantum Mechanics
was this eﬀective theory that delivers only statistical predictions, but gives no
account for the single events.
In a more private environment, a letter from the 16th February, 1936 to his
friend Michele Besso, Einstein expresses this point of view explicitly. Since to
my knowledge this letter has not been cited in context with the EPR discussion,
we want to cite it in full length 36 [Speziali et al., 1972, p.308].
33The problems refer to the inability of ﬁeld theory to give account for a molecular structure
and to describe quantum phenomena with methods of ﬁeld theory [Einstein, 1936, p.347]
34Translation by the author
35In the sense of Born completeness and theory completeness
36We omit a passage on the political situation in Europe
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
“Ich halte die statistische Physik trotz all ihrer Erfolge doch f¨ ur eine
vor¨ ubergehende Phase und habe Hoﬀnung, zu einer wirklich befriedi-
genden Theorie der Materie zu gelangen. Ich sende Dir gleichzeitig
eine kurze Arbeit, die den ersten Schritt darstellt. Das neutrale
und das elektrische Teilchen erscheinen gewissermassen als Loch im
Raume, derart, dass das metrische Feld in sich selbst zur¨ uckkehrt.
Der Raum wird als zweischalig dargestellt. In der Schwarzschild-
schen strengen zentralsymmetrischen L¨ osung erscheint das Teilchen
im gew¨ ohnlichen Raume als Singularit¨ at vom Typus1− 2m
r . Durch
die Substitution 1− 2m = u2 wird das Feld regul¨ ar im r-Raume.
Wandert u von−∞ bis +∞, so wandert r von +∞ zu r = 2m und
hierauf wieder zur¨ uck zur = +∞. So kommen beide ”Bl¨ atter” im
Riemannschen Sinne zustande, die an der ”Br¨ ucke” r = 2m bezw.
u = 0 stetig zusammenh¨ angen. Aehnlich bei der Elektrizit¨ at. Die
Aufgabe an der ich mit einem jungen Kollegen (russischer Jude)
unabl¨ assig schwitze ist die Behandlung des Mehrk¨ orperproblems auf
dieser Basis. Wir haben aber die ernsthaften Schwierigkeiten des
Problems bereits ¨ uberwunden, sodass sich bald zeigen wird was daran
ist. Jedenfalls ist es eine wundervolle mathematische Aufgabe.”
“ To me statistical physics despite its success is a transitory phase
and I have hope that we arrive at a really satisfying theory of matter.
I send you enclosed a short work, that represents a ﬁrst step. The
neutral and the electrical particle appear as a hole in space, of this
kind that the metric ﬁeld returns to itself. Space is represented as two
sheets. In the strict spherical symmetric solution of Schwarzschild
the particle appears in usual space as singularity of the kind 1− 2m
r .
By substitution 1− 2m =u2 the ﬁeld becomes regular in r-space. If
u goes from−∞ to +∞, r is going from +∞ to r = 2m and back
again to r = +∞. This represents both ”sheets”, that are connected
by the ”bridge” at r = 2m respectively u = 0 . Likewise as it is
in electricity. The challenge a young college (russian jew) and I
labour away over is the many-body-problem on that basis. We have
conquered the serious problems already, so it will show soon if there
is something serious about it. Anyway it is a wonderful mathematical
problem.37”
The connection between Einstein’s critique on Quantum Mechanics, speciﬁcally
its statistical character as well as the problems of the localizability of particles,
and the connection to the Einstein-Rosen bridge approach, could not be closer
than presented here.
Einstein’s uniﬁed ﬁeld theory program failed for reasons we will not discuss in
this work. For a comprehensible presentation of this ﬁeld theoretic program,
refer to [Van Dongen, 2010]. Einstein expressed his hopes how the program
37Translation by the author
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
would succeed and how it might contain the quantum phenomena [Einstein,
1936]:
“Erst die Untersuchung des Mehr-Br¨ ucken-Problems kann zeigen,
ob diese theoretische Methode eine Erkl¨ arung f¨ ur die empirisch er-
wiesene Massengleichheit der Teilchen in der Natur liefert, und ob
sie den von der Quantenmechanik so wunderbar erfassten Tatsachen
gerecht wird.”
“Only the examination of the many-bridge-problem can show if this
theoretical model provides an explanation for the empirical proven
equality of masses of particles in nature, and if it can reproduce the
facts that are represented by Quantum Mechanics in such a delightful
way38.”
These hopes of Einstein seem to be carried on in recent program claims that
reconsider the idea of a deep connection between entanglement and Einstein-
Rosen bridge solutions.
4.5 Recent claims
Recents claims bring back the EPR-ER idea in the context of Quantum Gravity
[Maldacena and Susskind, 2013]:
“General relativity contains solutions in which two distant black
holes are connected through the interior via a wormhole, or Einstein-
Rosen bridge. These solutions can be interpreted as maximally en-
tangled states of two black holes that form a complex EPR pair. We
suggest that similar bridges might be present for more general entan-
gled states.”
and [Susskind, 2016]:
“Now I feel that our current views of Quantum Mechanics are pro-
visional; it’s the best we can do without a much deeper understand-
ing of its connection with gravity, but it’s not ﬁnal. The reason
involves a very particular development, the so called ER=EPR prin-
ciple. ER=EPR tells us that the immensely complicated network
of entangled subsystems that comprises the universe is also an im-
mensely complicated (and technically complex) network of Einstein-
Rosen bridges.”
It is remarkable that the critique by Susskind sounds not that diﬀerent from
Einstein’s reservations on Quantum Mechanics. The term ”provisional” and the
statement that Quantum Mechanics is not to be seen as ﬁnal can be understood
as synonymous to Einstein’s claims for incompleteness of Quantum Mechanics,
in the sense of theory completeness.
38Translation by the author
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
5 Conclusion
It is Einstein’s merit that he raised questions about the foundations of Quan-
tum Mechanics that are still relevant and bother contemporary physics. In this
light, it is more than just history of science to reconsider the old arguments.
The EPR-argument is such an argument that is still relevant to the discussions
on the interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. If one browses through Einstein’s
papers of the year 1935, the ER-paper coincides with the EPR-paper, and a
closer look reveals that there are further interrelations.
We presented several notions of completeness that can be identiﬁed in the EPR-
paper, the ER-paper and its accompanying sources: Theory completeness, which
refers only to the elements of the theory, bijective completeness, or the condi-
tion of completeness, as it was named in the EPR-paper, Born completeness
and Schr¨ odinger completeness. Recent conceptions of ψ-completeness and stan-
dard completeness amend the presentation. We argued that ψ-completeness is
not identical to bijective completeness based on the type of elements that both
notions of completeness refer to.
Einstein’s intention of writing the EPR paper was to demonstrate the incom-
pleteness of Quantum Mechanics, 39 to justify his ambitions to look for a com-
plete (in the sense of theory completeness) theory. This new theory should fulﬁll
theory completeness and Born completeness, explain the atomistic character of
Quantum Mechanics, which turned out to be the singularity-free description of
particles, and reproduce the quantum phenomena, which refers to the structure
and formalism of Quantum Mechanics.
With the ER-paper, Einstein presented this new theory, which developed into
his attempts to present a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. His critique on Quantum Mechan-
ics lasted in parallel to his ongoing work on the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, but focused
later on a position that was easier to hold. He criticized Born completeness,
because to him it was undeniable that a new theory is needed, and he shifted
the eﬀort from critique on Quantum Mechanics to development of a uniﬁed ﬁeld
theory.
The tempting thought to explain nonlocal phenomena inside Quantum Mechan-
ics with ER-bridges is nothing Einstein would have considered, because to him
separability was a principle applied to show that Quantum Mechanics is incom-
plete, in the sense of Schr¨ odinger completenessindependently of a measurement
carried out on the system.
By applying the separation principle and exclusion of the measurement process
from the consideration, Einstein aimed to show that the statistical character of
Quantum Mechanics is not owed to the measurement process, but resides only
39We identiﬁed Schr¨ odinger completenessas the completeness he challenged in the EPR
paper
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
in the state vector formalism and the Schr¨ odinger evolution. The state vector
formalism is fully deterministic, and by that he concludes that the formalism of
Quantum Mechanics in incomplete.
In the literature about the EPR-argument, the statistical character of Quan-
tum Mechanics plays a key role in Einstein’s critique on Quantum Mechanics,
and it truly deserves this role. We emphasized one further essential motiva-
tion for Einstein’s attempt to reconstruct Quantum Mechanics, the ”atomistic
structure,” or as we identiﬁed it: the problem of an absolute localization of par-
ticles. In classical ﬁeld theory, the attempts to give a localization of particles
result in ﬁeld singularities. For Einstein, this problem was an incompleteness
in general relativity, in the sense of theory completeness. He aimed to solve this
problem with a new complete theory, which he ﬁrst presented in outlines in the
ER-paper. The ER-bridge was intended merely to solve the problem of local-
ization of particles; but is also would provide a singularity-free representation
of particles and, according to Einstein, would be consistent with Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle. It must have been insights like this that encouraged him
to hope that this approach promised that quantum phenomena might emerge in
his new theory and, by that, reconstruct Quantum Mechanics out of ﬁeld theory.
Unfortunately, these hopes of Einstein failed, and until the end of his life, he
could not present a satisfying solution to this problem. Though we showed that
Einstein never had in mind resolving nonlocality issues in Quantum Mechanics
by Einstein-Rosen bridges, because of his non-acceptance of nonlocality as a
feasible concept in a theory.
Recent programmatic approaches that claim a EPR=ER principle have been
presented. We cannot estimate if the EPR=ER approaches will contribute to
the development of a uniﬁed theory of quantum gravity, but the idea is promis-
ing, and if the program would turn out to be successful, it would be a late
gratiﬁcation for Einstein’s ﬁeld theory program to unify Quantum Mechanics
and gravity, even if this success was not in the originally intended direction.
It would also underline the extent of Einstein’s intuition, which brought for-
ward foundational problems in the interpretation of Quantum Mechanics and
probably indicated the right direction in this quest.
6 Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the head of the Quantum Particle Workgroup Beatrix
Hiesmayr for her support and Basil Hiley, Chris Fuchs, Stefanie Lietze, Agnes
Rettelbach, and several other colleagues for fruitful discussions. For the reali-
sation of the graphical elements and illustrations, I would like to thank Isabella
W¨ ober.
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
References
Achinstein, P. (1991). Particles and waves: Historical essays in the philosophy
of science. Oxford University Press.
Avenarius, R. (1906). Kritik der reinen erfahrung.
Avenarius, R. and Avenarius, R. H. L. (1905). Der menschliche Weltbegriﬀ. OR
Reisland.
Bohr, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be
considered complete? Physical review, 48(8):696.
Einstein, A. (1933). Zur methode der theoretischen physik - herbert spencer lec-
ture, oxford. Albert Einstein Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Israel. 1-114.
Einstein, A. (1934). On the method of theoretical physics.Philosophy of science,
1(2):163–169.
Einstein, A. (1936). Physik und realit¨ at. Journal of the Franklin Institute ,
221(3):313–347.
Einstein, A. (1946). Remarks on Bertrand Russell’s theory of knowledge. Library
of Living Philos.
Einstein, A. (1948). Quantum mechanics and reality. Dialectica, 2(3-4):320–324.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical
description of physical reality be considered complete? Physical review ,
47(10):777.
Einstein, A. and Rosen, N. (1935a). Das partikel-problem von standpunkte
der allgemeinen relativit¨ atstheorie. Einstein archives online. Archival Call
Number: 1-130.
Einstein, A. and Rosen, N. (1935b). The particle problem in the general theory
of relativity. Physical Review, 48(1):73.
Fine, A. (2009). The shaky game . University of Chicago Press.
Harrigan, N. and Spekkens, R. W. (2010). Einstein, incompleteness, and the
epistemic view of quantum states. Foundations of Physics, 40(2):125–157.
Held, C. (2012). Incompatibility of standard completeness and quantum me-
chanics. International Journal of Theoretical Physics , 51(9):2974–2984.
Held, C. (2015). Einsteins boxes: Incompleteness of quantum mechanics without
a separation principle. Foundations of Physics, 45(9):1002–1018.
Hentschel, K. (1986). Die korrespondenz einstein-schlick: Zum verh¨ altnis der
physik zur philosophie. Annals of Science, 43(5):475–488.
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
Howard, D. (1993). Was einstein really a realist? Perspectives on Science ,
1(2):204–251.
Howard, D. A. (2005). Albert einstein as a philosopher of science. Physics today,
58(12):34–40.
Janssen, M. and Lehner, C. (2014). The Cambridge Companion to Einstein ,
volume 1. Cambridge University Press.
Kiefer, C. (2015). Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, Nathan Rosen: Kann die
quantenmechanische Beschreibung der physikalischen Realit¨ at als vollst¨ andig
betrachtet werden? Springer-Verlag.
Krizek, G. C. (2017a). A classiﬁcation scheme for interpretations of quantum
mechanics. forthcoming.
Krizek, G. C. (2017b). Ockham’s razor and the interpretations of quantum
mechanics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06564 .
Kuhlmann, M. (2010). The Ultimate Constituents of the material world: in
search of an ontology for fundamental physics , volume 37. Walter de Gruyter.
Le Morvan, P. (2004). Arguments against direct realism and how to counter
them. American Philosophical Quarterly, 41(3):221–234.
Lehner, C. (2014). Einstein’s realism and his critique of quantum mechanics. In
The Cambridge companion to Einstein, pages 306–353. Cambridge University
Press.
Mach, E. (1922). Analyse der Empﬁndungen . Verlag von Georg Fischer.
Maldacena, J. and Susskind, L. (2013). Cool horizons for entangled black holes.
Fortschritte der Physik, 61(9):781–811.
Popper, K. (2005). The logic of scientiﬁc discovery . Routledge.
Ruark, A. E. (1935). Is the quantum-mechanical description of physical reality
complete? Physical Review, 48(5):466.
Russell, B. (1940). An inquiry into meaning and truth . George Allen and Unwin
Ltd.
Schr¨ odinger, E. (1935). Die gegenw¨ artige situation in der quantenmechanik.
Naturwissenschaften, 23(49):823–828.
Speziali, P., Einstein, A., and Besso, M. (1972). Correspondance 1903-1955.
Hermann.
Susskind, L. (2016). Copenhagen vs everett, teleportation, and er= epr.
Fortschritte der Physik, 64(6-7):551–564.
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
Tegmark, M. (2004). Parallel universes. Science and ultimate reality , pages
459–491.
Van Dongen, J. (2010). Einstein’s uniﬁcation. Cambridge University Press.
Visser, M. (1996). Lorentzian wormholes. From Einstein to Hawking, 412 pp..
AIP Press, 1.
von Meyenn, K. (2010). Eine Entdeckung von ganz außerordentlicher Tragweite:
Schr¨ odingers Briefwechsel zur Wellenmechanik und zum Katzenparadoxon .
Springer-Verlag.
Wigner, E. P. (1960). The unreasonable eﬀectiveness of mathematics in the
natural sciences. richard courant lecture in mathematical sciences delivered
at new york university, may 11, 1959. Communications on pure and applied
mathematics, 13(1):1–14.
43
