===== PAGE 1 =====
arXiv:quant-ph/0112148v1  23 Dec 2001
In defence of naivet´ e: The conceptual status of
Lagrangian quantum ﬁeld theory
David Wallace
December 23, 2001
Abstract
I analyse the conceptual and mathematical foundations of La grangian quantum
ﬁeld theory (that is, the ‘naive’ quantum ﬁeld theory used in mainstream physics,
as opposed to algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory). The objective is to see whether La-
grangian quantum ﬁeld theory has a suﬃciently ﬁrm conceptua l and mathematical
basis to be a legitimate object of foundational study, or whe ther it is too ill-deﬁned.
The analysis covers renormalisation and inﬁnities, inequi valent representations, and
the concept of localised states; the conclusion is that Lagr angian QFT (at least as
described here) is a perfectly respectable physical theory , albeit somewhat diﬀerent
in certain respects from most of those studied in foundation al work.
1 Introduction
From its beginning, quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) has been plagued with mathematical
diﬃculties. Any attempt to apply the theory to interacting systems led to the appearance
of inﬁnities, and although methods were found 1 to remove those inﬁnities from the calcu-
lated cross-sections by cutting oﬀ certain integrals at ﬁnite (thou gh very high) energies,
these methods had a suﬃciently ad hoc feel that the theory was not felt to be on remotely
satisfactory conceptual ground.
From the 1950s onwards, there has been a major program to reso lve this problem
by reformulating QFT on an axiomatic basis: that is, starting from wh at seem to be
physically necessary — and mathematically precise — principles which an y QFT would
have to satisfy, and then ﬁnding QFTs which actually satisfy them. T his program is now
generally referred to as algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory , or AQFT; see Haag (1996), and
references therein, for extensive discussion of it.
1By Dyson, Feynmann, Schwinger and Tomonaga, amongst others; see Cao (1997, pp. 185–209) for
a historical discussion.
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
The major problem with AQFT is that very few concrete theories hav e been found
which satisfy the AQFT axioms. To be precise, the only known theorie s which do satisfy
the axioms are interaction-free: no examples are known of AQFT-c ompatible interacting
ﬁeld theories, and in particular the standard model cannot at pres ent be made AQFT-
compatible.
Nonetheless, the great majority of foundational discussions of Q FT are carried out in
an AQFT framework, for obvious reasons: the precise axiomatic na ture of AQFT makes
it ideal for foundational study, since we can specify with mathemat ical precision exactly
what the entity is that we are studying.
Meanwhile, the mainstream physics community has continued to work with what we
might call (for want of a better name) “Lagrangian” QFT, the origin al QFT developed in
the 1930s and whose inﬁnities were tamed (at least pragmatically spe aking) in the 1950s.
In Lagrangian QFT, an entirely diﬀerent program exists for unders tanding those inﬁnities,
in terms of the renormalisation group; this program, due primarily to Wilson, does not
eliminate the ﬁnite cutoﬀs introduced to deal with the inﬁnities, but r ather attempts to
‘legitimize’ them. It is in the framework of Lagrangian QFT that the St andard Model is
formulated.
This paper is an investigation of whether Lagrangian QFT is suﬃciently well-deﬁned
conceptually and mathematically that it too can be usefully subjecte d to foundational
analysis. The reasons for making such an investigation are threefo ld. Firstly, the problem
with restricting our foundational studies to AQFT is that — pending t he discovery of a
realistic interacting AQFT — we have only limited reason to trust that o ur results apply
to the actual world, which appears to be described rather well by t he Standard Model.
One response to this criticism is to say that Lagrangian QFT is so math ematically
ill-deﬁned that we cannot regard it as a proper theory at all, so we ca nnot trust its results
either! Our second reason for the investigation is then to see whet her this criticism is
justiﬁed.
The third motivation is somewhat more philosophical. Wilson’s explanatio n of the
renormalisation procedure relies upon the failure of the QFT to which it is applied at
very short distances. It is then intriguing to ask how to put on a ﬁrm conceptual footing
a theory which relies for its mathematical consistency on its own eve ntual failure.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the form al deﬁnition of
a Lagrangian QFT. This deﬁnition is very formal and mathematically to tally ill-deﬁned;
sections 3 and 4 address this problem, dealing respectively with reno rmalisation and with
the existence of inequivalent representations of the observable a lgebra. Section 5 considers
the problem of how to deﬁne local objects in QFT. This is also a problem in AQFT and
much of this section’s argument applies in that domain; however, the framework of sections
2–4 oﬀers some interesting insights. Section 6 is the conclusion.
Three comments should be made before the main part of the paper:
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
1. This paper is not intended as an attack on the AQFT program. The program to
construct an AQFT-compatible interacting ﬁeld theory is well-motiva ted and, if suc-
cessful, would be of enormous import; the foundational results wh ich have emerged
from AQFT have been of considerable importance in understanding q uantum ﬁeld
theory and in general they apply also to Lagrangian QFTs. This pape r should be
read as complementary to, rather than in competition with, these r esults.
2. There is a strong tradition in foundational studies of QFT to trea t the theory from
an operational viewpoint, formalised by regarding the local algebra s of AQFT as
describing operations which can be carried out by an observer localis ed in a given
region. This paper does not follow that viewpoint: it treats QFT inste ad as a closed
theory (a ‘universal theory’ in Deutsch’s (1985) sense), and reg ards measurement
devices, observers etc. as just subsystems of the QFT state. T his diﬀerence of
approach has only limited signiﬁcance for most of the paper but is impo rtant in
section 5.3.
3. Although much of the discussion below applies equally to bosonic and fermionic
ﬁeld theories, the speciﬁc examples discussed are exclusively boson ic.
2 What is a Lagrangian QFT?
For better or for worse, most canonical quantum ﬁeld theories ar e found by starting with a
classical ﬁeld theory and then ‘quantizing’ it. To be sure, there is so mething intellectually
unsatisfactory about this: given that quantum theory is the more fundamental theory,
we would prefer to work in the other direction, that is, to recover classical ﬁeld theories
from quantum starting points (see Deutsch (1984) for a developm ent of this criticism).
Nonetheless, the classical starting point has proven a powerful m ethod for ﬁnding QFTs,
and we adopt it here.
2.1 Classical ﬁeld theories
A classical relativistic ﬁeld theory can be considered as consisting of a relativistic space-
time M (such as Minkowski spacetime), a set of ﬁelds (that is, maps from M to some
other space, such as the real or complex numbers 2), and a Lagrangian density: a real-
valued function L on M whose value at a given point x depends only on the ﬁelds and
their ﬁrst partial derivatives, evaluated at x. For a given region D of M, we deﬁne the
action SD as the integral of L over D; SD is thus a functional of the ﬁelds, and we deﬁne
2In more advanced treatments, we might take the ﬁelds to be sectio ns of some ﬁbre bundle over M;
this technicality does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the arguments of the p aper, and will be ignored.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
the dynamically allowed ﬁeld conﬁgurations within D to be those for which SD is extremal
under variations of the ﬁelds which vanish at the boundary of D.
To go further, it is necessary to take M to be globally hyperbolic, and then to ﬁx a
foliation M = Σ × R. Let Σ 1, Σ2 be any two spatial slices in the foliation, with associated
time coordinates t1,t 2 respectively; let the spacetime region between the two slices be
D12. If the ﬁelds are required to fall oﬀ rapidly enough at spatial inﬁnity , then we can
deﬁne the action SD12:
SD12 =
∫
D12
d4µ L =
∫ t2
t1
dt
∫
Σ
d3µ(t)L (1)
where d 4µ is the four-dimensional volume element on M and d 3µ(t) is the induced three-
dimensional volume element on Σ. As the notation indicates, the thre e-volume element is
in general time-dependent; however, when M has a time-translation symmetry then we
can always choose a foliation such that this time- dependence vanish es.
We can now deﬁne the Lagrangian L(t) of the theory by
L(t) =
∫
Σ
d3µ(t)L. (2)
L is now a functional of the ﬁelds on Σ and their time-derivatives, and t he action SD12 is
given simply by
SD12 =
∫ t2
t1
dtL (t), (3)
so the ﬁeld theory is now in Lagrangian form (albeit inﬁnite-dimensiona l).
The ﬁnal step before quantisation is to transform from Lagrangia n to Hamiltonian
form, which we do by a straightforward inﬁnite-dimensional genera lisation of the Legendre
transform in classical mechanics: to each ﬁeld φi we associate a conjugate momentum ﬁeld
πi by
πi(x) = δL
δ ˙φi(x), (4)
and we deﬁne the Hamiltonian H by
H[φ,π ] =
∑
i
∫
Σ
πi(x) ˙φi(x) −L[φ, ˙φ], (5)
where ˙φi is deﬁned implicitly in terms of the πi, via (4). Points in the phase space P of
the ﬁeld are then given by specifying sets of functions ( φi,π i) (for all i); it is easy to check
that the dynamics are given by Hamilton’s equations, as in the ﬁnite-d imensional case:
˙φi(x) = δH
δπi(x) ; (6)
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
˙πi(x) = − δH
δφi(x). (7)
The Poisson bracket on P is given by
{A[φ,π ],B [φ,π ]} =
∑
i
∫
Σ
d3x
(
δA
δφi(x)
δB
δπi(x) − δA
δπi(x)
δB
δφi(x)
)
, (8)
and φi and πi obey natural inﬁnite-dimensional analogues of the canonical relat ions:
{φi(x),φ j(y)} = {πi(x),π j(y)} = 0 and {φi(x),π j(y)} =δi,jδ(x − y).
Before going on to quantise this theory, we make two observations :
1. Despite the somewhat casual approach of this section, classica l ﬁeld theories have
perfectly well-deﬁned Lagrangian and Hamiltonian forms, and the ab ove analysis
can be carried out in a fully rigorous way; see chapter 7 of Woodhous e (1991),
chapter 3 of Marsden and Ratiu (1994) and references therein fo r such an analysis.
In this more rigorous approach it is necessary to replace the point f unctionalsφi(x)
andπi(x) with smoother functionals on phase space, and to eschew use of t he delta-
function Poisson bracket between such point functionals; such ob jects have a status
not dissimilar to that of position eigenstates in non-relativistic quant um mechanics,
in that they cannot easily be rigorously deﬁned but (if used with a little caution)
are of great conceptual and calculational convenience.
2. The almost immediate introduction of a foliation of M may cause some readers to
worry about violation of relativistic covariance. However, recall th at each point in
P deﬁnes a unique trajectory through P, so that we may set up an isomorphism
between phase-space and the space of all solutions to the ﬁeld equ ations. The latter
space is covariant (in the sense that it can be deﬁned without use of any pre ferred
foliation) and if desired all talk of ‘phase space’ may be reinterprete d as talk of
solution space.
Both of these points are developed further in Wald (1994) (from an AQFT perspective,
and in the somewhat restricted context of free ﬁelds).
For convenience, in the remainder of this paper we assume that we a re dealing with a
single real ﬁeld, and so drop the subscripts on φ andπ; this has no signiﬁcant consequences.
2.2 Quantization: observables
In an ideal world, quantization would work as follows: it would yield a Hilbe rt space H,
together with a map Q from the functions on P (which can be thought of as the classical
observables) into the space of self-adjoint operators on H. Q would have the property
that, if {, } is the classical Poisson bracket, then Q({A,B } =i(Q(A)Q(B) −Q(B)Q(A)).
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
This is not an ideal world: quantization as deﬁned above is provably imp ossible (see,
e. g. , Abraham and Marsden (1978) for a discussion). What is poss ible is to ﬁnd such a
Q for a much more restricted class of observables: in nonrelativistic p article mechanics,
for instance, we choose spatial position and the momentum conjug ate to it. There is
no known algorithm for choosing this restricted class, and no real r eason to expect one
to exist (c. f. the criticisms of quantization in Deutsch 1984); two d iﬀerent choices will
sometimes lead to empirically inequivalent quantum theories, in which ca se experiment
is the only way to determine which is correct. 3 In general, however, Nature is fairly
kind to us, and making the most obvious choice of observables tends to work. QFT is
no exception: choosing φ(x) and π(x) as preferred observables leads to the empirically
correct theory.
The question of which observables count as ‘fundamental’ is also rele vant for the
interpretation of the quantum theory which we hope to produce. F or any ﬁxed dimension,
all Hilbert spaces are isomorphic, so it is through the observables th at we are able to give
physical meaning to a theory. In practice, this usually involves a con nection between
certain observables and the spacetime of the theory: in NRQM, for instance, it is the
designation of the momentum operators as generators of transla tions which allows us to
identify certain states as eigenstates of position. 4 The obvious strategy in QFT is to use
the spatiotemporal dependence of the observables to give the th eory physical meaning:
when quantised, φ(x) and π(x) will become operators which we will treat as localised at
x.
This approach can be taken further. First we shift from the Schr¨ odinger to the Heisen-
berg picture, so that the ﬁeld operators are functions of spacet ime points x rather than
just spatial points x. Then, given any (bounded, open) subset O of M, we deﬁne the
algebra A(O) as the algebra of all operators which can be constructed from ˆφ(x) and
ˆπ(x) whenever x ∈ O — so O includes such operators as ˆπ(x)2(x ∈ O ),
∫
Of (x)ˆφ(x), etc.
This gives us (formally) what is technically known as a net of operator algebras: a map
from bounded, open subsets of a topological space into operator algebras, such that if
O1 ⊆ O 2, then A(O1) is a subalgebra of A(O2). It is a central claim of algebraic quantum
ﬁeld theory — and one which appears consistent with the way QFT is us ed in physics
— that a QFT is entirely speciﬁed by the structure of this algebra net : in other words,
that all physical facts about the theory can be determined from k nowing the spacetime
3Carlip (1998) points out (p. 97) that ‘old quantum theory’ can be (s omewhat anachronistically)
understood as wrongly selecting action-angle variables as the pref erred observables.
4The argument, adapted from Newton and Wigner (1949), is as follow s (in one dimension): if a state
|φ⟩ is localised at some point, then any translation exp( iλˆP ) applied to it will leave it localised at a
diﬀerent point; thus exp( iλˆP ) |φ⟩ must be orthogonal to |φ⟩; hence the position eigenstates are precisely
those satisfying ⟨φ| exp(iλˆP ) |φ⟩ for all λ. If {|k⟩} are the (improper) eigenstates of ˆP , and if we deﬁne
|x⟩ =∫ dk exp(−ikx) |k⟩, then ⟨x|y⟩ = δ(x − y), and exp( iλˆP ) |x⟩ = |x − λ⟩; hence, ⟨x| exp(iλˆP ) |x⟩ =
⟨x|x − λ⟩, and so the |x⟩ states are exactly localised.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
dependence of the observables, without any need to know (for ins tance) which observable
is ˆπ(x) and which is ˆφ(x). In particular, this allows the possibility that ﬁeld theories
generated from diﬀerent classical Lagrangians are actually the sa me QFT; two such ﬁeld
theories are generally referred to as Borchers equivalent.
As such, to specify an algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory, all that is nee ded is a net of
algebras, which is required to satisfy certain axioms (basically relatin g to locality and
causality; see Haag (1996) for an extended discussion of these ax ioms). Any such AQFT
implicitly speciﬁes a Borchers equivalence class of ‘concrete’ QFTs ea ch of which generates
the same algebra net; all such concrete QFTs are Borchers equiva lent to one another, and
they are usually regarded simply as diﬀerent ways of describing the A QFT, analogous to
diﬀerent coordinate systems on a manifold.
The assumption that the net of algebras captures all physical info rmation about a
theory gives a very elegant realisation of the idea that quantum the ories gain physical
content via a speciﬁcation of the spatiotemporal properties of th eir observables. We will
refer to it as the Net Assumption.
We have glossed one question, though: what does it mean to say tha t an operator is
localised somewhere? In much of the AQFT literature an operationalis t answer is given
to this question: operators represent physical operations which can be performed, by
the observer, on the QFT state, and in particular A(O) is the algebra of all operations
which can be performed, and all measurements which can be made, b y an observer who
is external to the ﬁeld system but localised within O. However — as mentioned in the
Introduction — we wish to understand a given QFT as self-contained (in which case
observers, measurement devices and the like must be built out of st ates of the QFT) so
this approach is not available to us. Instead, we take the expectat ion values of operators
in a given spatial region as giving us information about the degree of e xcitation of the
ﬁeld in that region. This view will be further developed in the next sect ion.
2.3 Quantization: states
We now address the practical task of actually ﬁnding the operator representations of the
ﬁeld observables. In NRQM we usually do this via wave-functions: we t ake our Hilbert
space to be the space of complex functions ψ(q) on the conﬁguration space of the classical
theory, and quantize the classical observables q,p via
ˆqψ =qψ(q); ˆpψ = −idψ
dq . (9)
Formally (and only formally; but see sections 3 and 4) we can easily gen eralise this
to inﬁnite-dimensional systems: the conﬁguration space of the sy stem is the inﬁnite-
dimensional space of all ﬁeld conﬁgurations on Σ, so the quantum st ates will be complex-
valued functionals on that space. We will denote the Hilbert space of such functionals by
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
HΣ, and proceed to quantize the classical observables φ(x) and π(x) as
( ˆφ(x)Ψ)[χ] = χ(x)Ψ[χ]; (10)
( ˆπ(x)Ψ)[χ] = −i δΨ
δχ(x) [χ], (11)
where χ is any ﬁeld conﬁguration on Σ. It is easy to check that inﬁnite-dimens ional
generalisations of the canonical commutation relations are satisﬁe d:
[ ˆφ(x), ˆφ(y)
]
=
[ ˆπ(x), ˆπ(y)
]
= 0; (12)
[ ˆφ(x), ˆφ(y)
]
=iδ(x − y). (13)
(For simplicity we have considered only the case of one real ﬁeld, but the generalisation
to multiple ﬁelds is obvious.)
Now the Hilbert space HΣ has a natural tensor-product structure. Let Σ 1,..., Σn be
disjoint subsets of Σ whose union is Σ; then (formally) we can deﬁne Hj as the space of
complex functionals on functions on Σ j. Any function f on Σ can be speciﬁed uniquely
by giving those n functions which are the restrictions of f to each Σ j; hence we have
HΣ = ⊗n
i=1HΣi. (14)
If x ∈ Σj then ˆφ(x) and ˆπ(x) act trivially on HΣi for i ⁄= j. Hence, the HΣi can be
thought of as representing those subsystems of the ﬁeld which ar e localised within Σ i.
This viewpoint can be reversed: we can take spatially localised subsys tems of the ﬁeld
as our starting point, in which case ˆφ(x) and ˆπ(x) are localised in Σ j because they act
trivially on the other HΣi.
The reader is likely to have noticed that none of the above would win pr izes for math-
ematical rigor! Indeed, on the face of it the approach of this whole section is appallingly
badly deﬁned. It will be the purpose of sections 3 and 4 to explain how we can attain
peaceful coexistence with this ill-deﬁnedness.
3 Inﬁnities and renormalisation
We now have at least a formal deﬁnition of a quantum ﬁeld theory; bu t it is, clearly,
profoundly unsatisfactory in many respects. In this section we co nsider the question of
how, and to what extent, it is possible to restore some degree of ma thematical rigour to
the theory.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
3.1 The problem of inﬁnities
Where to start in analysing the mathematical shortcomings of sect ion 2.3? We could
begin by noting the various ambiguities glossed over when considering functionals on an
inﬁnite-dimensional space: what topology should be placed on the sp ace of functionals?
How smooth must a ﬁeld conﬁguration be to be admitted?, etc. Howe ver, there is a more
crucial problem which applies to any attempt to make wave-function al space a Hilbert
space. This is the problem of how to deﬁne the inner product. In the ﬁnite case, of course,
we deﬁne the inner product of two wave-functions by
(ψ1,ψ 2) =
∫
ℜn
dnqψ ∗
1(q1,...,q n)ψ2(q1,...,q n); (15)
generalising this to wave-functionals gives a functional integral:
(Ψ1, Ψ2) =
∫
S
DχΨ∗
1[χ]Ψ2[χ], (16)
where S is ﬁeld conﬁguration space and Dχ is a ‘functional measure’ on S.
Unfortunately, deﬁning measures on inﬁnite-dimensional spaces is extremely hard.
Indeed, simple attempts to deﬁne Dχ tend to give inﬁnity as the result of the functional
integral, which clearly isn’t satisfactory (see, e. g. , Binney et al (1992, p. 409) for an
example of how this occurs). The integral can be made well-deﬁned if we restrict ourselves
to a ﬁnite-dimensional subspace of S, but as soon as we start to consider functions which
can vary on arbitrarily short length-scales, we lose the ability to deﬁ ne it.
Blithely ignoring this little problem, we can press on with the developmen t of our QFT,
but we soon run into other inﬁnities: in particular, when we try to calc ulate the eﬀects
of interactions, we ﬁnd that our calculations include terms which invo lve integrating over
arbitrarily short length-scales, and that some of these terms are inﬁnite when the integral
is taken over such length-scales. With care we can avoid the inﬁnities in free-ﬁeld theories
(such theories can be exactly deﬁned in AQFT) but no examples are k nown of realistic
QFTs in which these inﬁnities do not have to be confronted.
One highly principled attitude to the problem might be to say: very well, none of our
supposed ‘interacting QFTs’ count as real theories, so let us reje ct all of them and go
looking for properly deﬁned ones. Needless to say, though, this is n ot the mainstream
approach in particle physics, where algorithms for extracting usef ul information from QFT
despite the inﬁnities have been known for nearly ﬁfty years. To und erstand why these
algorithms work — and why they can be understood not just as ‘algor ithms’, but as a valid
resolution of the problem of inﬁnities — we take a brief digression into c ondensed-matter
physics.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
3.2 High-energy cutoﬀs and renormalisation
Functional integrals are not restricted to relativistic quantum the ory: they occur through-
out physics, and in particular in condensed-matter physics. There too they formally lead
to inﬁnities; however, there is no question of a conceptual problem . For the integrals
are taken on the assumption that (for instance) the density of ma tter is continuously
varying, and can vary on arbitrarily short length-scales. But this c ontinuum assump-
tion can only be an approximation, for matter is made of atoms, and a ny variations on
a length-scale short relative to the interatomic distance clearly lie be yond the scope of
the approximation. So the functional integral must be cut oﬀ at so me short, but ﬁnite,
length-scale.
It might be thought that this would lead to enormous computational diﬃculties, for
the functional integral is dominated by the short-distance variat ions and hence the precise
details of the cutoﬀ procedure ought to be important. Remarkably , this is not so: it can
be shown that if we restrict our attention to the behaviour of the s ystem on lengthscales
which are very long relative to the cutoﬀ, then:
1. All but a ﬁnite number of possible interaction terms (the so-called ‘renormalisable’
terms) have negligible eﬀect on the system’s behaviour.
2. The only eﬀect of the high-energy (i. e. short-distance) degre es of freedom on the
system’s long-distance behaviour is to modify (‘renormalise’) the coe ﬃcients of the
renormalisable interaction terms. As such, the only eﬀect of gettin g the cutoﬀ
details wrong is to change the eﬀective values of the coeﬃcients in th e Hamiltonian.
If, instead of trying to calculate these eﬀective values based on th e true values (which
in any case is often impossible) we simply measure them, the details of t he cutoﬀ
procedure are completely irrelevant to the long-distance behaviou r of the system.
These results were established in the 1970s, primarily by Kenneth Wils on (see Wilson
and Kogut (1974) and references therein); Binney et al (1992) give an exceptionally lucid
exposition.
At least mathematically, this process can be applied equally well to rela tivistic QFTs:
instead of allowing our functional integrals to range over all ﬁeld con ﬁgurations, we restrict
them to only those conﬁgurations whose short-distance variation is not too quick (the
conceptually simplest way, at least in Minkowski spacetime, is to exclu de all conﬁgurations
whose Fourier coeﬃcients vanish above some ﬁxed value of |k|, where 1/|k| is the intended
cutoﬀ length). This yields a well-deﬁned theory, and if we require the cutoﬀ length to be far
smaller than the lengthscales at which we study the theory, then th at cutoﬀ length aﬀects
the theory’s predictions only through renormalisation of the coeﬃc ients in the eﬀective
Hamiltonian.5 Since the latter coeﬃcients are in any case only known empirically, this
5See chapter 12 of Peskin and Schroeder (1995) for the technical details of this process.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
has no practical consequences.
What physical justiﬁcation might there be for imposing a cutoﬀ in rela tivistic QFT?
Three possibilities are generally mentioned in the literature (see, e. g . , Cao (1997) or
Binney et al (1992) for details):
• It is easy to construct ﬁeld theories in which some of the degrees of freedom are
‘frozen out’, i. e. become irrelevant, below some given energy scale. Below this scale,
the ﬁeld theory can be described by an ‘eﬀective ﬁeld theory’ (EFT) , which does
not explicitly include the frozen-out degrees of freedom; however , those degrees
of freedom do have the eﬀect of imposing an eﬀective cutoﬀ of the E FT. This is
believed to happen for a number of actually studied low-energy theo ries, whose
cutoﬀ energies are experimentally accessible; see Binney et al (1992, pp. 372–373),
for a brief discussion. Of course, when a cutoﬀ is generated this wa y, it relies on the
existence of the ‘true’ ﬁeld theory, which in turn can only be rigorou sly deﬁned with
a cutoﬀ of its own. This implies either some inﬁnite tower of EFTs, which describe
physics at successively higher energy scales, or else some other cu toﬀ mechanism
which truncates the tower.
• Possibly at suﬃciently high energy scales (say, beyond the ‘Grand Un iﬁcation en-
ergy’ (Peskin and Schroeder 1995), about 10 16 GeV, above which the strong and
electroweak forces are conjectured to become uniﬁed) the entir e ﬁeld-theoretic de-
scription of physics may break down and be replaced by some other t heory (such as
string theory). This new theory would then impose an eﬀective cuto ﬀ, and might
itself be free of inﬁnities.
• At still higher energy levels (and hence still shorter lengthscales), it is widely believed
that the concept of spacetime as a continuum will itself break down, to be replaced
by some quantized version. On dimensional grounds this is expected to happen
at around the Planck energy, or 10 19 GeV; this is equivalent to a breakdown on
lengthscales of order 10 −34 metres (the Planck length).
In practice, the second and third alternatives may not be all that d istinct: although string
theory is usually formulated as a perturbative theory on a ﬂat back ground spacetime, it is
generally accepted that this background spacetime must eventua lly be eliminated from the
theory — in which case, presumably, we would again expect spacetime to be an eﬀective
concept emerging only on lengthscales greater than the Planck leng th.
3.3 The conceptual status of a cutoﬀ QFT
The introduction of a ﬁnite cutoﬀ, then, mathematically resolves th e inﬁnities problem,
and might turn out to be justiﬁable on a number of physical grounds . However, it is prima
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
facie unfortunate from a foundational perspective, for the follo wing reason: in founda-
tional work, it is usual to start with a well-deﬁned (and, preferably , axiomatisable) theory,
and then to investigate the implications of that theory. If QFTs are intrinsically approxi-
mate theories, which can be trusted only at certain energy scales a nd whose behaviour is
unknown at other scales, it is hard to take this attitude to them. Sh ould we then regard
a QFT as a well-deﬁned theory at all, or (as Buchholz (2000) has advo cated) as
an eﬃcient algorithm for the theoretical treatment of certain spe ciﬁc problems
in high-energy physics (Buchholz 2000, pp. 1–2)
Cao (1997, pp. 350–352) identiﬁes three diﬀerent, commonly adop ted, attitudes to the
foundations of QFT:
(1) The current situation is genuinely unsatisfactory: we should re ject the cutoﬀ theories
as not mathematically well-deﬁned, and continue to look for nontrivia l theories
deﬁned at all lengthscales.
(2) The picture of ‘an inﬁnite tower of eﬀective ﬁeld theories’ mentio ned in the last
section is to be taken seriously. As Cao stresses, this would require
a drastic change of our conception of fundamental physics itself, a change
from aiming at a fundamental theory (as the foundation of physics ) to
having eﬀective theories valid at various energy scales. (Cao 1997, p. 351)
(3) QFTs as a whole are to be regarded only as approximate descript ions of some as-
yet-unknown deeper theory, which gives a mathematically self-con tained description
of the short-distance physics.
(1) is of course the viewpoint of the entire algebraic QFT program: t hat program’s ul-
timate long-term goal is to produce a mathematically rigorous descr iption of interacting
QFTs (speciﬁcally, of the Standard Model or of some successor to it). Obviously, com-
pletion of that goal would dramatically change the foundational sta tus of quantum ﬁeld
theory; it is only because the goal has not been achieved that it is int eresting to investi-
gate alternatives to (1). Conversely, anyone regarding either (2 ) or (3) as fully satisfactory
from a foundational viewpoint would have reason to doubt whether the eventual success
of the AQFT program is possible.
(2) will not be discussed further here: adopting it would require dra matic changes
to many aspects of our attitude to the foundations of physics, an d a discussion of such
changes lies far beyond this paper. See Castellani (2000) and Hart mann (2000) for further
discussion.
The rest of this discussion will focus on (3), and its attendant foun dational problem:
how can we give a clean conceptual description of a theory which can be rigorously deﬁned
only as the low-energy limit of another theory which we do not yet hav e?
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
To see the problem here, contrast this case with a more straightfo rward one: the
current status of classical mechanics (CM), given that we believe it to be in some sense
superseded by non-relativistic quantum mechanics (NRQM). What is our justiﬁcation
for continuing — as in many situations we do continue — to use CM, given that we
believe NRQM to be the more valid description? It is not enough to obse rve that NRQM
tends to CM as ¯ h → 0, for ¯h does not tend to zero: it is a constant. Furthermore,
simply considering successively larger systems (so that the quantit y (¯h/typical action)
tends to zero) is singular and contains various surprises (this matt er is discussed in Zurek
1998b). A better approach is to identify what might be called ‘classica l domains’ of
NRQM: that is, domains of NRQM in which NRQM is approximately isomorph ic to CM.
(A system of large bodies decohered by interactions with an environ ment would be an
example of such a domain.) Within such a domain, we could then tentativ ely apply CM,
whilst remaining aware that CM could fail to give accurate answers to some questions,
and that its predictions should only be treated as accurate to within the accuracy of the
‘approximate isomorphism’ between CM and the restricted domain of QM. (This approach
to inter-theoretic reduction is discussed in much more detail, and in t he speciﬁc context
of the relationship between CM and NRQM, in Wallace (2001c); it is close ly related to
Cao’s structural approach to QFT (Cao 1997, chapter 12) and to the ‘structural realist’
program inaugurated by Worrall (1989) and discussed in, e. g. , (P sillos 1995; Ladyman
1998).)
Approach (3) presumes the existence of some theory — call it X — to which QFT is
to be an approximation (in some domains). There are, however, a nu mber of important
diﬀerences between the X–QFT relationship and the NRQM–CM one:
1. Most obviously, we know NRQM, whereas we have only the sketchie st idea of what
X will turn out to be. This makes it diﬃcult to delineate the domains in whic h QFT
is approximately isomorphic to X, since we have to describe those dom ains in QFT-
language rather than X-language. In particular, we would like to say that these
domains are those in which the states do not vary on too-short leng thscales, but
this implicitly suggests that it even makes sense to talk about states which do vary
on such lengthscales – which may not be possible in X: indeed, X may not contain
any elements which are even approximately isomorphic to too-rapidly -varying states
of QFT. In solid-state physics, by analogy, it isn’t even meaningful t o talk about
density ﬂuctuations on lengthscales shorter than the interatomic separation.
2. When using CM, in situations where we are unsure about its validity w e can always
cross-check with NRQM to check that its predictions agree with CM. Since we don’t
have X, we can’t do this in QFT: the only tests available for its validity in d escribing
a given phenomenon are empirical.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
3. CM is a mathematically well-deﬁned and self-consistent theory, wh ereas QFT as we
have described it so far is not.
It is useful to separate the ﬁrst and second points from the third . For if we had a
mathematically well-deﬁned QFT, we would have a perfectly good phys ical theory which,
however, we would have good reason to believe empirically inadequate for describing
certain phenomena, even though we have no better alternative. T his has been a common
situation throughout physics: classical mechanics in the early 20th century is an example
of such a theory; general relativity today is another. In fact, un til and unless we come up
with a theory which we are supremely conﬁdent is ‘ﬁnal’, this should be o ur attitude to
any well-tested physical theory: its predictive utility and explanato ry power require us to
take seriously those entities which the theory claims to exist (such a s classical particles,
or general-relativistic spacetimes), but to remember that
• these entities may be patterns or structures in some more fundam ental ontology,
rather than fundamental entities in their own right;
• our theory may describe the world not by virtue of being ‘fundament al’, but by
virtue of being instantiated in the structure of a deeper theory;
• this instantiation may be only approximate, leading to domains in which t he theory
fails.
(See Wallace (2001b) for a discussion of the ontology of patterns a nd structures in physics.)
So, if we had a mathematically well-deﬁned QFT then we could happily inte rpret it
in the same way we now interpret CM. Can we obtain such a QFT?
The easiest way to do so is to choose a concrete implementation of th e short-distance
cutoﬀ. A simple recipe for such an implementation is as follows:
1. Choose a cutoﬀ lengthscale l.
2. Choose a spacetime foliation.
3. On each leaf of the foliation, replace the continuum of ﬁeld operat ors ˆφ(x), ˆπ(x)
with a discrete grid of such operators (to be called grid observables ) with the grid
spacing being ∼l.
4. Discretise the Hamiltonian, replacing its integral over functions o f ﬁeld operators
with a discrete sum over operators on the grid.
5. Replace the (formal) Hilbert space HΣ of the QFT (deﬁned in section 2.3 as the
space of complex functionals over all ﬁeld conﬁgurations on Σ) with t he space of
functionals over some subset of ﬁeld conﬁgurations, chosen to va ry in some suitably
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
chosen way between points of the grid. (The details of how this is to b e done don’t
matter — i. e. have no consequences for the large-scale behaviour of the model —
provided that specifying the value of a ﬁeld conﬁguration at all grid p oints is enough
to identify it uniquely).
Such a theory is a close relative of the QM description of a crystal: in t he latter, we
specify the position and momentum of each crystal atom; in the for mer, the ﬁeld strength
and conjugate momentum at each gridpoint. (It is also very similar to the “lattice gauge
theories” studied in lattice QCD.) It is also perfectly well-deﬁned math ematically, and as
such a valid entity to be viewed as approximately isomorphic to some su btheory of X.
We are interested in the structure of states of such theories, wh en studied at length-
scales ≫l. To give a precise meaning to this, recall that the physical meaning o f a state
is given by its expectation value on elements of the algebra of observ ables. We can de-
ﬁne the large-scale observables of a discretised QFT as those which are averages of gr id
observables over regions which are very large compared to the grid spacing; then we can
regard the large-scale structure of a state as speciﬁed by its exp ectation value with respect
to all large-scale observables. 6 The small-scale structure of a state is not to be treated as
physically signiﬁcant, since it is deﬁned at lengthscales at which we exp ect the approxi-
mate isomorphism between X and our discretised QFT to break down. (Analogously, the
structure of a classical phase-space distribution can be fairly relia bly viewed as telling
us about the actual world if it is studied on action scales large compar ed to ¯h, but is
probably meaningless on scales small compared to ¯ h).
Now, obviously there is a very large number of possible discretisation s of a ﬁeld theory:
one for each possible choice of grid, at least (and no claim is being made here that the
method above is the only way of implementing the cutoﬀ). But renorm alisation tames
this profusion of theories to some extent, for it implies that the larg e-scale structure of
two diﬀerent discretisations can be made to be virtually identical (an d totally identical
in the limit as the two theories are studied on larger and larger length- scales) by ﬁnite
rescaling of the ﬁeld observables and ﬁnite adjustments in ﬁnitely ma ny parameters of
the Hamiltonians of the theories.
By analogy with section 2.2, we can construct an algebra net by asso ciating to each
region O which is large compared with the cutoﬀ length l, an algebra A(O) of large-scale
observables localised in O. The statement that two discretised QFTs are structurally
equivalent at large scales is then equivalent to the statement that b oth generate the same
large-scale nets — a large-scale variant of the Net Assumption of se ction 2.2.
6By ‘grid observables’ I mean the basic ﬁeld observables ˆφ(x) and ˆπ(x), not their pointwise products
— so for instance
∫
dx dy f (x)g(y)ˆφ(x)ˆφ(y) is a large-scale observable (if f and g vary slowly compared
to l) but
∫
dx f(x)ˆφ(x)2 is not, irrespective of how smoothly f varies. This means, in particular, that
the energy density is not a large-scale observable. In fact, the en ergy density of a discretised QFT is (a)
cutoﬀ-dependent, and (b) extremely large: this is the origin of the ‘cosmological constant problem’.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
In fact, we can mimic the algebraic description of section 2.2 further , by deﬁning our
cut-oﬀ QFTs directly in terms of their algebraic structures: we deﬁ ne a scale-l algebraic
QFT as a map from regions of M which are large compared with l, to operator algebras,
such that the axioms of AQFT are approximately satisﬁed on scales la rge compared with
l. (Obviously this is not intended to be precise.) Two ‘concrete’ QFTs, such as two
versions of the discretised QFT above, are then scale-l equivalent if they generate the
same scale-l AQFT; hence scale- l equivalence is a generalisation of Borchers equivalence.
The results of renormalisation theory can now be simply stated: two discretisations
of the same renormalisable QFT can be made scale- l equivalent just by ﬁnite renor-
malisations of the coeﬃcients in one of them. So, for φ4 QFT (for instance) there is
a two-parameter family of scale- l AQFTs, parametrised by the renormalised mass and
coupling constant.
Now if we know that a given scale- l AQFT is empirically accurate, we can ﬁnd any
number of concrete QFTs which are members of its scale- l equivalence class. We can
choose any such member to calculate with, and make our choice base d upon calculational
convenience, but we need not regard any of them as candidates fo r the fundamental
theory of nature. Rather, they are to be viewed as candidate the ories to be approximately
isomorphic to a subtheory of X.
From this perspective, the profusion of discretisations is no embar assment. For sup-
pose QFT 1 and QFT 2 are members of the same scale- l equivalence class, and suppose
the scale-l AQFT corresponding to that equivalence class accurately describe s our ob-
servations (on scales large compared with l). Then it follows that QFT 1 and QFT 2 are
both approximately isomorphic to a subtheory of X 7 with that approximate isomorphism
breaking down around the cutoﬀ lengthscale. But if so, then there can be no fact of the
matter as to which of QFT 1 and QFT 2 is ‘correct’: both are approximately instantiated
by X. If X is itself a QFT (presumably some interacting QFT which exact ly satisﬁes the
axioms of AQFT) then X itself will be inside the scale- l equivalence class, but if X is
something else — a string theory, or some theory in which spacetime is quantized — then
no elements of the equivalence class are fundamental: all are usefu l purely because of
their structural resemblance to a subtheory of X.
3.4 Covariance
One of the least aesthetic features of discretised QFTs is their non -covariance, which
manifests itself in (at least) two ways. Firstly, a lattice is inevitably no t preserved under
Poincare transformations (indeed, it is not even preserved under translations). Secondly,
the commutators of ﬁeld operators which are spacelike separated are in general not zero
7Note that QF T1 and QF T2 must be approximately isomorphic to the same subtheory of X, since
they are intended to describe the same physical domains as one ano ther.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
(although they drop oﬀ extremely rapidly if the ﬁeld operators are s eparated by distances
large compared with the cutoﬀ distance). This second eﬀect is beca use of the discretisation
of the Hamiltonian, in which spatial derivatives like ∇φ(x) are replaced with terms like
(φ(x) − φ(x + l))/l, where l is the cutoﬀ length and l is a vector of length l. As a
consequence, inﬂuences can propagate instantaneously from x to x + l, although the
eﬀect is miniscule for widely separated points.
This is not to say that the approach advocated in section 3.3 implies th at the actual
world has faster-than-light signalling or a preferred reference fr ame. Recall that in this
approach, our discretised QFT is taken to describe the actual wor ld only insofar as it is
isomorphic to a subtheory of the deeper “theory X”, and we expec t that this isomorphism
will hold only for expectation values of ﬁeld observables averaged ov er regions large com-
pared with the cutoﬀ length. But for these expectation values, we ﬁnd that violations
of covariance are very small, tending to zero as the regions over wh ich the observables
are averaged increase in size. In other words, non-covariance is e ssentially a small-scale
property of discretised QFTs, and such properties are precisely t hose for which, it was
argued, we should not regard QFT as telling us about the actual wor ld.
Notwithstanding this, the situation is still rather unsatisfactory, at least if we view
covariance as a fundamental property of physics rather than so me eﬀective limit of a
non-covariant theory. There are a number of ways of coming to te rms with this:
1. We might manage to ﬁnd a covariant way of deﬁning discretised QFT s. Obviously
this would remove the covariance problem; however, it seems rathe r unlikely since
cutoﬀs are about short lengthscales, and length is not a relativistic invariant. (Of
course, if we look for a covariant QFT deﬁned without a cutoﬀ, we ar e moving away
from the approach described here, and back towards the AQFT pr ogram.)
2. We might bite the bullet and accept that covariance is only an appro ximation. This
would follow, for instance, if X were itself a non-covariant theory (s uch as Barbour
(1994a, 1994b, 1999) has advocated in quantum gravity).
3. We might ﬁnd that X is itself a totally covariant theory. There seem s no reason why
such a theory should not have a family of useful non- covariant app roximations.
4. Perhaps most interestingly, X may be a theory which does not invo lve spacetime
at all at a fundamental level (as is conjectured would be the case in loop-space
quantum gravity, or non-perturbative string theory). In this ca se, relativistically
covariant spacetimes would have to emerge as eﬀective, approxima te concepts from
such a theory, and it would seem to be a curiosity rather than a path ology if this
emergence proceded via non-covariant intermediate theories. Af ter all, when we
say that we expect spacetime to be quantized, we generally do not m ean that it
is literally to be divided into grid squares, but rather that it is to be rep laced
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
in toto with some fundamentally discrete entity which in some circumst ances is
approximately isomorphic to spacetime — yet in recovering that spac etime it might
be necessary to use an intermediate step which does involve treatin g spacetime as
a grid. (To take an analogy, we think that the phase space of classic al mechanics
breaks down at scales of ∼ ¯h, but that doesn’t mean that we think that phase space
really is a grid of ¯h-sized squares.)
4 Inequivalent representations
In section 2.2, we deﬁned algebraic QFTs in terms of a net of operator algebras. The
usual deﬁnition, however, is of a net of abstract algebras, which can be represented as
Hilbert space operators in a number of inequivalent ways. At ﬁrst sig ht these inequivalent
representations seem to cause problems for QFT since there seem s no principled way
to select the ‘right’ one; it is also not immediately obvious what has hap pened to the
inequivalent representations in our previous quantization (in sectio n 2.3) of QFT in terms
of wave-functionals on conﬁguration space. In this section we sha ll address these issues,
and will show that inequivalent representations — although importan t and interesting in
QFT — pose no problems for its foundations.
4.1 The algebraic approach
Consider the quantum mechanics of some ﬁnite number of nonrelativ istic, scalar particles.
We could specify this theory by starting with the Hilbert space, and t hen describing the
actions of the various observables (position, momentum and funct ions thereof) on the
space. We would need to specify a speciﬁc function of the observab les as the Hamiltonian,
so as to tell us how states evolve in time.
Once we have these observables, we could shift to the Heisenberg r epresentation by
using the Hamiltonian to time-evolve the observables:
ˆX(t) = exp( −itˆH)ˆX exp(+itˆH).
(The Hamiltonian would then be unnecessary, since all the informatio n about the system’s
time evolution would be contained within the time-evolved observables .) Let A be the
algebra of these observables. 8
Now suppose we take A considered as an abstract algebra (with the norm topology,
i. e. a C ∗-algebra) and discard the Hilbert space. We would still have a great d eal of
dynamical information encoded in the algebraic and topological stru cture of the algebra,
but would have lost the action of the algebra on physical states.
8If we were being mathematically rigorous, we would instead work with t he algebra of bounded func-
tions of the observables, since ˆX and ˆP are unbounded and thus very awkward to work with.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Suppose we try to recover the Hilbert space action. That is, we wish to ﬁnd an iso-
morphism between the abstract algebra A and some subalgebra of the bounded operators
on a Hilbert space H, i. e. a representation9 of A. If this representation turns out to be
unique up to unitary equivalence (an assumption which was often mad e uncritically in the
early days of quantum theory) then we must have recovered the o riginal Hilbert space,
i. e. the representation must be isomorphic to the original choice of Hilbert space and of
observables on it.
In fact, for a system of ﬁnitely many particles the representation is indeed unique —
provided we require it to be irreducible. This last is the requirement that the Hilbert
space does not split into orthogonal subspaces preserved by the action of A. Equivalently,
there must exist in the Hilbert space a cyclic vector whose image under the action of
A is dense in the Hilbert space. Physically this requirement rules out the existence of
superselection rules: superselection sectors can be identiﬁed with the irreducible sectors
of a reducible representation.
By an algebraic quantum theory, we shall mean one which is speciﬁed by giving the
algebraic structure of the observables but not the Hilbert space o n which they act. A
theorem of Stone and Von Neumann tells us that any such quantum t heory with a ﬁnite
number of degrees of freedom — i. e. ﬁnitely many ‘position’ and ‘mome ntum’ observ-
ables, corresponding to a classical theory with a ﬁnite-dimensional phase space — has a
unique irreducible representation (up to unitary equivalence). Hen ce for such systems the
algebraic and Hilbert-space ways of speciﬁcation are equivalent.
4.2 Inﬁnite-dimensional systems
When the number of degrees of freedom of a theory becomes inﬁnit e, the Stone-von
Neumann theorem fails. Such theories generally have a large number of inequivalent
representations, and so giving the algebraic structure does not c ompletely specify the
theory.
Nonetheless it still seems natural to specify a theory algebraically, because
1. The way in which we usually describe a system is to describe its obser vables. Fur-
thermore, a theorem of Fell (see below) tells us that no amount of e mpirical data
can tell us what the ‘real’ representation is.
2. As explained in section 2.2, the ‘quantization’ process begins with t he classical
observables and tries to map them onto quantum-mechanical oper ators. Since in this
process we are trying to impose purely algebraic restrictions on this map (speciﬁcally,
the restriction that Poisson brackets go over to commutators) it will generally specify
9Technically, a representation need not be an isomorphism. However , here we are working with simple
C∗-algebras, for which all irreducible representations are faithful ( i. e. isomorphic to the original algebra).
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
only the algebraic structure of a quantum theory, with an ambiguity left as to the
Hilbert space action. In other words, two quantum theories which a re algebraically
identical could be regarded as equally valid quantizations of the class ical system. 10
If we were to take a robustly instrumentalist viewpoint there would b e no particular
problem: Fell’s theorem says that a ﬁnite number of measurements, each conducted with
ﬁnite accuracy, cannot distinguish between representations. He nce we could reproduce
any experimental results using whichever representation was mos t convenient.11
From a realist standpoint, however, we appear to have a dilemma. Ev en if no empirical
data lets us distinguish between representations, nonetheless th ere should be a fact of the
matter as to which is the ‘correct’ representation; yet it is provab ly impossible for us ever
to discover this fact. To see this, suppose we have two represent ations on Hilbert spaces
H1 and H2, and suppose the ‘real’ representation is the ﬁrst. Then if the sys tem is in
some state |A⟩, Fell’s theorem tells us that
For any operation O carried out with ﬁnite accuracy on |A⟩, there is a state
|O; A⟩ in H2 such that all data resulting from the operation are consistent
with the real representation being on H2 and the real state being |O; A⟩.
In fact, this dilemma will prove only apparent, as we will ﬁnd in the next three sections
when we study representation ambiguities in more detail. To do so, we distinguish two
ways in which inequivalent representations can occur: one associat ed with the short-
distance and high-energy (‘ultra-violet’) degrees of freedom, one with the long-distance
(‘infra-red’) ones. Given our tolerant attitude to short-distance cutoﬀs (c. f. section 3), it
should come as no surprise that all the important sources of inequiv alent representations of
a given QFT fall into the second category: for the Stone-von Neum ann theorem guarantees
uniqueness of representation for any theory with ﬁnitely many deg rees of freedom, and
a ﬁeld theory in any ﬁnite region has only ﬁnitely many degrees of free dom below a
ﬁnite energy bound. We will argue that the ultra-violet representa tion ambiguity is a
pure mathematical artefact, whilst the infra-red ambiguity is phys ically real but non-
pathological.
4.3 Ultra-violet degrees of freedom
It is probably already clear to the reader why we can ignore the ultra -violet representation
ambiguity: UV-inequivalent representations occur because of the existence of degrees of
10Separately from this, of course, we might not in general expect qu antization even to produce a unique
algebraic structure for the quantum observables, because of ambiguities a bout operator ordering.
11It is important in this approach that we have all the observables in th e algebra. If, for instance, the
(renormalized) stress-energy tensor is not in the algebra, then it s values may distinguish representations
(Wald 1994).
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
freedom at arbitrarily short lengthscales, and in section 3 it was arg ued that real QFTs are
cut oﬀ at short, though ﬁnite lengthscales. In particular, the disc retised QFTs of section
3.3 have only ﬁnitely many degrees of freedom per space-time point, and hence no UV-
inequivalent representations. Since renormalisation theory tells us that any QFT is scale-l
equivalent to some such discretised QFT (on lengthscales long compa red to the grid size
for the latter theory), it follows that any occurence of UV-inequiv alent representations is
purely a mathematical artefact and has no physical signiﬁcance.
4.4 Inequivalent representations in non-relativistic phy sics
The physical signiﬁcance of IR-inequivalent representations has lo ng been appreciated in
AQFT; it will be reviewed here from the perspective which this paper a dopts towards
QFT, but with no claim to originality. We begin by returning to non-relat ivistic QM:
imagine a line of n two-state systems — spin-half particles ﬁxed in place, say. The
Hilbert space of each system is two-dimensional, and we can constru ct the overall Hilbert
space by taking the n-fold tensor product. The resulting space will have dimension 2 n,
which is as we expect since we must make n yes-no choices to choose a state with (say)
given spin in the z-direction for each component system.
Now suppose our system becomes inﬁnitely large. The dimension of th e system will
be inﬁnite, of course, but it will be a larger inﬁnity than those to which we are used —
speciﬁcally it will be 2 ℵ0, the cardinality of the continuum, which is strictly larger than
the cardinality ℵ0 of the integers. 12
It follows that systems with inﬁnitely many components have a Hilbert space which
is non-separable (i. e. , has uncountable dimension). To see the con sequences of this,
consider the operator algebra of our set of two-state systems. It consists of the set of
linear combinations of spin operators, and hence has countably man y linearly independent
elements. The action of this algebra on any given state will generate only countably many
linearly independent states, hence the action of the operator alge bra on the total, non-
separable space is highly reducible.
In other words, the non-separable space has decomposed into va rious superselection
sectors (uncountably many, in fact), each giving an irreducible rep resentation of the op-
erator algebra.
To see what these sectors are, suppose we start with all compone nts having spin
up. Then the action of any element of the algebra can, at most, cau se ﬁnitely many
components to have spin down. So no amount of algebraic action can transform such a
state into one in which, say, every second component has spin up. T his state, in turn,
can be transformed into other states diﬀering from it in ﬁnitely many places, but not into
a state in which all components are spin down . . . or every third comp onent is spin down
12See, e. g. , Enderton (1977).
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
. . . or where half the states are spin up but the spin-up states are grouped in pairs . . .
In other words, the diﬀerent representations describe states w hich are ‘inﬁnitely’ diﬀer-
ent from one another (see Morrison (1962) for a full discussion). In statistical mechanics,
diﬀerent representations describe diﬀerent phases, since at arb itrarily large length-scales
— tending to the thermodynamic limit — only the inﬁnite diﬀerences betw een represen-
tations remain visible.
For such systems, of course, the use of diﬀerent representatio ns is an idealization, since
the actual systems are ﬁnite.
4.5 IR-inequivalence in quantum ﬁeld theory
Guided by the nonrelativistic example, we look for inequivalent repres entations in ﬁeld
theory by looking for states diﬀering on asymptotically large scales. The diﬀerence from
the previous section is that here inﬁnite systems are perfectly res pectable: in fact, our
discretised QFTs are eﬀectively inﬁnite crystals.
This resolves the problem mentioned at the start of section 4: what is the connec-
tion between inequivalent representations and the wave-function al approach of section
2.3? The answer is that the space over which the wave-functionals a re deﬁned — the
ﬁeld-conﬁguration-space S — is inﬁnite-dimensional both because functions may vary on
arbitrarily short length-scales, and because they may have arbitr ary large-distance bound-
ary conditions. The former reason is nulliﬁed when a short-distance cutoﬀ is imposed (as
in section 3) but the latter one also interferes with the deﬁnition of t he functional inte-
gral, and has to be dealt with by imposing boundary conditions at inﬁnit y (such as the
requirement that functions in S be square- integrable). Each choice of boundary condition
generates a diﬀerent, and inequivalent, representation.
Examples of inequivalent representations are then:
Diﬀering mass-densities at inﬁnity
The closest analogue to the previous section is the case of states w ith asymptotically
nonvanishing mass density: average density is superselected (Haa g 1996) and diﬀerent
densities correspond to diﬀerent representations. It is worth no ting that this rules out
the Fock representation for an open universe, even a ﬂat one, sin ce any realistic state
of such a universe will have nonzero mass density; the Fock repres entation, which has
ﬁnite-energy states, stands in the same relation to a realistic open -universe representation
as an asymptotically empty classical spacetime does to a realistic ope n cosmology (Wald
1984).
The overall velocity of the universe is also superselected, of cours e, except in the special
case where the (expected value of the) stress-energy tensor is asymptotically diagonal.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Diﬀering total charge
Even when the spacetime is asymptotically empty, inequivalent repre sentations exist. The
total charge of a system leaves its imprint on the spacetime at arbit rarily long distances
in the form of the asymptotic Coulomb ﬁeld, whose ﬂux through a sph ere is independent
of the size of that sphere. As such, total charge is superselecte d (Strocchi and Wightman
1976). (Another way to see this is to remember that ﬁeld lines exten d to inﬁnity, so no
amount of local operations will remove them.)
In fact, the centre-of-mass velocity of a charged system is also s uperselected (Haag
1996), since the asymptotic ﬁeld will be a Lorentz-boosted Coulomb ﬁeld and the associ-
ated magnetic ﬁeld lines also extend to inﬁnity.
Inequivalent vacua
A major component of the Standard Model of particle physics (Pes kin and Schroeder
1995) is the presence of ﬁeld theories with degenerate vacua. Clas sically this corresponds
to the existence of nonzero ﬁeld conﬁgurations which are global min ima of the energy. If
the ﬁeld theory has a continuous global symmetry then there will ex ist a continuum of
vacuum states, wave-packets around which will give us the quantu m ground states. Since
these states diﬀer from one another everywhere in space, they t oo belong to inequivalent
representations.
Changes in the interaction parameters
A famous theorem (Haag’s theorem; see Haag 1996) tells us, in eﬀec t, that interacting
ﬁelds cannot be represented on the same Hilbert space as the corr esponding free ﬁelds,
even when we consider asymptotically early or late ﬁeld operators. I n the current frame-
work this may be understood as follows: introducing the interaction will change the
ground state everywhere in space, causing it to be inﬁnitely diﬀeren t from the free-ﬁeld
ground state and so in a diﬀerent superselection sector.
In fact, and as these examples show, there is not really anything ‘qu antum’ about
IR-inequivalent representations: in many cases, picking a represe ntation is rather like
picking boundary conditions at inﬁnity in a classical problem. The follow ing classical
— and utterly banal — version of Fell’s theorem shows why the ‘dilemma f or realism’
mentioned in section 4.1 is nothing of the kind as far as IR-inequivalent representations
are concerned:
Classical Fell ‘theorem’: the spatial average of a classical quantity over an
inﬁnite universe cannot be empirically determined by measurements c onﬁned
to a ﬁnite spatial region.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
4.6 Retrospective
From a realist perspective the sting of the representation ambiguit y has largely been
drawn. Locally, any representation ambiguity is artiﬁcial, caused by the presence of un-
physical degrees of freedom beyond the high-energy limit of the th eory’s validity. Globally,
there may indeed be representation ambiguities — depending on cosm ology, and the topol-
ogy of the universe — but the inaccessible information which they enc ode is ‘respectable’,
analogous to the classical inaccessibility of the long-distance struc ture of the universe.
Nonetheless it would be more aesthetic to lose the long-distance amb iguity as well.
This can only be done if the universe is ﬁnite. There has long been a divid e between
observational cosmology (favouring an open universe) and theor y (preferring closed uni-
verses); this analysis of representations makes a modest contrib ution to keeping the divide
open.
For the purposes of this paper, representational ambiguities nee d no longer concern
us. In practice we are always analysing a theory in a ﬁnite region — and idealizing the
system beyond that region in whatever manner is convenient — so diﬀ erent choices of
representation should not aﬀect our conclusions.
5 Localisation in quantum ﬁeld theory
The phenomenology of particle physics — and indeed, of virtually all of science — makes
extensive use of the concept of localisation: that is, of the concep t that physical systems
have at least some states which localised in ﬁnite spatial regions. The re are a number
of results in AQFT which apparently rule out the possibility of such sta tes, and this is
sometimes described as a paradox in QFT. In this section the problem of localisation
will be analysed from the viewpoint of the previous sections, and it will be argued that
nothing paradoxical is going on.
In a relativistic theory, there are two natural ways of thinking abo ut localisation:
spatial localisation, where something is localised in some subregion Σ i of a spacelike slice
Σ (and therefore not localised anywhere else in Σ), and spacetime localisation, where
something is localised in some subregion O of spacetime (and therefore not localised in
any region of spacetime spacelike separated from O). The latter concept makes sense in
AQFT (including the scale- l approximate AQFTs of section 3.3); the former needs some
concrete QFT to be interpreted. In this section we will move freely b etween the two
notions, using a discretised QFT where necessary to make sense of spatial localisation,
and relying on renormalisation theory to ensure that we are not mak ing cutoﬀ-dependent
statements.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
5.1 Localisation and the Reeh-Schlieder theorem
We have already established (in section 2.2) that in QFT the idea of loca lisation arises
through the spatial localisation of the ﬁeld observables ˆφ(x) and ˆπ(x) (here, for conve-
nience, we work with a concrete element of the scale- l equivalence class of the QFT in
question). But how are we to go from localised observables to localise d states? We might
begin by trying the following (phrased in terms of spacetime localisatio n):
Naive localisation : A state |ψ⟩ is localised in a region O iﬀ ⟨ψ|ˆA |ψ⟩ = 0
for any observable ˆA localised in a region spacelike separated from O.
This seems plausible when we compare to the classical case: there a s tate is localised
in O if π(x) = φ(x) = 0 for any x spacelike separated from O. But it is mathematically
impossible for any states to satisfy it, for it implies that for any such x = ( x,t ), and for
anyn,
⟨ψ|ˆφ
n
(x,t ) |ψ⟩ = ⟨ψ|ˆπn(x,t ) |ψ⟩ = 0. (17)
But this would imply that |φ⟩ was a simultaneous eigenstate of ˆπ(x) and ˆφ(x), and these
operators have no eigenstates in common (the mathematics, once we have introduced a
cut-oﬀ to deal with operators deﬁned at a point, is the same as for the nonrelativistic
operators ˆX, ˆP , which are well-known to have no eigenstates in common).
Physically it is easy to see what is happening here. The vacuum state o f a ﬁeld theory
(which we will denote by |Ω⟩) is not ‘nothingness’, or ‘empty space’; it is simply a slightly
colourful way of describing the ground state of the ﬁeld’s Hamiltonia n. In solid-state
systems this state is just the zero-temperature state of the so lid, in which the atoms will
not be at rest but will have zero-temperature ﬂuctuations; the s ame will be true for the
ﬁeld excitations of a relativistic ﬁeld theory.
This suggests, however, an alternative: rather than consider st ates which are local
simpliciter, we could consider states which diﬀer only locally. The vacuum could be used
as a reference state, and states could be declared ‘local’ if they diﬀ ered only locally from
the vacuum.
To make this quantitative, we need to understand what it could mean for two quantum
states to ‘diﬀer locally’. Recall that in section 2.3 we deﬁned spatially loc al subsystems
of the QFT, with Hilbert spaces HΣj , which described the degrees of freedom of the
QFT localised in Σ j; this formally deﬁned concept can be exactly deﬁned in discretised
QFT, provided that the grid spacing is small compared to each Σ j. If the vacuum were
a product state with respect to any decomposition of the form HΣ = HΣ1 ⊗ HΣ2 (where
Σ = Σ 1 ∪ Σ2 and Σ 1 ∩ Σ2 = ∅)13 then deﬁning ‘diﬀering locally’ would be straightforward:
the vacuum would have form |Ω⟩ = |Ω1⟩ ⊗ |Ω2⟩, and any state |ψ⟩ could be said to diﬀer
13Since we are working with discretised QFT here, a more accurate sta tement would be ‘all grid points
in Σ are contained either in Σ 1 or Σ 2, and Σ 1 and Σ 2 do not overlap.’
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
from the vacuum only in Σ 1 if (a) |ψ⟩ was also a product state, |ψ⟩ = |ψ1⟩ ⊗ |ψ2⟩, and (b)
|ψ2⟩ = |Ω2⟩.
However, the vacuum is not a product state, but a highly entangled one (this can be
readily seen by calculating expectation values such as
⟨Ω|ˆφ(x)ˆφ(y) |Ω⟩ − ⟨Ω|ˆφ(x) |Ω⟩ ⟨Ω|ˆφ(y) |Ω⟩ (18)
and showing that they are non-zero for all spacelike separated x,y ,14 and is discussed
by Clifton and Halvorson (2001).) As such, deﬁning ‘diﬀering locally’ is s omewhat more
subtle, since it is diﬃcult and even controversial to say what the sta te of a subsystem
of a quantum system is, when the total state of the system is enta ngled. Some possible
deﬁnitions might be:
1. Two states might be said to diﬀer only within Σ 1 if their expectation values coincide
with respect to all operators localised outside Σ 1.
2. We might take the ‘state of a subsystem’ to be the density opera tor obtained when
all degrees of freedom of the other subsystems are traced over . In this case, two
states |ψa⟩ and |ψb⟩ could be said to diﬀer only within Σ 1 if (with TrHΣ1
being
tracing over degrees of freedom inside Σ 1)
TrHΣ1
|ψa⟩ ⟨ψa| = TrHΣ1
|ψb⟩ ⟨ψb|. (19)
3. The problem with the above deﬁnition of the state of a subsystem is that we cannot
then recover the state of the whole system from the states of its components. This
could be taken to indicate the intrinsic nonlocality of quantum states ; this view
was recently rejected by Deutsch and Hayden (2000), who propo se that locality in
quantum mechanics is best understood in the Heisenberg picture. T hey pick a spe-
ciﬁc Hilbert-space vector as a reference state, to be used to calc ulate all expectation
values irrespective of the particular initial conditions and then trea t the quantum
state as being speciﬁed at time t by the set of all Heisenberg operators at time t.
14For a free scalar ﬁeld, with x = (x, t) and y = (y, t) we get
⟨Ω|ˆφ(x)ˆφ(y) |Ω⟩ − ⟨Ω|ˆφ(x) |Ω⟩ ⟨Ω|ˆφ(y) |Ω⟩ = 1
2 (m2 − ∇2)− 1
2 δ(x − y);
smearing ˆφ(x, t) and ˆφ(x, t) out with non-overlapping spatial test-functions f, g, this becomes
1
2
∫
Σ f (x)[(m2 − ∇ 2)− 1
2 g](x). That this is nonzero for generic f, g, irrespective of the spatial separa-
tion of their supports, follows from the antilocality of the operator (m2 − ∇2)− 1
2 (Segal 1964). Adding
interactions to the free ﬁeld will lead to perturbative modiﬁcations t o these results but should not change
their qualitative nature, provided the interactions are weak enoug h at large distance-scales to treat per-
turbatively — hence adding a λφ4 interaction will have only quantitative eﬀect, but adding a coupling
to a non-Abelian gauge ﬁeld may have more drastic consequences.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
The obvious deﬁnition of ‘diﬀering locally’ within this framework is that t wo states
diﬀer only within Σ 1 if they have the same Heisenberg operators outside Σ 1.
4. Leaving aside the question of how to specify the state of a subsy stem, we might
deﬁne two states as diﬀering only within Σ 1 if they are connected by a unitary
operator localised within Σ 1 (such an operator will have form ˆU Σ1 ⊗ˆ1Σ2 acting on
the tensor-product space HΣ = HΣ1 ⊗ HΣ2).
Fortunately, all of these deﬁnitions coincide 15 and this in turn supports the naturalness
of each of them as a deﬁnition of ‘diﬀering locally’. Using the vacuum as o ur reference
state, and using for convenience the ﬁrst deﬁnition, we obtain our deﬁnition of localised
states, which we refer to as Knight localisation after Knight (1961) who ﬁrst proposed
such a deﬁnition. We state it in the more general context of AQFT (f or which reason we
return to spacetime, as opposed to spatial, localisation):
Knight localisation: a state |ψ⟩ is localised in a region O iﬀ ⟨ψ|ˆA |ψ⟩ −
⟨Ω|ˆA |Ω⟩ = 0 for any observable ˆA localised in a region spacelike separated
from O.
However, Knight localisation diﬀers in one important respect from th e sort of locali-
sation which we encounter in NRQM. In the latter, properties like ‘is loc alised in O’ are
treatable in the same way as properties like ‘has energy E’ or ‘has momentum less than p’:
that is, we can deﬁne a projection operator whose intended interp retation is ‘localised in
O’, whose range is the space of all such states. This would be possible f or Knight-localised
states iﬀ they form a subspace: that is, iﬀ any superposition of two states Knight-localised
in O is also Knight-localised in O.
The fact that Knight-localised states do not have this property is a consequence of the
Reeh-Schlieder theorem (Reeh and Schlieder 1961).
Reeh-Schlieder theorem : for any region O, the set of vectors A(O) |Ω⟩
generated by the action of operators localised within O upon the vacuum,
spans the Hilbert space of the QFT.
(For a proof, and further discussion, see Haag 1996.) It follows 16 from the Reeh-Schlieder
theorem that states Knight-localised at O span the entire state space, which rules out
any possibility of a projector meaning ‘localised with certainty in O’.
15The equivalence of (1), (2) and (4) is trivial; the equivalence of (3) a nd (4) is given in Deutsch and
Hayden 2000 (and is, again, trivial once Deutsch and Hayden’s form alism is understood).
16To see that it follows, we need only note that the unitary elements of a (bounded) operator algebra
A(O) span A(O). This can be proved as follows: for any bounded Hermitian element ˆH of A(O), and
any t ⁄= 0, ( it)− 1(exp(itˆH) −ˆ1) is a linear combination of unitary elements of A(O). As t → 0, this
sequence tends to ˆH, hence ˆH is in the span of the unitary operators. To complete the proof, simp ly
recall that any linear operator can be written as ˆA + iˆB, where ˆA and ˆB are Hermitian.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
It has long been understood that the Reeh-Schlieder theorem is a c onsequence of the
entanglement of the QFT vacuum. Non-relativistic quantum mechan ics furnishes us with
many examples where, given an entangled state of the Hilbert space HA ⊗ HB, unitary
operations on HA alone suﬃce to produce a basis for HA ⊗ H B. One example, which
plays an important role in quantum teleportation (Bennett, Brassa rd, Jozsa, Peres, and
Wootters 1993), is the Bell basis : we take a system of two qubits (i. e. , two-state systems)
and prepare them in one of these four states
|B1⟩ = 1√
2 (|0⟩⊗|0⟩ + |1⟩⊗|1⟩)
|B2⟩ = 1√
2 (|0⟩⊗|0⟩ − |1⟩⊗|1⟩)
|B3⟩ = 1√
2 (|1⟩⊗|0⟩ + |0⟩⊗|1⟩)
|B4⟩ = 1√
2 (|1⟩⊗|0⟩ − |0⟩⊗|1⟩)
. (20)
Obviously this is a basis for the combined two-qubit system, but also a ny element of it is
cyclic under unitary operations carried out on the ﬁrst qubit alone, as is easily shown:
(MA ⊗ˆ1) |B1⟩ = |B2⟩
(MB ⊗ˆ1) |B1⟩ = |B3⟩
(MC ⊗ˆ1) |B1⟩ = |B4⟩
(21)
where
MA =
(
1 0
0 −1
)
;MB =
(
0 1
1 0
)
;MC =
(
0 1
−1 0
)
in the ( |0⟩, |1⟩) basis. In other words, even if the qubits are macroscopically sepa rated,
if they begin in an appropriately entangled state then it is possible by o perating on one
qubit to generate a set of states which span the Hilbert space. (Ex amples of this kind are
analysed in rather more detail by Redhead (1995) and Clifton and Ha lvorson (2001).)
Since (as discussed above) the QFT vacuum is entangled, the Reeh- Schlieder theorem
should come as no surprise to us. Nor does it cause any logical problems for Knight’s
deﬁnition of localisation: there are many perfectly respectable pro perties of quantum
states which are not preserved under linear superposition, such a s being an eigenstate of
energy, or being an entangled state.
It does, however, cause us practical problems. The sort of localisation which we
use in NRQM is preserved under linear superpositions, and this fact is essential t o the
analysis of NRQM problems — so, at least on the face of it, NRQM localisa tion and
Knight localisation must be diﬀerent concepts. Nor is the problem con ﬁned to NRQM:
in scattering theory, for instance, it is crucial to be able to discuss the amplitude for
a particle to be scattered to a given area, and such discussions pre suppose that spatial
localisation is preserved under superpositions.
So what is going on? In the face of the Reeh-Schlieder theorem, the re is little prospect
of ﬁnding an alternative to Knight localisation which does have the req uired properties
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
(see Halvorson and Clifton (2001) for a wide variety of no-go theor ems); so, how are
NRQM, and scattering phenomenology, compatible with QFT?
The key to this question is the fact that NRQM is not supposed to be perfectly com-
patible with QFT: rather, it is supposed to be an approximation to QFT valid only in
certain regimes of QFT. (And the same is true for scattering theor y, which is a marvellous
tool to analyse high-energy collisions, but of limited use in understan ding, e. g. , quark
conﬁnement.) With this in mind, we will lower our sights and seek an appr oximate form
of locality which, in certain domains of QFT, will be approximately prese rved under lin-
ear superposition. Section 5.2 will construct such an approximation , and section 5.3 will
address the question of whether it is after all adequate for our ne eds.
5.2 Eﬀective localisation
Our approximate concept of localisation will be deﬁned as follows (it is a gain deﬁned in
terms of spatial localisation, partly for ease of comparison with non relativistic localisa-
tion):
1. Eﬀective localisation (qualitative form): A state |ψ⟩ is eﬀectively
localised in a spatial region Σ i iﬀ for any function ˆf of ﬁeld operators ˆφ,ˆπ,
⟨ψ|ˆf |ψ⟩ − ⟨Ω|ˆf |Ω⟩ is negligibly small when ˆf is evaluated for ﬁeld operators
outside Σ i, compared to its values when evaluated for ﬁeld operators within
Σi.
2. The eﬀective localisation principle (ELP) (qualitative form: A
subspace H of the QFT Hilbert space HΣ obeys the ELP on scale L iﬀ for any
spatial region S large compared with L, a superposition of states eﬀectively
localised in S is eﬀectively localised in eﬀectively the same region.
These qualitative notions can be made precise in a number of ways, su ch as:
1. Eﬀective Localisation (quantitative form): A state is L-localised in a
region Σi, iﬀ for any function ˆf of ﬁeld operators ˆφ,ˆπ, ⟨ψ|ˆf |ψ⟩−⟨Ω|ˆf |Ω⟩ falls
oﬀ for large d like (or faster than) exp( −d/L), where d is the distance from
Σi at which the function ˆ(f ) is evaluated. (Note that there is no diﬀerence,
according to this deﬁnition, between a state L-localised at some spatial point
x and a state L-localised in a region of size ∼L around x.)
2. ELP (quantitative form): A state obeys the ELP on scale L iﬀ, for
any 3-sphere S of radius > L, a superposition of states L-localised in S is
L-localised in S.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
Obviously ELP cannot hold on any scale for the Hilbert space HΣ of the full QFT,
on pain of violating the Reeh-Schlieder theorem (the space of state s eﬀectively localised
in a region obviously includes all those Knight-localised in a region, and a s mentioned in
section 5.1, the span of all such states is the whole of HΣ.) However, if some subspace H
of HΣ is such that:
1. ELP holds, for all regions large compared with some lengthscale L;
2. the current state of the QFT lies within H; and
3. H is approximately conserved, on timescales of interest to us, by the QFT dynamics
then we will, approximately, be able to deﬁne projection operators in H which project
onto states localised in a given region, provided that that region is lar ge compared to L.
(Note that L is nothing to do with the cutoﬀ lengthscale l, except that L must be large
relative to l for our results to be cutoﬀ-independent.)
Why should we expect ELP to hold for any subspaces of HΣ? To answer this, we
need to analyse the entanglement of the vacuum in somewhat more d etail. For if it were
completely non-entangled, ELP would indeed hold for all of HΣ, as argued for above.
We might expect, then, that if the vacuum entanglement drops oﬀ r apidly above certain
distance-scales, then above those scales localisation would be ‘almos t’ preserved under
superposition, and only extremely careful superposition of state s would spoil this; hence,
we would expect it to be fairly typical for a given subspace of HΣ to satisfy ELP on these
lengthscales.
Does vacuum entanglement in fact decrease with distance; equivale ntly, do the cor-
relations in the vacuum decrease with distance? For a massive QFT it c an be shown
that they drop oﬀ exponentially, with the lengthscale given by the ‘Co mpton wavelength’
1/m (where m is the renormalised mass term in the QFT Hamiltonian): this is provable
rigorously for any QFT satisfying the AQFT axioms (Fredenhagen 19 85), and can be
calculated perturbatively in the case of QFTs with weak large-scale in teraction terms.
(QCD, and other theories with strong long-distance interactions, may not be covered by
either case — rather little is known about the QCD vacuum, in fact.)
To see intuitively the signiﬁcance of the 1 /m lengthscale, recall that the Hamiltonian
for a free scalar QFT has the form
ˆHΨ[χ] = 1
2
∫
Σ
d3x
(
δ2
δχ(x)2 + (∇χ)(x)2 +m2χ(x)2
)
Ψ[χ], (22)
and that in a discretised QFT we replace derivative terms like ∇ˆφ(x) with terms like
(φ(x) −φ(x + l))/l, where |l| =l and l is the cutoﬀ length. These discretised derivative
terms are the only ones in the Hamiltonian which lead to entanglement, as they are the
only ones which couple observables at diﬀerent lattice points.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Now there is no requirement that l ≪ 1/m — all we require of l is that it is small com-
pared with the lengthscales at which we want to study the QFT’s stru cture. Admittedly,
if l is smaller than, or comparable to, 1 /m, then the coupling terms ( φ(x) −φ(x + l))/l,
which are responsible for entanglement, will be signiﬁcant relative to the other terms in
the Hamiltonian. However, as l becomes large compared with 1 /m, the coupling terms
become only a small perturbation on the Hamiltonian
ˆHΨ[χ] = 1
2
∫
Σ
d3x
(
δ2
δχ(x)2 +m2χ(x)2
)
Ψ[χ], (23)
which is the Hamiltonian of a set of uncoupled oscillators, one at each la ttice point. Thus,
on such scales we should expect to ﬁnd the ground state only slightly entangled.
So, we expect that for a massive QFT with mass m, we should ﬁnd it to be common
for the ELP to hold for subspaces on lengthscales large relative to 1 /m. Obviously, this
heuristic argument has to be tested for any speciﬁc subspace in wh ich we are interested.
In particular, we ﬁnd it to hold for the one-particle sector of any fr ee (or asymptotically
free) massive bosonic QFT, suggesting that such theories have a q uite satisfactory notion
of particle localisation (this result is proved, and analysed in extenso , in Wallace (2001a)).
For a QFT which describes some massless ﬁelds, the vacuum correlat ion functions still
drop oﬀ with distance, but follow a power-law dropoﬀ rather than an exponential one;
hence there is no characteristic lengthscale on which correlations e xist. This does not rule
out ﬁnding subspaces of the Hilbert space of the QFT for which ELP a pplies on some
useful scale; however, it suggests that the scale will vary accord ing to the speciﬁc problem
being examined.
Furthermore, we expect there to be physically relevant sectors o f at least some mass-
less QFTs in which states are localised only on extremely large lengthsc ales (if at all).
For instance, there should be a low-energy sector of QED in which ele ctron number is ap-
proximately conserved, in which the electromagnetic ﬁeld has eﬀect ively no independent
degrees of freedom, and in which each electron has an associated C oulomb ﬁeld. In such
sectors, the state of the electromagnetic ﬁeld is not really localised at all, or at least not
on any characteristic lengthscale; analysis of such sectors would b e necessary to establish
the validity of ELP for nonrelativistic, interacting particles. (See ch apter VI of Haag
(1996) and references therein for further discussion of the sta te space of QED, from the
perspective of AQFT.)
5.3 The conceptual justiﬁcation of eﬀective localisation
We have now constructed a deﬁnition of localisation which approximat ely has the prop-
erties we wish: that is, it designates a set of states which are appro ximately localised,
and that set is closed under linear superpositions. But is this approx imate localisation
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
good enough? After all, in general ‘eﬀectively localised’ states are n ot exactly localised
— particle states, in particular, invariably diﬀer from the vacuum eve rywhere in space.
It follows that particle creation and annihilation operators cannot b e exactly localised,
which seems to preclude localised particle-detecting devices.
This problems has recently been addressed from an AQFT viewpoint b y Halvorson
and Clifton (2001) (see also Haag (1996) for a more technical discu ssion along similar
lines). Their argument is as follows:
1. What we actually measure are (exactly) local operators.
2. Although particles cannot be detected by measurements of any local operator, they
can be detected by measurements of operators which are very clo se (in operator
norm) to local operators.
3. It follows that to a high degree of accuracy, we can detect particles; however, the
detection will not be 100% reliable.
In their approach,
It is not (strictly speaking) true that we observe particles. Rathe r, there
are ‘observation events’, and these observation events are cons istent (to a
good degree of accuracy) with the supposition that they are brou ght about by
(localizable) particles.(Halvorson and Clifton 2001)
From the perspective of this paper, the problem with this approach is its a priori assump-
tion that what we measure are always exactly localised operators. T his is, of course, an
interpretive axiom of AQFT as it is often presented, but it eﬀectively assumes the presence
of outside observers whose measurements cannot be treated wit hin the ordinary dynamics
of the QFT. We shall instead construct an account which treats ob servers as part of the
internal dynamics of the system (although, apart from that diﬀer ence of emphasis, the
solution below will be rather similar in character to that of Halvorson a nd Clifton).
If we wish instead to treat our QFT as a closed system, and the meas urement process
as part of the internal dynamics of that system, then it is an open q uestion whether or
not we must treat question our measurements as localised. Furthe rmore, we have at least
some reason to think that the answer to the question is negative — f or we believe our
measuring devices (including ourselves) to be made out of particles, and we have already
noted the fact that particles are never exactly localised.
But does it even make sense to consider non-localized measuring dev ices? To see that
it does (at least in some sense), we return (again) to non-relativist ic quantum mechanics.
In NRQM it is unproblematic, at least in principle, to construct measur ement devices
out of atoms. Such devices usually have rather large masses, so de spite the uncertainty
principle they can be put in states whose position and momentum are b oth very sharp.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
In particular, if a measurement device’s momentum is sharply peaked around zero then
the system will eﬀectively remain in a single well-determined region.
But will it exactly remain in that region? The mathematics says not, fo r it is math-
ematically impossible for any centre-of-mass wavefunction to rema in localised in a ﬁnite
spatial region for any ﬁnite period of time. (A rather general proo f of this result has been
given by Hegerfeldt (1998a, 1998b), and is discussed by Halvorson and Clifton (2001).)
This is implicit, in fact, in the wave-functions we usually use in NRQM to de scribe ‘lo-
calised’ systems: they are generally described by fairly sharp Gaus sians, but any Gaussian
— no matter how sharp — is non-zero everywhere in space.
Does this mean that the Geiger counter in my lab has ﬁnite amplitude to be in An-
dromeda? No, for the representation of a quantum object by a Ga ussian state relies on
the fact that the object is not entangled with its environment. But the part of the wave-
function representing the device as (for instance) in the walls of th e lab will obviously
interact with its environment in a rather diﬀerent way from the part which represents the
device as in the middle of the lab. As such, the device should not strict ly speaking be
represented by a pure state at all, but is instead entangled with its s urroundings.
The reason why we do not in practice need to allow for this entangleme nt is that it
is ludicrously small. Consider, for instance, a device of mass m whose centre-of-mass
wave-function has Gaussian form
ψ ∝ exp(−r2/2L2). (24)
If the device is allowed to evolve freely, after some time t the centre-of-mass wave-function
will evolve to
ψ(r,t ) ∝ exp(−r2/2L2
t ) (25)
whereL2
t =L2 +it/2m. The probability density for ﬁnding the particle a distance r from
the origin at time t is
|ψ(r,t )|2 ∝ exp(−r2/D2
t ) (26)
where D2
t = (L4 +t2/4m2)/L2; hence the device’s wave-function will have essentially
constant half-width as long as t ≪ 2mL2. For a one-kilogram device whose initial half-
width is 10 −11m, this means that the half-width will stay approximately constant o n
timescales of order 10 6 years. The probability of ﬁnding the particle in a given volume a
distance r from the origin, compared with the probability of ﬁnding it in a similar-siz ed
volume around the origin, is |ψ(r, 0)|2/|ψ(0, 0)|2 = exp( −r2/L2). If we take r = 1µm,
then this probability ratio is approximately equal to 10 −1010
. Only if we are working to
1010-signiﬁcant-ﬁgure accuracy do we need to allow for terms like this, a nd calculations
are seldom done to such accuracy!
The truth, of course, is that the real state of any realistic model of NRQM is an
entangled mess. It contains no exactly localised objects and no truly isolated subsystems,
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
and there is no chance of working out its exact dynamics. Our actual strategy is t o ﬁnd a
decomposition into subsystems such that they are approximately isolated, and to accept
the errors that may result from this strategy.
We can quantify this by means of the Hilbert-space norm. Let |ψ⟩ be the actual state
of the system, and ˆU (t) the unitary operator generating its actual time evolution. Then
to say that the state is approximately two isolated subsystems (du ring a period of length
T) is to say that:
1. There is some state |∼ψ⟩ = |ψ1⟩⊗|ψ2⟩ such that | ⟨ψ| ∼ ψ⟩ | ≃ 1;
2. There is some unitary operator ˆU ∼(t) = ˆU 1(t) ⊗ ˆU 2(t), such that, for t < T,
| ⟨ψ|ˆU
†
(t)ˆU ∼(t) |∼ψ⟩ | ≃ 1.17
(Note that we are not requiring ˆU ∼(t) ≃ ˆU (t) in any sense; our discussion is entirely
state-dependent.)
If our standard description of a certain complex object (a DNA str and, a Geiger
counter, a computer, whatever) describes it as an isolated objec t, and if isolated subsys-
tems are only ever approximations to the ‘true’ quantum state, it m ight seem that we
should say something like ‘complex objects don’t exist, they only appr oximately exist’.
But this is to misunderstand the status of complex objects in physic s. Such objects are
actually identiﬁed by their structural properties (interacting with other DNA strands in a
certain way, detecting radiation, calculating π, whatever) and such structural properties
can tolerate small amounts of noise. (Put another way, an object which operates like a
computer with 99.999999... % accuracy is still a computer!) From this viewpoint, to say
that a certain complex object is present is to say that making that a pproximation is an
extremely eﬀective method of analysing the dynamics. (See Wallace ( 2001b) for a more
extended discussion of this approach to complex objects).
Localisation enters this framework as a pragmatic criterion for isola tion. If, in the
state |∼ψ⟩ = |ψ1⟩⊗|ψ2⟩, the states |ψ1⟩ and |ψ2⟩ have negligible amplitude to be in the
same spatial location, and if the actual dynamics (as described by ˆU (t)) are generated
by a Hamiltonian in which the inter-particle forces drop oﬀ strongly wit h distance, then
we can apply the isolated-subsystem approximation with considerab le conﬁdence as to its
accuracy; conversely, if at some point this approximation predicts that |ψ1⟩ and |ψ2⟩ have
17There are two simpliﬁcations in this account. Firstly, in general a sta te of NRQM contains large
numbers of identical particles, so the tensor product in (1) should be symmetrised and/or antisymmetrised
to allow for these particles. Secondly, many subsystems (particula rly those of macroscopic dimension)
undergo decoherence, and hence cannot literally be said to be isolat ed in the sense used here. For
systems whose dynamics are regular (i. e. non-chaotic) this is not p articularly signiﬁcant: decoherence
will be signiﬁcant if the system is not in some state of a certain prefer red basis, but if it is in such a state
then the isolated quantum dynamics will fairly accurately predict its e volution. For chaotic systems we
cannot ignore decoherence in this manner (see Zurek (1998b) for details).
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
come to be localised, with high amplitude, in the vicinity of one another, then we should
abandon the approximation from that point onwards.
This means that — not withstanding the existence in NRQM of a precise ly deﬁnable
position operator — we should treat the spatial location of a given ob ject as approximate.
It is not that my Geiger counter is localised in a number of exact locatio ns with diﬀerent
amplitudes for each; rather, it is determinately 18 localised in some approximately-deﬁned
location. The exponentially small tails of the centre-of-mass wavef unction are totally
irrelevant to any considerations of the counter’s spatial location, for it is only in the
approximation where these are neglected that we can treat the Ge iger counter as isolated
anyway.
Before applying these ideas to QFT, we should acknowledge a lacuna in the argument:
we have assumed that the Hilbert-space norm is the appropriate me asure of closeness of
approximation, but what justiﬁes this assumption? From a purely ma thematical point
of view, to be sure, it is an extremely obvious choice: it is a very natur al metric on
the space of states, and the unitarity of Hilbert-space dynamics m eans that the Hilbert-
space distance between two points is time-invariant. But the situat ion is more complicated
than this: Reutsche (1998) (writing in the context of the modal int erpretation of quantum
mechanics) points out that whilst a state like
α |Spin up⟩ +β |Spin down⟩ (27)
(where α ≃ 1 and β ≃ 0) may legitimately be regarded as ‘almost’ a spin-up state, it is
highly problematic to suppose that a macroscopic superposition like
α |Living cat⟩ +β |Dead cat⟩ (28)
is almost a live cat, whatever the values of α and β. She describes this sort of ap-
proximation (borrowing her terminology from Teller 1984) as “ontolo gical distortion”, as
against the mere “numerical distortion” that occurs when, say, t he position of a classical
particle is predicted with slight inaccuracy: a macroscopic superpos ition is not (prima
facie) even approximately the same as a system in a macroscopically d eﬁnite state, but
an ontologically new and problematic entity.
It is now clear that justifying the use of the Hilbert-space norm in th is way takes us into
the murky waters of the quantum measurement problem. We can se e this another way by
considering how easily an instrumentalist could dismiss our worries: fr om his perspective,
the empirical content of the Hilbert-space norm is simply given by the probabilities of
measurements to yield certain results, and states diﬀering only ver y slightly in Hilbert
space will give only slightly diﬀerent probabilities for a given outcome on measurement. It
18No comment on the measurement problem is intended here; Everett ians should read this as ‘deter-
minately localised relative to the branch which we are considering’.
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
is the illegitimacy of using “measurement” as a primitive concept in our a pproach which
causes the diﬃculties.
In fact (staying in the non-relativistic domain) our problem is very clo sely related to
some standard foundational questions in a number of interpretat ions:
• In the modal interpretation (van Fraassen 1991; Dieks and Verma as 1998) the ques-
tion is essentially equivalent to the Albert-Loewer (Albert and Loewe r 1990, 1991;
Albert 1992) problem of vagueness, discussed by Reutsche (1998 ) (see also references
therein): the idea of a modal interpretation is to pick out a certain s et of properties
as deﬁnite, whilst it seems likely that the properties actually picked ou t are slightly
diﬀerent from the “right” ones — where ‘slightly’ means ‘slightly in Hilber t-space
norm’. The standard (‘vague property’) response to this is to repla ce precise prop-
erties (like spatial localisation) with a family of ‘vague’ properties, all very close in
Hilbert-space norm to the ‘precise’ property under consideration .19
• In collapse interpretations such as those of Ghirardi, Rimini, and Web er (1986) and
Pearle (1989) the question is equivalent to the ‘problem of tails’ (Albe rt and Loewer
1996): the collapse mechanism is generally chosen to cause the wave -function to
be sharply peaked around a given spatial position but it is impossible to construct
mechanisms which prevent the wave-function having exponential t ails extending
to inﬁnity. The problem of tails can be addressed (Albert and Loewer 1996) by
postulating some rule such as “a particle is localised in spatial region R if the squared
modulus of the wave-function integrated over R exceeds (1 −p)”, where p is taken
as small. There has been recent controversy (Lewis 1997; Ghirard i and Bassi 1999;
Bassi and Ghirardi 1999, Clifton and Morton 1999, 2000) as to whe ther this rule
should be understood as a metaphysical principle (which leads to diﬃc ulties both
because of the arbitrariness of p and because of alleged failures of the arithmetic of
macroscopic objects) or, as advocated by Clifton and Monton (19 99), as a mere facon
de parler useful in describing the wave-function (in which case there is presu mably
need for a defence of treating the tails as irrelevant to observatio nal predictions).
• From the viewpoint of the Everett interpretation (at least in the fo rm advocated by
the author (Wallace 2001b; Wallace 2001d), which is essentially that d eveloped by
Zurek(most explicitly in Zurek 1998a) and Saunders (1995, 1996, 1 998)) our problem
19In fact, the considerations of this section suggest a more serious problem for the modal interpretation:
the very concept of macroscopic (non-relativistic) subsystems is threatened by wave-function spreading.
Reutsche (1998) discusses a library book, localised approximately in her oﬃce but with exponential
tails giving it a nonzero amplitude to be anywhere in space, and claims th at such a book ‘is in no way
compatible with my ordinary notion of located in my oﬃce ’ ((Reutsche 1998, p. 233); italics hers) — but
in fact, the interaction of those tails with the walls of the oﬃce will lead to the sort of rapid interaction
that removes any prospect of distinguishing ‘book’ and ‘wall’ subsys tems.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
is that of justifying the neglect of parts of the wave-function of e xtremely low weight.
This is essentially the probability problem of Everett interpretations : what justiﬁes
our strategy of disregarding low-weight branches when making dec isions?
Although expanding on these rather brief comments would take us d eep into interpre-
tational questions and far beyond the scope of this paper, it seem s likely that (at least
for the interpretations above) a resolution of the quantum measu rement problem would
include a justiﬁcation of the Hilbert-space norm as the appropriate measure of approxi-
mation. This seems particularly certain in the Everett interpretatio n, which is probably
the interpretational program most naturally extendible to QFT and most in keeping with
the spirit of this paper.
Given an interpretational justiﬁcation of our use of the Hilbert-sp ace norm, the con-
cepts above carry through to QFT with only minor changes. The dyn amical impossibility
of constructing exactly isolated subsystems in NRQM becomes a kine matic impossibility
in QFT if we consider the spatially localised subsystems HΣi, but for essentially the same
reasons: interactions between those subsystems are so prevale nt that the energy cost of
constructing non-entangled states would take us out of the doma in of validity of the QFT
altogether. Also, in QFT it is even more apparent than in NRQM that ob jects can only
be deﬁned approximately unless they are isolated, for all that exist in QFT are the ﬁeld
observables, excitations of them, and patterns in those excitatio ns, and if two patterns
overlap and interact then there can be no exact criteria for individu ating them. And in
QFT there are no action-at-a-distance interactions, so spatial lo cation is an even better
criterion for isolation: two subsystems can be treated as isolated iﬀ they are eﬀectively
localised in spatially separated regions.
Consequently, the approximate criteria developed above for NRQM apply just as well
in QFT. In particular, QFT particles (unlike NRQM particles, which are p art of the basic
formalism) are themselves just certain patterns of excitations in t he ﬁelds. As such, the
appropriate concept of localisation for them is approximate, and so perfectly adequately
treated by the methods of section 5.2. If we say, for instance, th at a particle is localised
in (spatial) region Σ i, and that the region in the vicinity of Σ i is empty, then what we
mean is:
• that the ﬁeld state restricted to Σ i coincides almost exactly with the restriction to
Σi of some state in the one-particle Hilbert space H1P ;
• that in the region surrounding Σ i the ﬁeld state almost coincides with the vacuum.
These requirements are perfectly consistent with the actual ﬁeld state being that of a
particle (or of a particle together with some other excitations, cre ated by operators strictly
localised far from Σ i); they are also consistent with the actual state itself being strict ly
(i. e. , Knight-) localised in Σ i. The point is, we neither know nor care: diﬀerent ways
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
of realising the requirements just mean diﬀerent — but tiny — amount s of noise added
to our highly-accurate description of the quantum state and of its dynamics. Ditto for
particle detectors: there is no more need (and no more prospect) to regard them as e xactly
localised, provided that they are very well localised. If we model suc h a detector as made
out of particles then that model will describe it as diﬀering from the v acuum all the way
to inﬁnity, but it will also describe those diﬀerences as incredibly small beyond a certain
very-well-deﬁned, but not precisely deﬁned, region. Then if the actual state of the QFT
is almost the same as that of the model within that region, and is almos t the same as the
vacuum outside that region, then the criterion has been met for us to say that the region
contains a detector. 20
6 Conclusion
This completes our analysis of Lagrangian QFTs. We have argued tha t such QFTs can be
made into perfectly well-deﬁned quantum theories provided we take the high-energy cutoﬀ
absolutely seriously; that the multiple ways of doing this are not in con ﬂict provided that
we understand them as approximations to the structure of some d eeper, as yet unknown
theory; that the existence of inequivalent representations is not a problem; that a concept
of localisation can be deﬁned for such theories which is adequate to a nalyse at least
some of the practical problems with which we are confronted; and t hat the inexactness
inherent in that concept is neither unique to relativistic quantum mec hanics, nor in any
way problematic.
If there is one underlying theme to the approach to QFT advocated in this paper, it
is this: the sort of information which we are interested in getting fro m physical theories
is structural information. The reason that states with isolated su bsystems approximate
real quantum states well (both kinematically and dynamically) is beca use the two have
virtually the same structure; the reason that we can be indiﬀerent as to which concrete
realisation of a scale- l AQFT to use is that structurally they are all virtually identical
(at least until we get to scales of order l, at which point we no longer believe that any of
them give us valid structural information).
The need to understand theories in structural terms is not restr icted to QFT, but it is
more starkly obvious there. It is not just that QFT is strictly speak ing false, or that it is
expected to be replaced someday by a deeper ‘theory X’; that is tru e for virtually every
physical theory we study. It is rather that — if Wilson’s approach to renormalization is
taken seriously — QFT only makes sense if we include in it some vestigial a spects of the
20We could, to be sure, deﬁne a detector as being present if the QFT s tate is almost the same as the
model state within the localisation region, and exactly the same as the vacuum outside it — but what
would be the justiﬁcation for so doing? We don’t have any reason to s uppose that actual lab detectors
are precisely localised in this way.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
very theory which we expect to replace it.
From this viewpoint, we can see that Lagrangian QFT (as I have defe nded it) is not
really in conﬂict with AQFT at all. Success in the AQFT program would leav e us with
a ﬁeld theory exactly deﬁned on all scales, and such a theory would b e a perfectly valid
choice for ‘theory X’: furthermore, even if we found such an exact QFT it would not
prevent us from deﬁning low-energy, ‘eﬀective’ QFTs — which would n ot be well deﬁned
without a cutoﬀ; nor, probably, would it obviate the need for these theories in describing
certain low-energy limits of X.
If AQFT has any rival programs, in fact, they are string theory an d other theory-of-
everything candidates. Success in any of these programs would, o f course, revolutionise
physics, but that success would scarcely change the current sta tus of Lagrangian QFT: as
an inherently approximate, but nonetheless extraordinarily power ful tool to analyse the
deep structure of the world.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Simon Saunders, whose own work on the foundat ions of QFT
prompted my interest in the subject; and Jeremy Butterﬁeld for m any useful comments
on an earlier draft of this paper. I have also beneﬁtted greatly fro m conversations with Ian
Aitchison, James Binney, Katherine Brading, Keith Burnett, Peter Morgan, and Andrew
Steane.
References
Abraham, R. and J. Marsden (1978). Foundations of Mechanics (2nd Edition ed.).
Reading, Mass.: Benjamin/Cummings.
Albert, D. (1992). Quantum mechanics and experience . Cambridge, Massachussets:
Harvard University Press.
Albert, D. and B. Loewer (1990). Wanted dead or alive: two attemp ts to solve
Schr¨ odinger’s paradox. In A. Fine, M. Forbes, and L. Wessels (Ed s.), Proceedings
of the 1990 Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Ass ociation, Volume 1,
pp. 277–285. East Lansing, Michigan: Philosophy of Science Associa tion.
Albert, D. and B. Loewer (1991). The measurement problem: some ‘solutions’. Syn-
these 86 , 87–98.
Albert, D. and B. Loewer (1996). Tails of Schr¨ odinger’s cat. In R. Clifton (Ed.), Per-
spectives on Quantum Reality , pp. 81–92. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Barbour, J. (1999). The End of Time . London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
Barbour, J. B. (1994a). The timelessness of quantum gravity: I. the evidence from the
classical theory. Classical and Quantum Gravity 11 , 2853–2873.
Barbour, J. B. (1994b). The timelessness of quantum gravity: Ii. the appearence of
dynamics in static conﬁgurations. Classical and Quantum Gravity 11 , 2875–2897.
Bassi, A. and G. Ghirardi (1999). More about dynamical reduction and the enumeration
principle. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 50 , 719–734. Available online
at http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9907050.
Bennett, C. H., G. Brassard, R. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W. K. Woott ers (1993). Tele-
porting an unknown quantum state via dual classical and Einstein-P odolsky-Rosen
channels. Physical Review Letters 70 , 1895–1898.
Binney, J. J., N. J. Dowrick, A. J. Fisher, and M. E. J. Newman (1992 ). The Theory of
Critical Phenomena : an introduction to the renormalisatio n group. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Buchholz, D. (2000). Algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory: a status rep ort. Plenary talk
given at the XIIIth International Conference on Mathematical P hysics, London.
Available online at http://xxx.arxiv.org/math-ph/0011044.
Cao, T. Y. (1997). Conceptual Developments of 20th Century Field Theories . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carlip, S. (1998). Quantum Gravity in 2+1 Dimensions . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Castellani, E. (2000). Reduction, emergence, and eﬀective ﬁeld th eories. Forthcoming
in Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics . Available online from
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/.
Clifton, R. and H. Halvorson (2001). Entanglement and open syste ms in algebraic
quantum ﬁeld theory. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 32 ,
1–31. Available online at http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0001 107.
Clifton, R. and B. Monton (1999). Losing your marbles in wavefunct ion collapse theo-
ries. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 50 , 697–717. Available online at
http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9905065.
Clifton, R. and B. Monton (2000). Counting marbles with ‘accessible’ mass density:
a reply to Bassi and Ghirardi. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 51 ,
155–164. Available online at http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9 909071.
Deutsch, D. (1984). Towards a quantum theory without ‘quantiza tion’. In S. Chris-
tensen (Ed.), Quantum Theory of Gravity: essays in honour of Bryce S. DeWit t,
pp. 421–430. Bristol: Adam Hilger Ltd.
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
Deutsch, D. (1985). Quantum Theory as a Universal Physical The ory. International
Journal of Theoretical Physics 24 (1), 1–41.
Deutsch, D. and P. Hayden (2000). Information Flow in Entangled Q uantum Systems.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A456 , 1759–1774. Available online at
http://www.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9906007.
Dieks, D. and P. E. Vermaas (Eds.) (1998). The Modal Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Enderton, H. B. (1977). Elements of Set Theory . San Diego, California: Academic
Press.
Fredenhagen, K. (1985). A remark on the cluster theorem. Communications in Mathe-
matical Physics 97 , 461–463.
Ghirardi, G. and A. Bassi (1999). Do dynamical reduction models imp ly that arithmetic
does not apply to ordinary macroscopic objects? British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science 50 , 705–720. Available online at http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-
ph/9810041.
Ghirardi, G., A. Rimini, and T. Weber (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for micro and macro
systems. Physical Review D 34 , 470–491.
Haag, R. (1996). Local Quantum Theory: Fields, Particles, Algebras . Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.
Halvorson, H. and R. Clifton (2001). No place for particles in relativis tic quantum
theories? Available online at http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0 103041.
Hartmann, S. (2000). Eﬀective ﬁeld theories, reductionism and sc ientiﬁc explanation.
Forthcoming in Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics . Available
online from http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/.
Hegerfeldt, G. A. (1998a). Causality, particle localization and posit ivity of the energy.
In A. B¨ ohm (Ed.),Irreversibility and Causality , pp. 238–245. New York: Springer.
Hegerfeldt, G. A. (1998b). Instantaneous spreading and Einste in causality. Annalen der
Physik 7 , 716–725.
Knight, J. M. (1961). Strict localisation in quantum ﬁeld theory. Journal of Mathemat-
ical Physics 2 , 459.
Ladyman, J. (1998). What is Structural Realism. Studies in the History and Philosophy
of Science 29 , 409–424.
Lewis, P. J. (1997). Quantum mechanics, orthogonality, and coun ting. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science 48 , 313–328.
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
Marsden, J. E. and T. S. Ratiu (1994). Introduction to Mechanics and Symmetry . New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Morrison, H. L. (1962). The Quantum Theory of Many-Particle Systems . New York:
Gordon and Breach Science Publishers.
Newton, T. D. and E. P. Wigner (1949). Localized states for elemen tary particle physics.
Reviews of Modern Physics 21 , 400.
Pearle, P. (1989). Combining stochastic dynamical state-vector reduction with sponta-
neous localization. Physical Review A 39 (5), 2277–2289.
Peskin, M. E. and D. V. Schroeder (1995). An introduction to Quantum Field Theory .
Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.
Psillos, S. (1995). Is Structural Realism the Best of Both Worlds? Dialectica 49, 15–46.
Redhead, M. (1995). More ado about nothing. Foundations of Physics 25 , 123.
Reeh, H. and S. Schlieder (1961). Bemerkungen zur unit¨ ar¨ aquivalenz von lorentzinvari-
anten feldern. Nuovo Cimento 22 , 1051.
Reutsche, L. (1998). How close is ‘close enough’ ? See Dieks and Ver maas (1998), pp.
223–240.
Saunders, S. (1995). Time, Decoherence and Quantum Mechanics . Synthese 102 , 235–
266.
Saunders, S. (1996). Time, Quantum Mechanics and Tense. Synthese 107 , 19–53.
Saunders, S. (1998). Time, Quantum Mechanics, and Probability. Synthese 114 , 373–
404.
Segal, I. (1964). Quantum ﬁelds and analysis in the solution manifolds of diﬀerential
equations. In W. Martin and I. Segal (Eds.), Analysis in Function Space, Cambridge,
Massachusets. MIT Press.
Strocchi, F. and A. S. Wightman (1976). Journal of Mathematical Physics 17 , 1930.
Teller, P. (1984). The projection postulate: a new perspective. Philosophy of Science 51 ,
369–395.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1991). Quantum Mechanics . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wald, R. M. (1984). General Relativity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wald, R. M. (1994). Quantum Mechanics on Curved Space-Time and Black Hole Ther-
modynamics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wallace, D. (2001a). Emergence of particles from bosonic quantum ﬁeld theory. Avail-
able online at http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0112149 or fro m http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu.
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
Wallace, D. (2001b). Everett and structure. To appear in Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics ; available online at http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-
ph/0107144 or from http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu.
Wallace, D. (2001c). Implications of quantum theory in the foundat ions of statistical
mechanics. Available online from http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu.
Wallace, D. (2001d). Worlds in the Everett interpretation. Forthc oming in
Studies in the history and philosophy of modern physics ; available on-
line at http://www.arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0103092 or from http ://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu.
Wilson, K. G. and J. Kogut (1974). The renormalization group and th e ǫ expansion.
Physics Reports 12C .
Woodhouse, N. M. J. (1991). Geometric Quantization . Oxford: Oxford Science Publi-
cations.
Worrall, J. (1989). Structural Realism: the Best of Both Worlds. Dialectica 43 , 99–
124. Reprinted in The Philosophy of Science , D. Papineau (Ed. ), Oxford University
Press, 1996, pp. 139–165.
Zurek, W. (1998a). Decoherence, einselection and the existentia l interpretation (the
rough guide). Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A 356,
1793–1820.
Zurek, W. H. (1998b). Decoherence, chaos, quantum-classical correspondence, and
the algorithmic arrow of time. Phys. Scripta T76 , 186–198. Available online at
http://xxx.arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9802054.
43
