===== PAGE 1 =====
Start
Elementary Einstein
Special relativity
General relativity
Gravitational waves
Black Holes & Co.
Cosmology
Relativity and the Quantum
Spotlights on relativity
Special relativity
General relativity
Gravitational waves
Black Holes & Co.
Cosmology
Relativity and the Quantum
Complete Spotlights
About Einstein Online
The concept of EO
About Albert Einstein
About Us
Contributing Institutions
FAQ
Copyright policy
Contact
Essentials
Links
Glossary
Further reading
Glossary
More than 400 keywords from relativity and related topics, from “absolute zero” to
“XMM Newton” – please use the menu on the left to choose a letter.

===== PAGE 2 =====
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y |
Z
absolute zero
The lowest possible temperature. It is the point where particles reach their minimum
of vibrational motion. For instance, the temperature of a gas is proportional to the
average kinetic energy of the moving molecules or atoms. In classical terms,
absolute zero would be reached when the gas particles do not move anymore.
According to quantum mechanics the particles still retain a minimum motion,
induced by lowest possible energy state that a quantum mechanical system may
have and which fluctuates according to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
On the usual temperature scales, absolute zero is at -459.67 degrees Fahrenheit or
-273.15 degrees Celsius. By definition of the Kelvin scale, absolute zero is at zero
Kelvin.
abundances of elements
What portion of atomic matter in the universe is made up of hydrogen atoms? What
fraction takes the form of helium, and how abundant are the other chemical
elements? Questions like these are interesting in the context of relativity theory
because the relativistic big bang models predict how many nuclei of light elements
(mainly deuterium, helium, lithium) should have formed in the early universe
during the phase known as Big Bang Nucleosynthesis. A brief account of this phase
can be found in the spotlight text Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, while Equilibrium and
change provides more information about the physical processes involved.
Measuring the abundances for these elements and subtracting the estimate for how
many such nuclei formed inside stars (stellar nucleosynthesis) makes for an
important test of this prediction and thus of the big bang models themselves. More
information is provided by the spotlight text Elements of the past.
acceleration
Every change of velocity with time is an acceleration.
This definition is slightly different from our everyday usage of the word. Ordinarily,
we talk of an object accelerating when it becomes faster and faster. The physics
definition covers two more situations. An object that decelerates, becomes slower,
thus changes its velocity and, in the physics sense, undergoes a (negative)
acceleration. Also, in physics, velocity is not the same as speed. A constant velocity
implies not only constant speed, but also a constant direction of movement. Once
the direction changes, so does the velocity – the change in velocity is associated
with the change in the direction of movement. Thus, in the physics sense, even a car
going around a curve of the road at constant speed undergoes acceleration.
accretion
When gas, dust or other kinds of matter fall towards a compact object (such as a
black hole or a neutron star), a disk of infalling matter forms around the central
object called the accretion disk.
The energy that matter gains in its fall is transformed into heat energy of the disk
matter. Consequently, accretion disks are, as a rule, extremely hot. Their thermal

===== PAGE 3 =====
radiation they emit is an important tool for indirect observation of neutron stars and
black hole.
Within the disk, matter spirals around and around, coming closer and closer to the
central object until at last it falls onto its surface (or, in the case of a black hole,
through its event horizon).
Synonyms: accretion disk
action-at-a-distance
Forces acting from one location to another without the need for any material
connection, and without any delay – for instance, the Newtonian gravitational force
with which even distant bodies in empty space can exert influence on each other.
active galactic nuclei (AGN)
The innermost regions of young galaxies can be very active and radiate
considerable amounts of energy. Examples for such active galactic nuclei are radio
galaxies and quasars.
In current models, the energy source powering activities of such nuclei, is a
supermassive black hole in the galactic centre.
age of the universe
Another word for cosmic time, the time coordinate of the big bang models: time as
measured by clocks that are at rest relative to the expanding space, and that have
been set to zero at the very beginning, the time of the hypothetical big bang
singularity.
aggregate state
See under states of matter.
Albert Einstein Institute
One of the research institutes of the Max Planck Society; an international centre for
research on Einstein’s theory of gravity – from the mathematical fundamental,
astrophysics and gravitational waves to quantum gravity. Founded in 1995, the
institute is situated in Golm near Potsdam in Germany. In 2002, the experimental
branch of the institute was opened in Hannover. It is dedicated to research with the
gravitational wave detector GEO 600 .
AEI webpages
Website of AEI-Hannover
Synonyms: Max Planck Institute for gravitational physics AEI
alpha particle
Alternative expression for the naked (i.e. stripped of electrons) atomic nucleus of
the element helium consisting of two protons and two neutrons.

===== PAGE 4 =====
amplitude
For a physical quantity that changes periodically, the amplitude is a measure of how
much the quantity changes from maximum to minimum. The simplest example is a
sine oscillation. Over time, the sine curve oscillates between its minimum and its
maximum values and the amplitude measures how big this oscillation is. There are
different ways of defining amplitude. Some definitions use the Peak-to-peak
difference for the amplitude (Maximum of the signal minus Minimum of the
signal). Other definitions for signals with values centered symmetrically around
zero specify the amplitude as the maximum value of the signal (Half of the Peak-to-
peak amplitude).
Depending on the nature of the oscillation or wave, the amplitude will have
different meanings. For a pendulum swinging back and forth, the amplitude is the
maximum angle between the vertical direction and the pendulum string. For an
electromagnetic wave, the amplitude is the maximal value of the electric field or
equivalently (since the two maxima are related) the maximum of the magnetic field.
For a (weak) gravitational wave, the amplitude is a direct measure of the changes in
distance caused by the wave – as a simple gravitational wave of amplitude A passes,
there are two directions in which distances are alternately stretched by up to a factor
(1+A/2) and compressed by a factor (1-A/2).
The amplitude can change over time. For instance, for an ordinary pendulum, air
friction will slow the pendulum bob down, and for each period – for each time the
pendulum bob travels back and forth – the amplitude will be less than for the
previous period. For a wave, the amplitude will also in general vary with location.
Typically, the amplitude of a wave will decrease with the distance from the wave’s
source.
angular momentum
A conserved physical quantity associated with the rotation of an object.
In classical physics, the contribution of each part of a body to the body’s total
angular momentum is the part’s mass times its distance from the axis of rotation,
times the part’s speed component which points in the direction of rotation and is
perpendicular to the axis of rotation.
More information can be found in the spotlight text What figure-skaters, planets,
and neutron stars have in common.
In the context of general relativity, angular momentum is an interesting quantity in
the physics of black holes. More information about this can be found in the
spotlight text How many kinds of black holes are there?
anti-particle
As a general rule, theories uniting special relativity and quantum theory predict the
existence of a species of anti-particle for every species of particle. For instance, if
such a theory contains electrons, then it also contains their anti-particles, called
positrons, for protons, there are anti-protons, and so on.
It is a universal feature of anti-particles that they have the same mass as
corresponding particles, and equal, but opposite charges; for examples, electrons
and positrons have the same mass, but the electrons carry negative electric charge,

===== PAGE 5 =====
whereas positrons carry the exact same amount of positive electric charge. For
particles that carry no charges of any kind, particles and anti-particles are identical.
Synonyms: anti-matter, anti-particles
aphelion
For a planet or other heavenly body orbiting the sun on an elliptic orbit, that point
of the orbit farthest from the sun. The point closest to the sun is the perihelion. In
the context of general relativity, aphelion and perihelion are of great interest as that
theory predicts a slight motion of these points around the sun, cf. (relativistic)
perihelion shift.
arcminute
Synonyms: minute of arc, second of arc. Subdivisions of an angle, analogous to
subdivisions of time: Sixty arcseconds correspond to one arcminute; sixty
arcminutes (or 3600 arcseconds) correspond to one degree. A right angle has 90
degrees, or 5400 arcminutes, or 324000 arcseconds.
To denote fractions of these units, a prefix is added in the usual way – for instance,
one thousandth of a second of arc is a millisecond of arc.
Synonyms: arcsecond
astronomical unit
Unit of length used by astronomers for distances in and around the solar system; the
average distance from the earth to the sun. Abbreviation: au.
Concrete value:
1 au = 149.597870700 million kilometres
= 92.955807 miles
= 8.3 light minutes.
atom
All matter we encounter in everyday life consists of smallest units called atoms –
the air we breath consists of a wildly careening crowd of little groups of atoms, my
computer’s keyboard of a tangle of atom chains, the metal surface it rests on is a
crystal lattice of atoms. All the variety of matter consists of less than hundred
species of atoms (in other words: less than a hundred different chemical elements).
Every atom consists of an nucleus surrounded by a cloud of electrons. Nearly all of
the atom’s mass is concentrated in its nucleus, while the structure of the electron
cloud determines how the atom can bind to other atoms (in other words: its
chemical properties). Every chemical element can be defined via a characteristic
number of protons in its nucleus. Atoms that have lost some of their usual number
of electrons are called ions. Atoms are extremely small (typical diametres are in the
region of tenths of a billionth of a metre = 10-10 metres), and to describe their
properties and behaviour, one has to resort to quantum theory.

===== PAGE 6 =====
atomic nucleus
See nucleus.
Auger observatory
See Pierre Auger Observatory.
baryon
In particle physics: collective expression for particles that fundamentally consist of
three quarks. The most important examples are protons and neutrons.
In cosmology, the word denotes ordinary matter in contrast with more exotic forms
of matter that the greatest part of dark matter is thought to consist of. This usage
comes about because cosmologists are mainly interested in what percentage of mass
in the universe is represented by ordinary matter. The mass of ordinary matter is
mostly contained in atomic nuclei, and these nuclei are built of baryons (protons
and neutrons), the total baryonic mass is, to good approximation, the same as the
total mass of ordinary matter in any region of our universe.
big bang
The big bang models are the foundation of modern cosmology. Firmly grounded in
Einstein’s theory of general relativity, they describe a universe that began in a very
hot initial state and has expanded (and cooled down) ever since. They make precise
predictions about nucleosynthesis in the early universe, the existence and properties
of the cosmic background radiation, and the distribution of distant galaxies in the
cosmos, which have been confirmed by astronomical observation.
The word “big bang” has two different meanings. In a strict sense, the big bang is a
spacetime singularity, a state of infinite density – the initial state the big bang
models predict for our universe. In a more general sense, the term is applied to the
earliest cosmic eras, in which the universe was exceedingly hot and dense. Further
information about these two meanings and why it is important to distinguish
between them can be found in the spotlight text A tale of two big bangs.
The basic features of the big bang models are reviewed in the chapter Cosmology of
Elementary Einstein.
Selected aspects of cosmology are described in the category Cosmology of our
Spotlights on relativity.
Big Bang Nucleosynthesis
Synonym: primordial nucleosynthesis. The formation of complicated nuclei from
constituents such as protons and neutrons in the early universe. According to the big
bang models, the early universe was filled with a particle soup of protons and
neutrons. At cosmic times between a few seconds and a few minutes, nuclear
reactions produced the first light elements, mainly nuclei of deuterium, different
varieties of helium and lithium. Heavier nuclei up to those of iron formed and
continue to form in the course of fusion processes inside stars; nuclei that are even
more massive form in the course of supernova explosions. These explosions also
serve to disseminate the complex nuclei formed inside stars (stellar
nucleosynthesis) in space.

===== PAGE 7 =====
A brief account of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be found in the spotlight text Big
Bang Nucleosynthesis, while Equilibrium and change provides more information
about the physical processes involved and Elements of the past describes how the
predictions of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be tested against astronomical
observation.
binary star
A system consisting of two stars in orbit around each other. From a relativistic point
of view, there are binaries that are of special interest, namely those in which at least
one of the partners is a neutron star or a black hole. Potentially, such systems are
effective sources of gravitational waves.
Synonyms: binary
binding energy
The energy needed to break up a composite object into its component parts.
More about binding energy, the mass defect it is responsible for and its role in
nuclear fission and nuclear fusion can be found in our spotlight topic Is the whole
the sum of its parts?
Birkhoff’s theorem
A theorem of general relativity, discovered by J. T. Jebsen (1921) and independently
discovered, and named after, George D. Birkhoff (1923): Any spherically
symmetric spacetime has the same properties as some region from one of a simple
family of spacetimes found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916. More concretely: The
spherically symmetric spacetime around any spherically symmetric matter
configuration (approximately, in good approximation, the earth) has the same
properties as spacetime around a Schwarzschild black hole of the appropriate mass.
BKL conjecture
Conjecture by the Soviet physicists Vladimir Belinskii, Isaak Khalatnikov and
Evgeny Lifshitz that, near a singularity, the contribution of matter to gravity
becomes negligible compared with the effects of gravity as a source of further
gravity (compare the spotlight text The gravity of gravity), and that near a
singularity, the variation of the gravitational field from one location to the next can
be neglected – what is much more important is the way gravity changes over time.
Further information about this can be found in the spotlight text Of singularities and
breadmaking.
black hole
Region in space where a sufficient amount of mass is concentrated so that it forms a
gravitational prison – a region into which matter or light can enter from the outside,
but from which nothing that has once entered can ever leave.
Basic information on this key phenomenon of Einstein’s general theory of relativity
can be found in the chapter Black holes & Co. of Elementary Einstein.
Selected aspects of the physics of black holes and neutron stars are described in the
category Black holes & Co. of our Spotlights on relativity.

===== PAGE 8 =====
In Einstein’s theory, black holes are truly black, due to the fact that no radiation or
light can ever escape them. Once quantum theory is taken into account, this
assumption no longer holds – on the contrary, it seems as if black holes should emit
so-called Hawking radiation. However, for astrophysical black holes (that typically
have more or even much more than one solar mass), that radiation would be
undetectable, even if we could transport today’s most sensitive sensors into the
immediate vicinity of the black hole.
Synonyms: black holes
black hole perturbation theory
Black hole perturbation theory is an approach to calculating theoretical gravitational
waveforms, so-called templates. It assumes a binary system consisting of a black
hole and a compact small object which is treated as point particle perturbing
spactetime. The system thus qualifies as an extreme mass-ratio inspiral (EMRI).
black hole uniqueness theorems
Theorems proved in the context of general relativity that answer the question: How
many different kinds of black holes are there? If that question is restricted to
stationary black holes (namely black holes that have settled down and do not
change over time), then the answer is: Surprisingly few. Once you know a
stationary black hole’s mass, angular momentum (roughly speaking, how fast it
rotates) and electric charge, its properties are determined completely.
More information can be found in the spotlight text How many different kinds of
black hole are there?
blackbody
Idealized body that is capable of absorbing and emitting all forms of
electromagnetic radiation, regardless of their wavelength. The thermal radiation
emitted by such a body is governed by a set of especially simple laws, like Planck’s
radiation law, the Stefan-Boltzmann law and Wien’s law.
blueshift
The frequency of a simple light wave is directly related to its colour (cf. spectrum).
For the highest possible frequencies of visible light, the colour is blue-violet. If the
frequency of a light wave is shifted towards higher frequencies (for instance by the
doppler shift), that corresponds to a colour shift towards the blue-violet end of the
spectrum, and is hence called a blueshift.
In the light of that, the term ‘blueshift’ has acquired a more general meaning. It is
used to refer to any shift towards higher frequencies, including types of
electromagnetic radiation where the frequencies do not correspond to any visible
colour, and more generally to other types of waves (for example, gravitational
waves).
See also redshift.

===== PAGE 9 =====
BNL
See Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
boson
Collective expression for quantum particles with an integer spin, mainly spin 0, spin
1, spin 2.
Among the elementary particles, bosons are carrier particles in charge of
transmitting the influences of forces. Photons, for instance, the carrier particles of
the electromagnetic force, are bosons. In contrast, the elementary particles that
make up matter, such as electrons or quarks, are so-called fermions.
brane
In string theory: An object that is the analogue of a two-dimensional membrane
embedded in three-dimensional space – an entity with a certain number of
dimensions (one-brane, two-brane, three-brane…) embedded in the higher-
dimensional space of string theory. A one-brane or 1-brane has one spatial
dimension, a two-brane has two, and so on.
brane world
The notion that our world with its three dimensions of space is a three-brane
embedded in a higher-dimensional space, akin to a two-dimensional surface
embedded in ordinary three-dimensional space.
More information about this can be found in the spotlight text The embedded
universe.
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
National laboratory in the United States, located on Long Island, New York. The
BNL operates the Relativististic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), a particle accelerator
that enables researchers to recreate the state of matter fractions of a second after the
big bang. Also, BNL operates accelerators used to produce synchrotron radiation.
> Brookhaven National Laboratory Website
> National Synchrotron Light Source II at the Brookhaven National Laboratory
brown dwarf
A failed star: A gas ball in space that has between one and ten percent solar mass –
not enough for the temperature and pressure in its core to reach the values required
for the nuclear fusion to start that would transform the gas ball into a shining star.
California Institute of Technology (Caltech)
Major research university located in Pasadena, California. Areas of research include
general relativity, particle physics, quantum gravity and cosmology; in addition,
Caltech is one of the main sites for the researchers (although not the detectors!) of
the LIGO project, which operates the most sensitive gravitational wave detectors to
date. Also, the Einstein Papers Project, which is working on an edition of Einstein’s
collected papers, is based at Caltech.

===== PAGE 10 =====
> Caltech webpages
> Webpages of the Theoretical Astrophysics and Relativity group at Caltech
carrier particle
In the framework of relativistic quantum field theories (which form the theoretical
basis of the physics of elementary particles, the forces by which matter particles
interact are transmitted by so-called carrier particles travelling back and forth
between them. For instance, the electric force between two electrons would come
about through the exchange of photons, the carrier particles of the electromagnetic
interaction. Carrier particles always have integer spin, such as spin 1 or 2 (which
means they belong to the class of particles called bosons). Synonym: force particles.
causal
In the context of relativity: causality concerns the question of which events cause
which other events (Latin causa, the reason, the cause) or, more generally, can
influence them. In special relativity, nothing, no moving object, no information, no
influence can move faster than light. Thus, in principle, an event can only influence
another event if the hypothetical influence (such as a signal or a force) would not
have to be transmitted faster than light. In other words, light propagation determines
the causal structure of spacetime (cf. light-cone). Models and theories that take this
structure into account are called causal – for example the relativistic quantum field
theories.
In general relativity, the cosmic speed limit, the speed of light is only defined
locally: In a side-by-side race, no object, no influence can overtake a light signal.
Also from this a causal structure can be derived and determines which events can
influence which other events. As gravity deflects and delays light signals, the matter
is more complicated in general relativity than in special relativity. Although this
makes the analysis somewhat more complicated, the following still applies: the
propagation of light determines the causal structure.
Synonyms: causality causal structure
causal sets
Approach to the problem of finding a theory of quantum gravity: In causet models,
spacetime is composed of elementary building blocks that represent elementary
events.
More information about causal sets can be found in the spotlight topic From order
to Geometry: causal sets.
Synonyms: causets
celestial mechanics
That discipline in physics (and astronomy) dealing with the laws that govern the
motions of heavenly bodies. Originally seen as distinct from the motions of bodies
on earth (see Kepler’s laws of motion), it has been a sub-discipline of mechanics
ever since Newton derived the cosmic laws of motions from more general
mechanical laws.

===== PAGE 11 =====
For most astronomical applications, Newtonian, classical mechanics works
perfectly well, however, as soon as high-precision measurements or strong
gravitational fields come into play, celestial mechanics is governed by laws of
relativistic mechanics derived from Einstein’s theory of general relativity.
Celsius
Most European countries use the Celsius temperature scale in everyday life.
Temperatures are given in “degrees Celsius” (abbreviated as °C). By definition, the
zero point of this scale (0°C) is the melting point of water, while the temperature
100°C corresponds to its boiling point (both parts of the definition assume the same
standard value for air pressure).
Relation to the Fahrenheit scale: X degrees Celsius correspond to (9/5 times X) +32
Fahrenheit, Y Fahrenheit are (Y-32)*5/9 degrees Celsius.
Relation to the Kelvin temperature scale used in physics: X degree Celsius are X
plus 273.15 Kelvin, Y Kelvin are Y minus 273.15 degrees Celsius. In particular,
differences in temperature are the same in Kelvin and in degrees Celsius; the only
difference between the two scales is their choice of zero point.
censorship
See cosmic censorship.
centrifugal force
An inertial force which an observer in a rotating reference frame needs to introduce
in order to explain why nearly all objects in the vicinity appear to undergo
acceleration away from the axis of rotation.
CERN
European research centre for nuclear and particle physics (Centre Européen pour la
Récherche Nucleaire – pardon my French), located near Geneva on both sides of
the franco-swiss border, founded 1954.
CERN isn’t famous just because of particle accelerators like its proton synchrotron,
the Large Electron Positron Collider (LEP) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
 but also as the birthplace of the World Wide Web.
> CERN website
Chandrasekhar mass
Upper bound for the masses of white dwarfs, in other words: for what low-mass
stars become when they have used up their nuclear fuel. The first to calculate this
upper bound was the Indian-American astrophysicist Subramanian Chandrasekhar.
The Chandrasekhar mass is 1.4 times as large as the solar_mass. The reason that no
white dwarf can have more mass follows from its need to maintain equilibrium
between the gravitational force working towards further collapse and the interior
pressure of the star acting to prevent collapse. For larger masses, the degeneracy
pressure on which a white dwarf’s stability depends is overcome by the
gravitational force, and further collapse ensues.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Synonyms: Chandrasekhar limit
charge
A measure of the strength of a force (action-at-a-distance) originating from a body,
and of how susceptible it is to being influenced by other bodies via the same force.
The most famous example is electric charge: Electrically charged bodies act on
other electrically charged bodies via an electric force whose strength is proportional
to the electric charges of the bodies involved.
It is a characteristic property of charges that they are conserved; they can neither be
created from nothing nor simply disappear. For instance, when a positron with
electric charge +1 (in suitable units) and an electron with electric charge -1
annihilate to give electromagnetic radiation, overall charge conservation is satisfied:
Before the annihilation, the sum of the electric charges was 1+(-1)=0, and
afterwards, when there is only uncharged electromagnetic radiation left, it is also
zero.
In the context of particle physics, there are more abstract charges not directly
connected with forces and interaction, but subject to similar conservation laws.
chemical element
See element
chemical evolution
The changes in the abundances of the different chemical elements that have taken
place throughout the history of the universe, mainly in the very early universe
during the phase called Big Bang Nucleosynthesis and, from a couple of hundred
million years later until today, in the interior of stars (stellar nucleosynthesis).
classical
In physics, the word is used with two meanings. First of all, it denotes physical
models or theories that take into account neither the effects of Einstein’s theories of
relativity nor those of quantum physics, for example classical mechanics. However,
it is also used to denote models or theories that are not formulated in the framework
of quantum physics; in that sense, general relativity is an example for a classical
theory.
classical mechanics
See mechanics, classical
classical tests of general relativity
See tests of general relativity, classical
cluster of galaxies
See galaxy cluster
Synonyms: clusters of galaxies

===== PAGE 13 =====
Compton Gamma Ray Observatory
A satellite observatory for astronomical observations of gamma rays operated by
NASA from 1991 to 2000. Scientific aims included the study of gamma ray bursts,
pulsars, supernovae, and accretion processes around black holes.
CGRO homepage (NASA)
conic singularity
A particular type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary where spacetime ends)
that is not associated with curvature, but instead is the analogue of the pointed tip of
a cone.
More information about the different types of singularity can be found in the
spotlight text Spacetime singularities.
conservation laws
Some of the most important quantities in physics are conserved : What they
measure can neither be created nor destroyed, and their total sum is constant over
time. Such statements of constancy over time are called conservation laws.
The most important conserved quantity is energy. Energy can neither be created
from nothing nor simply vanish. If the energy contained in a system increases, it
must be because energy has been transported into the system (and there is now less
energy outside the system); if the energy decreases, it must be because energy has
been transferred from the system (and there is now more energy outside).
Another important class of conserved quantities are charges, for instance electric
charge. A further conserved quantity in mechanics is angular momentum; a quantity
associated with a body’s rotation.
Synonyms: conserved quantities
constancy of the speed of light
One of the basic postulates of special relativity: The speed of light in a vacuum is
the same for all observers drifting through gravity-free space (more precisely: for
all inertial observers). In particular, its value is independent of an observer’s motion
relative to the source of the light.
continuous
Space as we are used to thinking about it is a continuum or, equivalently,
continuous space: Between every two points, there always exists an infinity of other
points, and every volume can be divided into smaller and smaller parts without ever
reaching a limit.
Synonyms: continuum

===== PAGE 14 =====
coordinates
A rule for assigning to each point of a general space or spacetime a set of numbers
for purposes of identification.
Many readers will know two examples from school: In the case of the line of real
numbers, every point on the line corresponds to a real number which can be seen as
its coordinate. What’s important is that these coordinates reflect neighbourly
relations: The number 1 lies between the number 0 and the number 2, and so does
the point corresponding to it lie between the two points corresponding to 0 and 2.
The second example is the usual X-Y-coordinate system (sometimes called
Cartesian coordinates), by which every point in a plane can be characterized by two
numbers: the first its X coordinate value, the second its Y coordinate value.
The examples reflect an important property of coordinates: To uniquely identify a
point in space, one needs as many coordinate values as the space has dimensions.
Of the four coordinates defining an event in spacetime, three serve to fix its location
in three-dimensional space, while the fourth gives the point in time for the event.
Synonyms: coordinate system
Coriolis force
A fictitious or inertial force which an observer in a rotating reference frame needs to
introduce in order to explain why certain moving objects appear to undergo
acceleration at right angles to their direction of motion.
The Coriolis force plays an important role in meteorology – from the point of view
of an observer at rest on the surface of the earth, it explains the deflection of certain
wind flows.
cosmic background radiation
“Electromagnetic echo” of the early universe; first predicted by the big bang models
in the context of general relativity; later, from the 1960s on, observed with radio
telescopes.
The cosmic microwave background contains important information about the
properties and the earliest history of the universe. For instance, it can be used to
deduce whether space is curved or Euclidean; more information about this can be
found in the spotlight text Cosmic sound.
cosmic censorship
Possibly the most disturbing feature of Einstein’s general theory of relativity is the
existence of singularities – most commonly, regions of spacetime in which density
and curvature go to infinity.
It is quite likely that singularities are artefacts resulting from the fact that Einstein’s
theory does not take quantum effects into account, and that they will be absent in a
more complete theory of quantum gravity. Yet even if you leave aside quantum
theory, and stay strictly within the framework of Einstein’s theory, it is likely that
most singularities are, if not absent, then at least well-concealed:

===== PAGE 15 =====
The hypothesis of cosmic censorship states that, whenever a body collapses so
completely as to result in the formation of a singularity, a black hole will be formed
so that the singularity will be hidden behind the horizon, and thus completely
unobservable for anyone outside the black hole.
At the present time, this hypothesis is unproven. Indeed, there are some
counterexamples, but they describe idealized situations which are not likely to tell
us anything about the real world. Finding a proof that, for all realistic collapse
situations, there is indeed cosmic censorship, is one of the great open problems of
general relativity research.
Cosmic Explorer
Cosmic Explorer is a proposed third generation gravitational wave detector, which,
together with other third generation detectors like the Einstein telescope, is
supposed to allow for gravitational wave detection with greater sensitivity than ever
before. The detector will be built in the United States and is designed with an L-
shaped geometry, each arm being 40 kilometers in length.
Website of the Cosmic Explorer
Cosmic microwave background radiation
See cosmic background radiation, above.
cosmic rays
Highly energetic particles reaching the earth from the depths of space, mainly
consisting of protons and light atomic nuclei.
cosmic time
Measure for the progress of the evolution of an expanding universe such as that of
the big bang models. It corresponds to time as measured by clocks that are at rest
relative to the expanding space, and that have been set to zero at the very beginning,
the time of the hypothetical big bang singularity. Synonym: Age of the universe.
The basic features of the cosmological models that use cosmic time are reviewed in
the chapter Cosmology of Elementary Einstein.
cosmological constant
In the big bang models, an inherent tendency of space to accelerate or decelerate its
expansion. From observations, it seems that our own cosmos has a cosmological
constant that leads to a slight acceleration of its expansion.
cosmological redshift
Consequence of cosmic expansion in the big bang models: the farther away a
galaxy, on average the more strongly shifted towards lower frequencies is the light
we receive from it .
cosmology
That branch of physics and astronomy dealing with the structure and development
of the universe as a whole. At the core of modern cosmology are the big bang

===== PAGE 16 =====
models based on Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Their basic features are
reviewed in the chapter Cosmology of Elementary Einstein. In order to describe the
very early universe, it will be necessary to take the effects of quantum gravity into
account – this gives rise to models of quantum cosmology.
current
Matter in coordinated, flowing motion – think of water flowing in a pipe. An
important example is the electric current associated with moving electric charges.
Electric currents are the sources of magnetic fields.
curvature
For a two-dimensional surface: criterion that allows us to decide whether that
surface is a plane, or part of a plane (i.e. a surface on which the usual rules of high
school geometry apply), or not. Two possibilities to define the curvature of a plane
are the following:
Sum of the angles of a triangle. In a plane, the sum of the three angles in a triangle
formed by three straight lines is always 180 degrees. In a more general surface, the
sum of the angles of a more general triangle formed by three straightest-possible
lines (i.e. geodesics) can be larger or smaller than 180 degrees. The difference (the
surplus or deficit), divided by the area of the triangle, is a measure for the curvature
of that region of the surface.
Second possibility: the circumference of a circle. In the plane, that circumference is
equal to 2 times pi times the circle’s radius. On a more general surface, it can be
larger or smaller. The difference, divided by the third power of the radius, leads to
the same measure for the curvature as the first definition.
Simple examples for curved surfaces are the surface of a sphere (positive curvature,
that is to say: sum of the angles in a triangle larger than 180 degrees, circumference
of a circle smaller than 2 times pi times radius) and that of a saddle (negative
curvature, that is to say: sum of the angles in a triangle smaller than 180 degrees,
circumference of a circle larger than 2 times pi times radius).
Curvature cannot only be defined for surfaces, but also for higher-dimensional,
more general spaces or spacetimes. However, the generalized definition is
substantially more complicated, and curvature is defined not by a single number,
but by a set of numbers (that, together, form the “curvature tensor”). It’s basic
meaning, however, is the same: it measures the space’s deviation from a flat space
of the same dimension.
For physics, an important aspect of curvature is its connection with gravity, as
described in Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Basic information about this can
be found in the spotlight text Gravity: From weightlessness to curvature.
curvature singularity
A type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary where spacetime ends) that is
associated with infinitely strong gravity and, hence, infinitely strong spacetime
curvature.
Two different varieties of curvature singularity are Ricci- and Weyl singularities.

===== PAGE 17 =====
More information about the different types of singularities can be found in the
spotlight text Spacetime singularities.
dark energy
Comparing astronomical observations with the predictions of the big bang models
(which link the properties of matter and the speed of the universe’s expansion), it
turns out that more than 70 percent of the density of the universe is supplied by
what is called dark energy, a type of energy that is associated with empty space
itself. Ordinary matter or energy are conserved when the universe expands: If I have
10 hydrogen atoms in a certain region of space, and if that region now expands to
twice its initial volume, it will still contain no more than the initial 10 hydrogen
atoms, now spread over the larger volume. On the other hand, the amount of dark
energy in that region of space doubles in the process, just as the volume, the
“amount of space” is twice as large than it was in the beginning.
There’s another crucial difference between ordinary energy and dark energy. The
gravitational influence of ordinary masses and ordinary energy is attractive – it is
aimed at pulling all the contents of the universe closer together. Dark energy, on the
other hand, acts to accelerate the universe’s expansion. In that way, it is equivalent
to a certain type of what is called a cosmological constant.
As yet, nobody knows how (and if) dark energy fits somewhere into our current
picture of the fundamental constitutents of the universe, for instance: into the
standard model of particle physics or some extension of that model. This makes
dark energy one of the greatest mysteries of modern physics.
dark matter
Astronomical observations of galaxies and galaxy clusters as well as comparison of
observations with the predictions of the big bang models show that only about 15
percent of matter in the universe announces its presence by giving off light or other
kinds of electromagnetic radiation. The other 85 percent of the mass are supplied by
dark matter and cosmologists have provided convincing evidence that most of that
dark matter is not composed of the usual atomic constitutents protons and neutrons.
The exact properties of these unusual matter particles are not yet known.
deflection of light, relativistic
One of the basic predictions of general relativity is that light is influenced by
gravity. For instance, light passing a massive body is slightly deflected. This is the
basis for what is called gravitational lensing.
General information about this topic can be found in the spotlight text The
gravitational deflection of light, while its connection with one of the fundamental
principles of general relativity is examined in The equivalence principle and the
deflection of light.
Synonyms: relativistic deflection of light
degeneracy pressure
For a gas made up of electrons, quantum effects become important. Roughly
speaking, it is strictly forbidden for two electrons to be present at the same location

===== PAGE 18 =====
(this is called the Pauli exclusion principle), and if anyone attempts to concentrate
electrons in a small volume of space, they will start to flit back and forth madly (cf.
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle). Just like with regular gases, this flitting back
and forth leads to pressure, in this case to what is called degeneracy pressure.
It is this kind of electron degeneracy pressure that, for instance, stabilizes a white
dwarf, preventing further collapse.
Degeneracy pressure is not only possible for electrons, but for a whole class of
quantum particles, namely for all fermions (for example for neutrons or protons.
density
In a stricter sense synonymous with “mass density”: The average density of matter
in a region of space is the total mass of all matter contained in that region, divided
by the region’s volume.
More generally, density can refer to other physical quantities as well. The energy
density, for instance, is the total sum of energy localized in a region divided by that
region’s volume.
deuterium
Variant of the chemical element hydrogen where the atomic nucleus consists not of
a single proton, but of a proton and a neutron.
In the context of general relativity it is of interest, as it is one of the species of light
atomic nuclei, that formed in the early universe during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis.
Deutsches Elektronensynchrotron (DESY)
Literally “German electron synchrotron” (a synchrotron being a type of particle
accelerator). German research centre for particle physics and research using
photons, founded in 1959 and located in Hamburg in Northern Germany. Site of the
decomissioned particle accelerator HERA, among others.
DESY website
diffusion
If we put a drop of ink into clear water, then even without stirring, the ink will
slowly spread throughout the water. Behind this is the motion of the ink molecules
associated with the temperature of the system. The motion of each molecule is
purely random, but eventually the sum of many random steps will carry a sizeable
number of the molecules far away from the location where we have put the ink drop
in. Processes like this where random motions lead to a spreading-out of an
ensemble of molecules or other entities are called diffusion.
dimension
The number of independent directions within a set of points, alternatively: the
number of coordinates needed to give each point a unique name. This is rather
abstract – time for some examples:
A line is one-dimensional. There’s only one direction to go on the line (the opposite
direction isn’t counted extra): Back-forth. A single number is sufficient to define a

===== PAGE 19 =====
point of the line. For instance, on a motorway, given the statement “the accident
happened 4 kilometres from the beginning of the I95 (or M1, or whatever)” is
sufficient information for the rescue workers to know exactly where to go.
Surfaces are two-dimensional, as there are two independent directions: back-forth
and left-right, say. On the earth’s surface, the two coordinate numbers geographical
longitude and latitude uniquely define each location.
The space that surrounds us is three-dimensional. There are three independent
directions, say back-forth, left-right and up-down. In order to define a location in
space, one needs to specify three numbers – for instance, two to specify where a
house is located on the earth’s surface (latitude/longitude, see above) and one floor
number (or, more precisely, the height above the earth’s surface).
Adding time to the three space coordinates (a must for defining an appointment –
where and when?), the result is four-dimensional spacetime. In order to define an
event in spacetime, one needs to give four numbers: three of them determine where
in space the event happens, the fourth gives the time where it happens.
According to some of the models that have been studied as candidates for a theory
of quantum gravity, our world should have even more space dimensions than the
usual three. Some information about these extra dimensions can be found in the
spotlight topics  “Extra dimensions, and how to hide them”, “Hunting for extra
dimensions” and Extra dimensions and simplicity.
Dirac equation
Equation regulating the behaviour of relativistic quantum particles that have a spin
of 1/2, for instance electrons. It was first formulated by Paul Dirac in 1928 and led
directly to his successful prediction of the existence of the first species of anti-
particle, the positron.
Doppler effect
Effect named after the Austrian scientist Christian Doppler concerning the emission
of waves by moving sources. Consider a wave-source (for instance, a device that
sends out sound-waves or light-waves). Also consider two observers A and B, with
observer A moving relative to the source, while observer B is at rest relative to it.
When a source that moves relative to an observer emits a wave, the frequency
measured by this observer is different from what a measuring instrument would
record that is at rest relative to the source: If source and observer approach each
other, the observer measures a higher frequency, if they move away from each
other, a lower frequency.
In everyday life, the Doppler effect is readily apparent when we listen to sound
waves from moving sources. If a police car or fire truck with blaring horns first
races towards us, then passes us and races away, the characteristic horn sounds
change dramatically in pitch, the moment the car passes us. This is because, at first,
the car is moving towards us, and there is a Doppler shift towards higher pitch
compared with a listener in the car. From the moment the car passes us, it becomes
a source that moves away from us, with all sounds being shifted to lower pitch.
In the context of relativity, the most important Doppler effect is that for light waves.
In this context, a shift towards higher frequencies is called blueshift, one to lower
frequencies redshift.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Synonyms: Doppler shift
E = mc²
See equivalence between mass and energy.
Synonyms: E equals m c-square
Earth
Our very own planet in the solar system – the third planet from the sun. The earth
has a mass of about 6 trillion trillion (in exponential notation, 6·1024) kilograms.
effective-one-body-approach
The effective-one-body (EOB)-formalism is an analytical approach describing the
dynamics of two coalescing black holes. It allows for the prediction of the radiation
caused by such an event, which can be used in the analysis of gravitational wave
signals. The EOB-approach was first introduced by Thibault Damour and
Alessandra Buonanno.
Synonyms: EOB-approach, EOB-formalism
Einstein Papers Project
Project at the California Institute of Technology which is dedicated to publish a full
and annotated edition of Einstein’s writings and correspondence (the Collected
Papers of Albert Einstein).
Einstein Papers Project webpages
Online archive of Einstein’s writings
Einstein telescope
The Einstein Telescope is a proposed third generation gravitational wave detector,
which is supposed to deliver measurements 10 time more accurate than Advanced
Virgo or Advanced LIGO. Its arms are planned to be 10 kilometers long, allowing
for a deeper look into space than ever before.
Website of the Einstein telescope
Einstein’s equation
Einstein’s equations are the cornerstone of his general theory of relativity. They
describe how the distortions of spacetime are connected with the properties (mass,
energy, pressure…) of whatever matter is present.
Using a compact version of mathematical language, Einstein’s equations, a whole
system of equations, can be written in an abbreviated way so that they appear to
form a single equation. That’s why, sometimes, they are called “Einstein’s equation”
in the singular.

===== PAGE 21 =====
An elementary description of general relativity and Einstein’s equations is given in
the chapter general relativity of Elementary Einstein.
Synonyms: Einstein's equations
Einstein@Home
Project that uses private computers to search for gravitational waves in the data of
current gravitational wave detectors. More information can be found on the project
webpages.
> Einstein@Home project page
electric charge
The charge associated with electromagnetism: a property of objects that determines
the strength of the electric force with which they act on other charged objects, and
the strength of electric forces by which other such objects act on them. Moving
electric charges produce a magnetic field, and are influenced by such fields.
electric field
The electric force is a force by which electric charges act on each other; the electric
field is the associated field.
Electric fields cannot be understood separate from magnetic fields – their complete
description is only possible within the more general context of electromagnetism.
In the simplest case, namely in situations that do not change over time, the electric
force is the so-called electrostatic force.
Synonyms: electric force
electrodynamics
That part of physics concerned with the study of electromagnetism, in particular
with electric and magnetic fields that change over time.
electromagnetic radiation
Electromagnetic influences (in the language of physics: electric and magnetic field)
which, even with no electric charges present, are locked in a state of mutual
excitation so that they form a wave that propagates through space.
As this wave transports energy, it is, by the usual physics definition, a form of
radiation, called electromagnetic radiation.
Depending on frequency, there are special names for different types of
electromagnetic radiation; going from lower to higher frequencies: radio waves,
microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, X-rays and
gamma rays.
In the context of quantum theory, it turns out that electromagnetic radiation consists
of tiny energy packets, called light particles or photons.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Synonyms: electromagnetic wave electromagnetic waves
electromagnetism
Electromagnetism is the totality of all phenomena associated with the presence of
electric charges, such as the electric force, magnetic force or electromagnetic
waves. The basic laws of electromagnetism are Maxwell’s equations.
In the context of special relativity it becomes clear that electric and magnetic forces
are relative – which one of them is active in a given situation depends on the
observer. Say that, from the point of view of one observer, the attractive force
between an electric conductor and a moving charged particle is purely electric in
nature – nevertheless, for a moving observer at rest with respect to that particle, it is
purely magnetic. Just as, in special relativity, it makes sense to talk of spacetime as
a whole, seeing that it depends on the observer how that spacetime is then split into
space and time, it makes sense to talk collectively about “the electromagnetic
force”, leaving it to the different observers to split this electromagnetic force into
electric or magnetic parts.
Synonyms: electromagnetic force
electron
Low-mass elementary particle with negative electric charge.
The atoms that are the constituents of everyday matter each consists of a nucleus
surrounded by a shell of electrons.
Synonyms: electrons
electron volt
Standard unit of energy in particle physics. One electronvolt is the energy gained by
an electron that is being accelerated by an electric potential difference (“electric
voltage”) of 1 volt. One electronvolt, in short: 1 eV is equivalent to 1.602176·10-19
Joule (the Joule being the energy unit of the SI system of units).
Multiples of eV that are commonly used are
kilo-electronvolt: 1 keV = 1000 eV
Mega-electronvolt: 1 MeV = 1,000,000 eV =106 eV
Giga-electronvolt: 1 GeV = 1,000,000,000 eV =109 eV
Tera-electronvolt: 1 TeV = 1,000,000,000,000 eV =1012 eV.
Making use of the equivalence between mass and energy, eV/c² is commonly used
as a unit for particle masses, with c the speed of light. As it is usual in particle
physics to use a system of units in which light speed is equal to one, c=1, mass
values are often simply given in eV, without explicitly mentioning the factor c².
The energy that is necessary to remove an electron from an atom is typically in the
range of between a few and a few dozen eV. Typical energies of x-ray photons are
in the keV range. The mass of an electron is 511 keV, that of a proton 938 MeV.

===== PAGE 23 =====
Each proton in the proton beams of the Large Hadron Collider, the particle
accelerator at the CERN laboratory, is accelerated to an energy of about 7 TeV.
As the temperature is a measure of the average energy with which each component
participates in a system’s disordered thermal motion, it can be measured in eV as
well, where 1 eV corresponds to 11,604 Kelvin.
Synonyms: eV keV MeV GeV
electrostatic force
An action-at-a-distance-force that acts between electrically charged bodies merely
because of the fact they carry electric charge.
element, chemical
A substance that cannot be decomposed into more elementary constituent
substances by the methods of chemistry. From a physics point of view, to every
chemical element corresponds a specific atom which is defined uniquely by the
number of protons in its atomic nucleus (for example: nuclei with a single proton
define the element hydrogen, two protons define helium, three Lithium, 26 iron and
92 uranium).
Synonyms: chemical element
elementary particle
Within the commonly accepted models of physics, certain particles are not built of
even more fundamental sub-particles – they are themselves elementary. Examples
for elementary particles are electrons, quarks and neutrinos, while particles such as
protons or neutrons consist of sub-units and are thus not elementary. The study of
elementary particles is called particle physics, under which keyword some more
information about the theoretical framework of elementary particles can be found.
Synonyms: elementary particles
eLISA
See LISA
ellipse
An ellipse is a planar curve. All points on the curve are located around two focal
points, such that the sum of the distances to each focal point is equal for all points.
Special cases of an ellipse are a circle (in this special case, both focal points are at
the same location) and a straight line joining the two focal points (in this special
case, the specific distance chosen is equal to the distance between the two focal
points).
As far as gravity is concerned, ellipses are of interest as the orbit of a lonely planet
around a central star is an ellipse, according to Newton’s theory of gravity.

===== PAGE 24 =====
energy
Physical quantity with the special property that, in physical processes, energy is
neither destroyed nor created, simply transformed from one form of energy to
another. Some of the different forms of energy that are defined separately are
kinetic energy, thermal energy and the energy carried by electromagnetic radiation.
Processes that transform one form of energy into another take place in all machines
we use in everyday life, from the engine of a subway train (electrical energy into
kinetic energy of the train) to an electric blanket (electrical energy into thermal
energy).
One important consequence of special relativity is that energy and mass are
completely equivalent – two different ways to define what is, on closer inspection,
one and the same physical quantity. See the keyword equivalence between mass and
energy.
equivalence between mass and energy
Already in special relativity, it turns out that (relativistic) mass and energy are really
no more than two different ways of looking at one and the same physical quantity.
To every form of energy, there corresponds a mass – if you heat a body up,
increasing its thermal energy, you automatically increase its mass. On the other
hand, simply because of the mass of its constituent particles, every chunk of matter
contains lots and lots of energy. In situations like the annihilation of particles in
contact with their anti-particles, resulting in electromagnetic radiation, this matter-
energy can be transformed completely into more ordinary types of energy.
The formula relating a mass to the equivalent energy is Einstein’s famous
E=mc² (“E equals m-c-squared”)
Here E is the energy, m the corresponding relativistic mass and the constant c the
speed of light.
equivalence principle
One of the postulates at the basis of general relativity: A freely-falling observer in a
gravitational field does not feel gravity. More precisely: In a small region of space
around an observer in free fall in a gravitational field, the laws of physics are
approximately the same as without gravitation (i.e. in special relativity) – at least
for a time-limited observation period.
This is sometimes called Einstein’s equivalence principle, which includes a more
restricted version called the weak equivalence principle, namely that, in a
gravitational field, objects which are at the same location are subject to the same
gravitationalacceleration – they fall at the same rate (“universality of free fall”).
More information about the equivalence principle can be found in the spotlight
topic The elevator, the rocket, and gravity: the equivalence principle, while the path
from there to Einstein’s geometric gravity is traced in Gravity: From weightlessness
to curvature.

===== PAGE 25 =====
error (measurement)
No measurement of a physical quantity is perfectly exact – all measurements have a
certain resolution or error. In particular, in measuring a physical quantity there will
be a myriad of tiny disturbances (such as fluctuations in the electronic circuits used,
atmospheric fluctuations in the observation of a star). Due to these disturbances,
repeated measurements will sometimes give a result that is a tad too high, at other
times one that is a tad too low. Such unsystematic disturbances can be described
with the help of mathematical statistics. In particular, the following holds true: If
the same type of measurement is repeated sufficiently often, then the results can be
used to estimate both the true value of the measured quantity (the average value of
the measurements) and a measure for the accuracy of the measurement (the
“standard error”, also called “measurement error” or “accuracy”).
In publishing the results of measurements, it is usual to give for each result both the
best approximation to the true value and an estimate of the accuracy of that
approximation. Typically, a result will be written in a form such as γ=0.99983 ±
0.00045, the translation of which is: the best estimate for the quantity γ that results
from the measurements is 0.99983, and the combined measurements have the
accuracy 0.00045. Alternatively, the same result might be written as γ
=0,99983(45), where the digits in parantheses (here 4 and 5) indicate the accuracy
of the last digits of the result itself (here 8 and 3).
The error or accuracy is an estimate of the difference between the measurement
result and the true value. One widely used convention (called “two sigma”) is to use
an accuracy with the following meaning: Consider a measurement of some physical
quantity that gives an estimate X and an accuracy Y. Then the probability that the
true value of that quantity lies somewhere between X-Y and X+Y is 95.5 percent.
With another convention (“one sigma”), the probability is only about 68 percent
(but in that case, there is a probability of 95.5 percent for the true value to lie
between X-2Y and X+2Y). Often, estimates for systematic errors are included in the
stated error as well (systematic errors do not manifest themselves in random
fluctuations around the true value, but in systematic deviations – for instance, the
measured value might systematically tend to be higher than the true value).
ether
In 19th century physics: Hypothetical medium in which light and other types of
electromagnetic radiation propagate as waves. Once the ether is postulated, certain
questions arise: Does the earth move through this medium? If yes, how fast? And
can this motion be detected by studying the propagation of light? Einstein’s special
theory of relativity, in which the value of the speed of light is independent of the
motion of light source or observer (more precisely: an inertial observer), the ether
turns out to be absolutely undetectable, which has led physicists to abandon the
concept.
Euclidean
In a stricter sense: Euclidean geometry is the standard geometry taught in school
(synonym: plane geometry). In a more general sense: Euclidean geometry is the
generalization of this geometry to include three-dimensional space and even higher-
dimensional spaces. The three-dimensional space we are used to in everyday life is
called Euclidean space. Quite generally, spaces with three or another number of
dimensions and Euclidean geometry are called flat.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Synonyms: Euclidean geometry Euclidean space
European Southern Observatory
A cooperative effort of 10 member states of the European union, ESO operates a
number of large-scale telescopes such as the “Very Large Telescope” (VLT) and the
“New Technology Telescope” (NTT). The telescopes themselves are located in
Chile; the observatory’s main office is in Garching, close to Munich in Germany.
ESO website
Synonyms: ESO
European Space Agency
The European Space Agency coordinates the space-faring activities of the European
countries. It is a partner in projects such as the Hubble space telescope and the
gravitational wave detector LISA.
ESA website
Synonyms: ESA
event
In the context of special or general relativity: Anything that is defined by a single
point in time and a single point in space, i.e. something that happens at a definite
time at a definite location.
Synonym: spacetime point.
event horizon
In general relativity: A closed surface that is the boundary of a black hole. Whatever
enters through this boundary from the outside can never again leave the inside.
Near-synonym: horizon.
Event Horizon Telescope
The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) is an array of radio telescopes that are
distributed around the globe. Using Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI),
they detect cosmic signals. Because of their large distance to one another, they
achieve a significantly better spatial resolution than a single radio telescope would.
By analyzing the combined data, astronomers can observe the event horizon of a
supermassive black hole such as Sagittarius A*.
exact solution
In general relativity, a solution of Einstein’s equations is a model universe that
follows the law of gravity given by general relativity. If the properties of that model
universe can be written down explicitly, for example by expressing the geometry at
each point in spacetime with the help of simple functions like fractions, square

===== PAGE 27 =====
roots, sine and cosine, the solution is called an exact solution. However, opinions
vary somewhat as to what “writing down explicitly” means, so “exact solution”,
while a useful term, is not a concept that can be defined precisely.
exponential
A quantity whose rate of growth is proportional to how large it already is is said to
show exponential growth. For instance, exponential growth is a model for
population growth on a planet with infinite resources: The larger the population, the
more children are born and hence the larger the rate of population growth.
In the context of relativity, exponential growth is interesting for cosmology. In the
hypothetical inflationary phase of our universe’s evolution the cosmos underwent
exponential expansion, with the rate of expansion getting ever larger as the universe
itself expanded more and more.
Synonyms: exponential growth
exponential notation
In physics, very large and very small numbers are written with the help of powers of
the number ten. For large numbers, 10n with n a non-negative integer is a 1 with n
trailing zeros:
100 = 1 = one
101 = 10 = ten
102 = 100 = a hundred
103 = 1000 = a thousand
106 = 1,000,000 = a million
109 = 1,000,000,000 = a billion
1012 = 1,000,000,000,000 = a trillion
1015 = 1,000,000,000,000,000 = a quadrillion
Very small fractions – numbers that differ very little from zero – can be written with
the help of 10-n, with n a non-negative integer (n is, again, the number of zeros):
100 = 1 = one
10-1 = 0.1 = one tenth
10-2 = 0.01 = one hundredth
10-3 = 0.001 = one thousandth
10-6 = 0.000,001 = one millionths
10-9 = 0.000,000,001 = one billionths
10-12 = 0.000,000,000,001 = one trillionth
10-15 = 0.000,000,000,000,001 = one quadrillionth
Numbers that are not clean powers of ten can be written by factoring out the
appropriate powers of ten. For instance,
1748 = 1.748·1000 = 1,748·103,

===== PAGE 28 =====
often written in what is called “scientific notation” as 1.748E3. On the other hand,
0.000,417,55 = 4.1755·10-4 = 4.1755E-4.
Synonyms: scientific notation powers of ten
extra dimension
According to some of the candidate models for a theory of quantum gravity, notably
in string theory, our world should have extra dimensions – space dimensions in
addition to the three we know from everday life.
More information about extra dimensions, possibilities of observing their effects
and their use for building physical models can be found in our section Spotlights on
relativity, namely Extra dimensions and how to hide them, The hunt for extra
dimensions and Simplicity in higher dimensions.
Synonyms: extra dimensions
extreme mass ratio inspiral (EMRI)
In an extreme mass-ratio inspiral (EMRI), a relatively light object orbits around a
much heavier cosmic object such as a black hole. EMRIs evolve very slowly and
allow for detailed study of the strong gravity regime in the vicinity of the black hole
using gravitational waves.
Fahrenheit scale
Usual temperature scale in the US. Temperatures are given in degrees Fahrenheit
(°F); the scale is defined historically, by using as its zero point the lowest
temperature measured in winter 1708/1709 in Danzig (today Gdansk, Poland,
Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit’s hometown), while 100 Fahrenheit is human body
temperature.
Relation with the Celsius scale widely used in Europe: X degrees Fahrenheit are (X-
32)*5/9 degrees Celsius, Y degrees Celsius are (Y*9/5) +32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Relation with the Kelvin scale widely used in science: X degrees Fahrenheit sind
(X+459.67)*5/9 Kelvin, Y Kelvin are (Y*9/5)-459.67 degrees Fahrenheit.
false colour
Only a small part of astronomical observations is concerned with visible light, in
other words: with electromagnetic radiation visible to the human eye. In order to
visualize obervations made at invisible wave-length, such as infra-red light, radio
waves or X-rays, the different wave-lengths are mapped to visible colours following
some arbitrarily chosen scheme.
Similarly, physical quantities that are not connected with electromagnetic radiation
can be mapped to colours; for instance, one can produce images of a star’s interior
where different colours stand for different densities.

===== PAGE 29 =====
fermion
“Fermion” refers to quantum particles with  half odd integer spin, such as spin 1/2,
3/2 or 5/2.
Fermions include elementary particles, for example electrons or quarks, but also
composite particles such as protons. In more vivid terms, Fermions are particles that
make up matter, while, for instance, bosons are responsible for transmitting the
elementary forces between particles and belong to a different class.
Fermions are subject to the Pauli exclusion principle. Two electrons can never
occupy the same quantum state. This property is decisive for what we call matter:
The fact that it is impossible for all electrons of an atom to occupy the lowest
energy state, close to the atomic nucleus, but that instead the electrons have to
spread out and occupy different states, leads to the differences between atoms. This
in turn is the basis for the different chemical properties of elements.
field
A field describes how a physical quantity is distributed in space and time. For
instance, the area where electric forces act on a test particle is subject to an electric
field. Or the gravitational forces which act on the mass of a test body define a
gravitational field. In general a field contains energy, occupies space and can
change over time.
fission
See nuclear fission
flat
A space is called flat if its geometry is the direct generalization of Euclidean
geometry, the standard geometry taught in schools. By this definition, the simplest
two-dimensional flat space is the plane, and ordinary, everyday three-dimensional
space is also flat, to very good approximation.
A space that isn’t flat is curved.
FLRW universe
See Friedman-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker universe.
fluid
State of matter in which the constituent atoms and molecules are connected so
loosely that the matter cannot maintain any shape without external support: If you
place a fluid into a container, its shape will adapt to that of the container (in contrast
with a solid body, which will keep its shape). Examples of fluids are gases, liquids
and plasma.
focus
In optics: A focus, also referred to as an image point, is the point where incoming,
parallel light rays meet after traveling through a lens.

===== PAGE 30 =====
In geometry: For an ellipse all points on the curve are located around two focal
points, such that the sum of the distances to each focal point is equal for all points.
force
In mechanics: Influence acting on a body, trying to accelerate it.
More generally: All influences by which elementary or other particles can interact;
in this sense, force and interaction are synonymous. In the standard model of
particle physics, there are three elementary forces: electromagnetism, the weak
(nuclear) force and the strong (nuclear) force, while there is no quantum description
of the fourth fundamental interaction, gravity.
force particle
In the framework of relativistic quantum field theories (which form the theoretical
basis of the physics of elementary particles, the forces by which matter particles
interact are transmitted by so-called carrier particles travelling back and forth
between them. For instance, the electric force between two electrons would come
about through the exchange of photons, the carrier particles of the electromagnetic
interaction. Carrier particles always have integer spin, such as spin 1 or 2 (which
means they belong to the class of particles called bosons). Synonym: carrier
particles.
fourth test of general relativity
Another name for measurements of the Shapiro time delay as an addition to the
three classical tests of general relativity.
Synonyms: fourth test of general relativity
frame of reference
See reference frame
frame-dragging
In Newtonian gravity , the gravitational field of a mass is independent of whether or
not that mass rotates. In general relativity , a mass’s rotation influences the motion
of objects in its neighbourhood. Put simply, the rotating mass “drags along”
spacetime in the vicinity.
This is known as Lense-Thirring effect or frame-dragging. Sometimes, frame-
dragging is also used in a more general sense that includes additional general-
relativistic effects associated with the movement of sources of gravity. There is an
analogy between gravity and  electromagnetism in which ordinary gravity
corresponds to the electrostatic force , and the field components responsible for
frame-dragging to *magnetism*. For this reasons, these effects also go by the name
of gravitomagnetism.
Synonyms: Lense-Thirring effect, Gravitomagnetism

===== PAGE 31 =====
free
In the context of relativity theory, a particle (object, observer…) that is not acted
upon by any force except gravity is said to be free or, a bit more specific, to be in
free fall. Free test particles play an important role in understanding the structure of
general relativity.
Synonyms: free fall, free particle
frequency
Measure for the rapidity of an oscillation, defined as the inverse of the period of
oscillation: A process that, in oscillating, repeats itself after 0.1 seconds has the
frequency 1/(0.1 seconds)= 10 Hz. (The unit Hertz, abbreviated as Hz, is defined as
1 Hz = 1/second.)
For a simple wave, the frequency is given by the number of maxima going by a
stationary observer in a second. Ten maxima going by per second correspond to a
frequency of 10 Hz.
Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker universe
The simplest assumptions one can make about a universe are that it is homogeneous
and isotropic. Homogeneity means that the properties of matter and of the geometry
of spacetime are the same at every point in space. Isotropy means that all spatial
directions are on the same footing, and that to a hypothetical observer, such a
universe looks exactly the same, in whatever direction he or she might be looking.
These assumptions are quite restrictive; in fact, it is possible to write down an
expression characterizing the spacetime geometry of all homogeneous and isotropic
solutions of Einstein’s equations. The result is a family of spacetimes known as
Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker universes. Typically, these universes are
either in a state of expansion or a state of collapse. The best-known example is the
expanding universe described by big bang cosmology.
Sometimes, these model universes are also referred to as Friedmann-Lemaître
universes, Robertson-Walker universes or Friedmann-Robertson-Walker universes.
fusion
See nuclear fusion
galaxy
Stars are rarely found alone – usually, they congregate in conglomerates of millions,
billions or even more stars called galaxies. A case in point is our sun, part of a
galaxy we call the milky way.
The life of a young galaxy can be very turbulent. Examples of such young, active
galactic nuclei are radio galaxies and quasars.

===== PAGE 32 =====
galaxy cluster
Galaxies are not solitary objects – usually, they cluster together. Our own galaxy for
instance, the Milky Way, is part of a small cluster called the local group of galaxies.
The next-closest large galaxy cluster is the Virgo cluster.
gamma rays
The most highly energetic variety of electromagnetic radiation , with over a
quintillion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths of less than a
hundredth billionth of a metre.
Synonyms: gamma radiation
gamma-ray burst
Astronomical events visible as extremely strong flashes of gamma rays. Their origin
is still unclear; In the context of general relativity they are interesting because they
are thought to signal the mergers of neutron stars and/or black holes. Shortly after
the observation of the gravitational wave GW170817 a gamma ray burst was
detected and thus underpins the hypothesis.
Synonyms: gamma burst
gas
In a strict sense: A state of matter in which the atoms and/or molecules wildly
careen and collide, without being bound to each other. This movement leads to an
inner pressure, while the average kinetic energy of the moving particles is a
measure for the temperature of the gas.
Compare the other states of matter: solid state, liquid, plasma.
In a broader sense, gas is also used to denote other mixtures of freely careening
particles, for instance in the case of the electron gas whose pressure stabilizes a
white dwarf against further collapse.
general theory of relativity
Albert Einstein’s theory of gravity; a generalization of his special theory of
relativity.
For information about the concepts and applications of this theory, we recommend
the chapter general relativity of our introductory section Elementary Einstein.
Further information about many different aspects of general relativity and its
applications can be found in our section Spotlights on relativity.
Synonyms: general relativity
GEO600
British-German gravitational wave detector located in Ruthe (close to Hannover,
Germany). GEO600 is an interferometric gravitational wave detector with an arm-

===== PAGE 33 =====
length of 600 metres.
GEO600 website
geodesic
A straightest-possible line in a surface or a more general space. In the plane, the
geodesics are straight lines, on the surface of a sphere they are great circles.
geodetic precession
In classical mechanics, the rotation axis of a gyroscope on which no external forces
are acting will remain constant – a useful property that has found applications in
navigation. However, in the presence of spacetime curvature, this is no longer true –
the axis direction of a gyroscope in free fall will change over time; an effect
predicted by Einstein’s general theory of relativity.
geometry
That part of mathematics concerning itself with surfaces or more general spaces as
well as objects defined on such spaces, such as points or lines as well as the objects
constructable from points and lines, such as triangles.
GeV
See electron volt
Synonyms: Giga-electronvolt
global positioning system
A system of satellites and mobile receivers that makes it possible to determine each
receiver’s position with high accuracy. Used by pilots, truckers, car drivers and by
many smartphone users world-wide, it is an industrial application of Einstein’s
theories of special and general relativity: Without taking into account the effects
predicted by these theories for moving clocks in a gravitational field, there would
be errors of roughly 10 kilometres per day of operation in the determination of
positions on earth.
Synonyms: GPS
gluons
The carrier particles of the strong nuclear force. They are responsible for binding
(glueing) quarks together into compound particles like protons or neutrons.

===== PAGE 34 =====
gold
Chemical element with the symbol Au; each gold nucleus contains 79 protons.
Gold nuclei, stripped of their electrons, are among the types of heavy ions which
are brought into collision in particle accelerators such as the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider in order to recreate the state of matter in the early universe shortly after the
big bang.
Gowdy spacetimes
Gowdy spacetimes (or universes) are simple expanding model universes. In contrast
with the better known Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker universes (the basis
for the big bang models), Gowdy universes are not homogeneous. Instead, they are
filled with a regular pattern of gravitational waves. A Gowdy T3 universe is the
simplest kind of Gowdy universe, in which space has the shape of a three-
dimensional torus.
More information about Gowdy universes can be found in the spotlight text Of
gravitational waves and spherical chickens.
Synonyms: Gowdy universes Gowdy T3
gravitation
In classical physics: An action-at-a-distance force by which all bodies that possess
mass attract each other (see Newtonian theory of gravity), synonym: gravitational
force.
In Einstein’s general theory of relativity: The fact that matter that possesses mass,
energy, pressure or similar properties distorts spacetime, and that this distortion in
turn influences whatever matter might be present.
An introduction to the basic ideas of general relativity is provided by the section
General relativity of Elementary Einstein. More information about the nature of
gravity in general relativity can be found in the spotlight text Gravity: From
weightlessness to curvature.
Synonyms: gravity
gravitational constant
Constant of nature; the fundamental Newton’s law of gravity and thus a measure for
the natural strength of gravity. Analogously, in Einstein’s equations in the general
theory of relativity, it occurs as the proportionality factor determining how strongly
mass, energy and similar properties of matter distort space and time. In formulae, it
is usually written as G. The best current value for G is
G = 6.674 30(15)·10-11m³kg-1s-2.
Compared with other fundamental constants, G is known only to a comparatively
low accuracy.

===== PAGE 35 =====
gravitational field
The totality of all gravitational influences that one or more massive objects can
exert on bodies in their vicinity.
More precisely: At every location in space, the gravitational field is defined as the
acceleration that a small test particle present at that location would feel due to the
gravitational forces of the masses around it.
gravitational lens
In Einstein’s general relativity, gravity necessarily acts not only on material bodies,
but also on light – light passing a massive body is deflected. This deflection can be
so strong that light of one and the same cosmic object reaches an observer along
multiple paths – corresponding to the observer seeing multiple images of that object
in the sky. Masses that, in this sense, act like very special optical lenses are called
gravitational lenses.
More information can be found in the spotlight text A brief history of gravitational
lenses.
Synonyms: gravitational lensing
gravitational redshift
According to general relativity, light flying away from a massive body (or other
source of gravity) experience a redshift – its frequency decreases and the light
becomes less energetic. On the other hand, light flying towards a massive body gets
blueshifted – its frequency and energy increase.
gravitational wave astronomy
Discipline of astronomy which aims at using gravitational waves to gain
information about cosmic objects or the cosmos as a whole – for instance about
what’s happening in the core region of a supernova, about neutron star or about the
heated past of our universe.
Since 2015, scientists have been detecting gravitational waves using highly
sophisticated gravitational wave detectors, so that the time of
gravitational astronomy has now begun for real.
gravitational wave detector
Currently, scientists world wide are attempting the direct measurement of
gravitational waves reaching us from the depths of space. They are mainly using
two types of detectors: interferometric detectors like GEO600 and the LIGO
detectors, and resonant detectors.
For more informations about gravitational waves, please consult the chapter
Gravitational waves of Elementary Einstein.
gravitational waves
Distortions of space geometry that propagate through space with the speed of light,
analogous to ripples on the surface of a pond propagating as water waves.

===== PAGE 36 =====
For more informations about gravitational waves, please consult the chapter
Gravitational waves of Elementary Einstein.
Selected aspects of gravitational wave physics are described in the category
Gravitational waves of our Spotlights on relativity.
Gravitomagnetism
See frame-dragging .
Synonyms: frame-dragging Lense-Thirring effect
graviton
Hypothetical carrier particle in a quantum theory of gravity. However, as of yet
physicists have but a rough idea of how a complete theory of quantum gravity will
look like.
gravity
See gravitation
GRAVITY
GRAVITY is part of the Very Large Telescope Interferometer (VLTI) at the
European Southern Observatory in Chile. The instrument operates in the near
infrared and combines the light of four telescopes, whereby it achieves the spatial
resolution of an equivalent telescope with 130 meters in diameter. Due to its high
sensitivity and accuracy, it allows researchers to render very small and faint cosmic
objects visible. GRAVITY also measures distances very accurately and is therefore
very suitable for the measurement of movements. For example, with the help of
GRAVITY, the motion of a star around the black hole at the centre of our galaxy
could be observed, confirming the predictions of general relativity.
great circle
Circle on the surface of a sphere whose center coincides with that of the sphere
itself. On the globe, the equator is a great circle, while every meridian corresponds
to half of a great circle.
If you want to move on a spherical surface in the straightest possible way, choose a
path along a great circle – in the language of mathematics this is equivalent to
saying: great circles are geodesics of a spherical surface.
Hawking radiation
Thermal radiation emitted by black holes due to quantum effects. First calculated by
the British physicist Stephen Hawking in the 1970s. The characteristic temperature
of the radiation, which depends on the mass and spin of the black hole, is called
Hawking temperature.
Hawking temperature
Characteristic temperature of the Hawking radiation of a black hole. For simple,
spherically symmetric black holes, it is

===== PAGE 37 =====
TH = 6· 10-8 (solar mass/mass of the black hole) Kelvin. [Problems reading
expressions such as 10-8? See exponential notation.]
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle
Is a fundamental law of quantum theory, which defines the limit of precision with
which two complementary physical quantities can be determined. If one of the
quantities is measured with high precision, the corresponding other quantity can
necessarily only be determined vaguely. In other words, it is impossible to measure
simultaneously both complementary quantities with greater precision than the limit
defined by the Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle.
An example for such complementary quantities are the location and the momentum
of a quantum particle: Very precise determination of the location make precise
statements about its momentum impossible and vice versa.
helium
After hydrogen, the second lightest chemical element. Its atomic nucleus consists of
two protons and, ordinarily, two neutrons (“helium-4”); such helium nuclei are also
called alpha particles. Another variety of helium, helium-3, has only one neutron in
its nucleus.
In the context of general relativity, both helium-3 and helium-4 are is of interest as
two species of light atomic nuclei that formed in the early universe during Big Bang
Nucleosynthesis.
Hertz
Unit of frequency, abbreviation: Hz. One Hertz corresponds to one oscillation per
second.
horizon
In general relativity: A closed surface that is the boundary of a black hole. Whatever
enters through this boundary from the outside can never again leave the inside.
Synonym: event horizon.
Synonyms: event horizon
Hubble constant
In an expanding universe such as that of the big bang models, every observer will
find: The apparent velocity with which the galaxies around him recede is
proportional to their distance; the more distant a galaxy, the more its distance
increases in a given time. This relation was first found by the astronomer Edwin
Hubble in the 1920s from observations of far-away galaxies; it is hence called
Hubble relation or Hubble’s law, and the constant of proportionality between speed
and distance is the Hubble constant.
A visualisation of the Hubble relation can be found on the page The expanding
universe in the chapter on Cosmology of Elementary Einstein.

===== PAGE 38 =====
The Hubble relation only holds for all galaxies in an idealized universe whose
expansion neither accelerates nor slows down. In more realistic universes, it is true
in good approximation only for galaxies that are not too far away.
Synonyms: Hubble effect Hubble relation Hubble's law
Hubble relation
See Hubble constant
Hubble space telescope
Cooperative project of NASA and ESA: Space telescope that was put into orbit in
1990. Orbiting 600 kilometres above the earth, it leaves behind the densest parts of
the earth’s atmosphere, allowing an unrivalled, undisturbed view into space.
Outreach website for the Hubble Space Telescope
Website of the Space Telescope Science Institute
hydrogen
The lightest (and, in our universe, the most abundant) chemical element. The atomic
nucleus of an ordinary hydrogen atom is a single proton. If the atomic nucleus
contains an additional neutron, the atom is called heavy hydrogen or deuterium.
imaginary time
Certain quantum calculations (notably the calculation of path integrals as a way to
find quantum mechanical probabilities) involve an algebraic manipulation of the
following kind: Wherever the time coordinate t occurs, it is replaced by i·t, where i
is the “imaginary unit”, a number defined to have the remarkable property i²=i·i=-1.
At the end of the calculation, the substitution is reversed. The combination T=i·t is
called imaginary time.
Most such calculations occur in particle physics, in the framework of special
relativity, where there are rigorous mathematical proofs showing how the use of
imaginary time leads to correct results.
Imaginary time has also been employed in some candidate theories for a theory of
quantum gravity, notably in certain types of quantum cosmology. This, however,
involves the flexible time of general relativity, and both the details of the imaginary
time recipe and the more general question whether or not imaginary time can
usefully be employed in this context in the first place are still unresolved, and the
object of current research.
Some more information about path integrals and the role of imaginary time can be
found in the spotlight text The sum over all possibilities, while imaginary time in
quantum cosmology is briefly discussed in Searching for the quantum beginning of
the universe.
inertia
Basic law of classical mechanics and special relativity: bodies on which no external
forces act move with constant speed on straight paths. In the geometrical language

===== PAGE 39 =====
of special relativity, this can be reformulated as: bodies on which no external forces
act move on straight line in spacetime.
Strictly speaking, though, this law is only true in specific reference frames. This
gives rise to a further, more precise reformulation: It is always possible to find a
reference frame on which bodies on which no external forces act move with
constant speed along straight paths. Such reference frames are called inertial
frames.
In general relativity, the law of inertia holds in a somewhat modified form: there,
bodies on which no external, non-gravitational forces act don’t move on straight
lines through spacetime, but on geodesics.
Synonyms: law of
inertial forces
In classical mechanics or special relativity: Whenever an observer who is not an
inertial observer wants to explain the movements of bodies using the law “force
equals mass times acceleration”, that observer has to assume the existence of
additional forces; these are called inertial forces. For ordinary forces like the
electric force, the magnetic or the gravitational force, one can always state which
bodies are acting on which other bodies; inertial forces, in contrast, appear to act on
bodies “from nowhere”.
A famous example for an inertial force is the centrifugal force – an observer riding a
merry-go-round needs to introduce that force to explain why he and all other riders
are pulled away from the axis of rotation.
inertial observer
An inertial reference frame is a reference frame in which the first law of classical
mechanics holds: A body on which no external forces act either remains at rest or
moves with constant speed along a straight path. An inertial observer is an observer
that is at rest with respect to an inertial reference frame. In the context of relativity,
an inertial reference frame is one that drifts in gravity-free space without
undergoing rotation or being accelerated.
Inertial reference frames play a central role in special relativity: the basic postulates
of that theory are the relativity principle (which holds that the laws of physics are
the same in all inertial reference frames – no such frame is special, in this sense)
and the postulate that the speed of light has the same value for every inertial
observer.
In general relativity, there are no real inertial observers, however, by what’s called
the equivalence principle, the laws of physics for an observer that is in free fall and
performs his measurements only in his direct neighbourhood (and only over a
limited period of time), the laws of physics are approximately the same as for an
inertial observer.
Synonyms: inertial reference frame

===== PAGE 40 =====
inflation
Hypothetical phase in the earliest universe during which the cosmos underwent
exponentially growing expansion.
Synonyms: inflationary phase
infrared
Electromagnetic radiation in the frequency region between a hundred billion and a
trillion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths between 0.8
micrometres and 1 millimetre. The thermal radiation associated with everyday
temperatures is infrared radiation.
Synonyms: infrared light IR
inspiral
The inspiral is one phase in the life cycle of binary black holes. The objects lose
energy due to the emission of gravitational waves, which causes their orbits to
gradually shrink. They spiral towards each other with increasing speed, until they
collide and merge.
INTEGRAL
Satellite launched in 2002 as a space-borne gamma ray observatory by the
European Space Agency.
Public outreach pages of the INTEGRAL mission
interaction
Interactions are all the different ways in which elementary or compound particles
can influence each other. In elementary particle physics, “interaction” and “force”
are used synonymously.
In the standard model of elementary particles, there are three fundamental
interactions: electromagnetism, the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force.
For another interaction, gravity, there is no quantum description yet.
interference
When waves meet and are superimposed, they can amplify or dampen each other.
These superposition effects are called interference effects: Wherever a wave-crest
meets a wave-crest, a higher wave-crest results (constructive interference); when a
wave-crest meets a trough, there can be a complete cancellation between the two
(destructive interference).
Interference can happen among electromagnetic waves (such as light), but also
among water waves and among sound waves.

===== PAGE 41 =====
interferometric detector
Gravitational wave detector that utilizes interference between light waves to detect
minute changes in distance effected by a passing gravitational wave.
Some of the physics behind interferometric detectors can be found in our spotlight
topic Catching the wave with light.
Exmples for interferometric detectors are GEO600 and the LIGO detectors.
Synonyms: interferometric gravitational wave detector
intergalactic medium
A thin gas that fills some parts of the empty regions between galaxies. The
distribution is non-uniform; filaments of intergalactic medium are separated by
voids with much lower density. The main ingredient of the intergalactic medium is
ionized hydrogen, in other words: a plasma consisting of an equal number of
hydrogen nuclei (protons) and electrons. The average density of the intergalactic
medium is estimated to be between ten and a hundred hydrogen atoms per cubic
metre.
International Space Station
Space station in an earth orbit, constructed as a cooperative project of 16 different
nations. In the context of relativity, its main reason is to be an example for a
laboratory in free fall in the earth’s gravitational field.
ISS pages (NASA)
Synonyms: ISS
International System of Units
See SI, International System of Units
Synonyms: SI
ion
Usually, an atom possesses as many electrically positive protons in its nucleus as it
has electrically negative electrons in its shell, rendering it, overall, electrically
neutral. Atoms that have more or fewer electrons and are thus, as a whole,
electrically charged, are called ions. If you start with an atom that is electrically
neutral and make it into an ion by removing or adding electrons, you have ionized
that atom.
Synonyms: ionize

===== PAGE 42 =====
isotope
Different species of atomic nuclei which contain the same number of protons (and
thus represent the same chemical element), but different numbers of neutrons, are
called isotopes.
Thus, helium-4 (two protons, two neutrons) and helium-3 (two protons, one
neutron) are isotopes, but helium-3 and tritium (one proton, two neutrons) are not.
The word can also be used of a specific species of nucleus and a generic chemical
element, as in “helium-3 is an isotope of helium”.
jets
In the context of astronomy: strongly focussed, highly energetic particle streams
like those emitted by certain active galactic nuclei. Jets can become visible when
they deposit their energy in a huge gaseous region, making them shine out bright
(so-called radio bubbles).
Joule
The unit of energy in the International System of units (SI). One Joule is equal to
one kilogram times square metre over square second, in short: 1 J = 1 kg m²/s². It is
equal to the kinetic energy gained by an object of the mass one kilogram that has
been accelerated with an acceleration of one metre per square second over a
distance of one metre.
KAGRA
The Kamioka Gravitational Wave Detector (KAGRA) is an underground Japanese
gravitational wave detector, the length of its two arms being 3 km. KAGRA uses
cyrogenic technology, which means that the interferometer’s mirrors are cooled
down to 20 Kelvin in order to reduce thermal noise. On top of that, the underground
construction is expected to reduce seismic noise. The detector has started
observation in 2020.
Karlstad University
University (enrolment ca. 10,000) in central Sweden. Research areas include a
number of relativistic topics, from string theory to the mathematics of general
relativity.
Karlstad University website
Kelvin scale
The temperature scale used in physics, synonym: absolute temperature.
The zero point of the Kelvin scale is at absolute zero; a temperature difference of
one Kelvin (abbreviated 1 K and, rarely, also called one “degree Kelvin”) is the
same as a temperature difference of one degree Celsius, as both scales differ only
by their choice of zero point: X degrees Celsius are (X plus 273.15) Kelvin, Y
Kelvin are (Y minus 273,15) degrees Celsius.
Relation to the Fahrenheit scale: X degrees Fahrenheit are (X+459,67)*5/9 Kelvin,
Y Kelvin are (Y*9/5)-459,67 degrees Fahrenheit.

===== PAGE 43 =====
Kepler’s laws
Basic laws governing the orbital motions of planets around the sun. First law: Each
planetary orbit is an ellipse, with the sun in one of its focus points. Second law: If
you connect the planet and the sun by an imaginary line then, in equal time
intervals, the line will sweep over equally large areas, independent on where the
planet is on its orbit. Third law: dividing the square of a planet’s orbital period by
the third power of it’s average distance from the sun gives the same value for all
planets in the solar system; written as a formula: period²/(average distance to the
sun)³ = const.
Kepler’s laws follow directly from the laws of classical mechanics and Newton’s
law of gravity. However, they are only valid approximately – the gravitational pull
of the planets on each other, as well as the fact that, ultimately, gravity is governed
not by Newton’s laws, but by general relativity (see relativistic perihelion shift) lead
to small deviations from perfectly elliptic orbits.
Synonyms: Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Kerr black hole
The simplest kind of a rotating black hole: a model universe containing a single
rotating black hole and nothing else. This solution to Einstein’s equations was found
by Roy Kerr in 1963.
Synonyms: Kerr solution
Kerr-Newman black hole
The simplest kind of a rotating, electrically charged black hole: a model universe
containing a single rotating, charged black hole and nothing else. This solution to
Einstein’s equations was found independently by Roy Kerr and Ted Newman in
1963.
The Kerr-Newman solution is more general and includes the Kerr solution if the
charge of the black hole is zero.
Synonyms: Kerr-Newman solution
keV
See electron volt
Synonyms: kilo-electronvolt
kilogram
In the international system of units (SI), the unit of mass; until May 2019 defined
by a reference mass that is kept in Paris, France. From then on by definition of the
Planck constant and of the Avogadro number that has an exact experimental value
used for the definition of the Mol.

===== PAGE 44 =====
kinetic energy
A type of energy that has to be ascribed to an object simply because that object
moves relative to the reference frame. In classical, pre-Einstein physics, the amount
of energy is given by one half, times an object’s mass, times the square of its speed.
Klein-Gordon equation
Equation regulating the behaviour of relativistic quantum particles with spin 0.
Lamb shift
Typically, electromagnetic radiation is emitted by atoms only at very specific
frequencies that depend on the type of atom. For a number of these characteristic
frequencies, the relativistic quantum theory of electromagnetism (called quantum
electrodynamics) predicts a slight shift, as compared with earlier theories. This is
the Lamb shift. Experiments have confirmed the prediction.
Large Hadron Collider
The Large Hadron Collider is a particle accelerator in the research centre CERN.
From the point of view of relativity theory, it has several points of interest: First of
all, it accelerates protons to higher energies than ever, allowing new tests of the
relativistic quantum field theories that are at the core of modern particle physics.
Secondly, at such high energies, there should be first traces of an as-yet unproven
symmetry of nature called supersymmetry, which plays an important role in string
theory, one of the candidates for a theory of quantum gravity (the quantum theory
version of Einstein’s general relativity). Finally, the high energies are interesting
because they give information about the very early high temperature universe, and
about the physics that should be included in the big bang models of relativistic
cosmology.
CERN website
Synonyms: LHC
laser
Abbreviation for “Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation”.
Technique for the production of very concentrated, strong light with a fixed
frequency, which propagates as a very simple electromagnetic wave in which wave
crests and wave troughs are in perfect step (“coherent light”).
Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory
See LIGO
Laser Interferometer Space Antenna
See LISA
lead
Chemical element with the symbol Pb; each lead nucleus contains 82 protons.

===== PAGE 45 =====
Lead nuclei, stripped of their electrons, are among the types of heavy ions which
are brought into collision in particle accelerators such as the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider in order to recreate the state of matter in the early universe shortly after the
big bang.
length contraction
Effect of special relativity theory: An observer (more precisely: an inertial observer)
measures a shorter length for a moving object than for an identical copy of that
object resting beside him (here, length refers to extension in the direction of
movement – extension in orthogonal directions remains the same).
Lense-Thirring effect
See frame-dragging.
Synonyms: frame-dragging Gravitomagnetism
light
Light in the strict sense of the word is electromagnetic radiation the human eye can
detect, with wave-lengths between 400 and 700 nanometres. In relativity theory and
in astronomy, the word is often used in a more general sense, encompassing all
kinds of electromagnetic radiation. For instance, astronomers might talk about
“infrared light” or “gamma light”; in this context, light in the stricter sense is
referred to as “visible light”.
Within classical physics, the properties of light are governed by Maxwell’s
equations; in quantum physics, it turns out that light is a stream of energy packets
called light quanta or photons.
In the context of relativistic physics, light is of great interest, and for a number of
reasons. First of all, the speed of light plays a central role in both special and
general relativity. Also, there are a number of interesting effects in general relativity
which are associated with the propagation of light, namely deflection, the Shapiro
effect and the gravitational redshift.
light elements
According to the big bang models, the early universe underwent a brief period of
primordial nucleosynthesis between a few seconds and a few minutes cosmic time,
during which nuclei of light elements such as heavy hydrogen, helium and lithium
formed.
A brief account of this Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be found in the spotlight text
Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, while Equilibrium and change provides more
information about the physical processes involved and Elements of the past
describes how the predictions of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis can be tested against
astronomical observation.
Synonyms: origin of light elements

===== PAGE 46 =====
light speed
See speed of light.
light-cone
In special as well as in general relativity, the speed of light sets the upper limit for
the transmission of influences and signals. Thus, studying the propagation of light,
one can find out for an event A which other events can influence A, which can be
influenced by A, and where any influence is impossible (because such influence
would have to travel faster than light – cf. causal structure). Graphically, the
boundary between the two sets of events where influence is possible or impossible
has the form of a double cone (for a sketch, see the page Spacetime in the chapter
Special relativity of Elementary Einstein). It is formed by all world-lines of
hypothetical light signals that would be emitted at the event A or, coming from an
arbitrary direction, would be absorbed there.
Light-second
Units of distance: A light-year is the distance a light signal travels during one year
of flight-time, a light-second the distance it travels in a second.
The following table translates these units into the more familiar kilometres or
seconds: 1 light-second = 300000 km = 186000 mi. 1 light-minute = 18 millionen
km = 11 million mi. 1 light-hour = 1.1 billion km = 670 million mi. 1 light-day = 25
billion km = 16 billion mi. 1 light-year = 9.5 trillion km = 6 trillion mi.
Synonyms: light-minute light-hour light-day light-year
light-wave
Light is a mixture of elementary waves, each a regular succession of maxima and
minima of the electromagnetic field. The same is true for all other sorts of
electromagnetic radiation.
light-year
See light-second etc., above
Synonyms: light-years
LIGO
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory : A detector project for the
measurement of gravitational waves in the United States, which was upgraded to
the Advanced LIGO between 2010 and 2015 .The detector includes two
interferometric gravitational wave detectors, with an arm-length of four kilometers
each. One of them is located in Hanford, Washington, the other one is located in
Livingston, Louisiana. The first ever direct measurement of gravitational waves was
made at LIGO.
> LIGO website

===== PAGE 47 =====
Synonyms: Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
line
Geometric object with a single dimension. A line can either be an independent one-
dimensional space (in the abstract mathematical space where a space does not need
to have three dimensions), or it can be embedded into a more general space, like a
line drawn onto a piece of paper (i.e. a surface).
liquid
State of matter in which the constituent atoms and molecules are bound to each
other, but so loosely that the matter cannot maintain any shape without external
support: If you place a liquid into a container, its shape will adapt to that of the
container (in contrast with a solid body, which will keep its shape, and in common
with other fluids such as gas or plasma).
Compare the other states of matter: solid state, gas, plasma.
LISA
The concept of LISA (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna), a space-based
gravitational wave detector, has been studied jointly by the European and US space
agencies ESA and NASA for 20 years. The planned interferometric gravitational
wave detector should be composed of three satellites, positioned to form a triangle,
with each side 2.5 million kilometers long. While called eLISA for some time, the
project named LISA is expected to launch in 2034.
> LISA website
Synonyms: Laser Interferometer Space Antenna
LISA Pathfinder
LISA Pathfinder was a test mission of the European Space Agency ESA for the
LISA mission. LISA Pathfinder demonstrated the functionality of crucial LISA
technologies with which the first gravitational wave observatory in space will
observe low-frequency gravitational waves.
lithium
Chemical element whose atomic nucleus contains three protons.
In the context of general relativity, it is of interest as one of the light elements that
formed in the early universe during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis.
local group
The galaxy cluster of which our very own galaxy, the Milky Way, is a member.
Cosmically speaking, the local group is rather puny – its only members apart from
the Milky Way are the Andromeda galaxy, the galaxy M33 and a number of dwarf
galaxies (such as the Magellanic clouds).

===== PAGE 48 =====
Lockman hole
A region in the sky, located in the constellation Ursa Major (better known as the Big
Dipper), and covering an area about 75 times that of the full moon. Pointing their
telescopes at this region, astronomers will encounter only negligible amounts of the
hydrogen gas that fills significant portions of our galaxy. These are ideal conditions
for obtaining a clear and unobstructed view of objects in deep space, far beyond our
own galaxy. Not surprisingly, the Lockman hole is one of the most intensively
studied regions in the night sky.
logarithmic
In graphic representations of physical data, a way of plotting values according to
their common logarithm. In mathematics, the logarithm is the inverse function to
exponentiation. That means the logarithm of a given number x is the exponent to
which another fixed number, the base b, must be raised, to produce that number x.
If the base is 10 then the logarithm of 10 is 1, the logarithm of 100 is 2, and so on.
In ordinary (“linear”) plots, the distance between the values 1 and 2 is the same as
between the values 2 and 3. In a logarithmic plot, the distance between the values 1
and 10 is the same as the distance between 10 and 100 and the distance between
100 and 1000.
Synonyms: logarithmic scale
lookback time
The time that light from a distance body needs to reach us here on earth. Lookback
time, defined using the cosmic time coordinate, is one way of defining distances in
an expanding universe.
loop quantum gravity
Candidate for a theory of quantum gravity. Loop quantum gravity is an attempt to
apply the concepts and laws of quantum theory directly to the geometry that is at
the heart of general relativity.
A brief description can be found on the page Loop quantum gravity in the chapter
Relativity and the quantum of Elementary Einstein.
Lorentz transformation
Central set of formulae of special relativity: Formulae that define how to go back
and forth between two inertial reference frames that are in relative motion; more
precisely: if an event is defined in terms of the space- and time coordinates of one
of the observers, one can calculate which coordinates the other observer would
assign to that same event.
magnetic field
The magnetic force is a force by which electric currents (i.e. moving electric
charges) act on each other; the magnetic field is the associated field. All phenomena
related to the magnetic force or magnetic field are subsumed under the heading of
magnetism. Magnetic fields cannot be understood separate from electric fields –

===== PAGE 49 =====
their complete description is possible only within the more general context of
electromagnetism.
Synonyms: magnetic force magnetism
mass
In classical physics, mass plays a triple role. First of all, it is a measure for how
easy it is to influence the motion of a body. Imagine that you’re drifting in emtpy
space. Drifting by are an elephant and a mouse, and you give each of them a push of
equal strength. The fact that the mouse abruptly changes its path, while the
elephant’s course is as good as unaltered, is a sure sign that the mass (or, in the
language of physics, the inertia or inertial mass) of the elephant is much greater
than that of the mouse. Secondly, mass is a measure of how many atoms there are in
a body, and of what type they are. All atoms of one and the same type have the
same mass, and adding up all those tiny component masses, the total mass of the
body results. Thirdly, in Newton’s theory of gravity, mass determines how strongly
a body attracts other bodies via the gravitational force, and how strongly these
bodies attract it (in this sense, mass is the charge associated with the gravitational
force).
In special relativity, one can also define a mass that is a measure for a bodies
resistance to changing its motion. However, the value of this relativistic mass
depends on the relative motion of the body and the observer. The relativistic mass is
the “m” in Einstein’s famous E=mc² (cf. equivalence of mass and energy).
The relativistic mass has a minimum for an observer that is at rest relative to the
body in question. This value is the so-called rest mass of the body, and when
particle physicists talk of mass, this is usually what they mean. Just as in classical
physics, the rest mass is a kind of measure for how much matter the body is made
up of – with one caveat: For composite bodies, the energies associated with the
forces holding the body together contribute to the total mass, as well (another
consequence of the equivalence of mass and energy).
In general relativity, mass still plays a role as a source of gravity; however, it has
been joined by physical quantities such as energy, momentum and pressure.
mass defect
Whenever two or more objects are bound together by strong forces, there is a
binding energy – the energy needed to be able to get these objects apart. Since
Einstein, we know that energy and mass are equivalent. To this binding energy there
corresponds a mass. It is called the mass defect because, by this amount, the mass
of the component object is less than the sum of the masses of its parts.
Some more information about binding energies and the mass defect can be found in
the spotlight topic Is the whole the sum of its parts?
masses in astronomy
While mass is surely one of the most basic properties of an astronomical object, it is
not that easy to actually determine that mass. Most methods utilize the laws of
celestial mechanics to deduce from the way that two (or more) objects orbit each

===== PAGE 50 =====
other their respective masses. In other cases, relativistic effects such as the
deflection of light or the Shapiro delay can be used to determine an object’s mass.
Synonyms: determination of masses in astronomy
matter
In general relativity: All contents of spacetime that contribute to its curvature:
particles, dust, gases, fluids, electromagnetic and other fields.
In particle physics: All elementary particles with half-integer spin, such as electrons
and quarks, as well as their composites such as protons and neutrons, in contrast
with force particles.
Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics
Research institute of the Max Planck Society, dedicated to astrophysical subjects
such as the evolution of stars, the physics of supernovae, the evolution of galaxies
and cosmology. Founded in 1958 in Germany, located in Garching, near Munich.
MPA website
Synonyms: MPA
Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics
Research institute of the Max Planck Society, dedicated to astronomy and
astrophysics with observations in the infrared, X-ray and gamma ray part of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Founded in 1963 in Germany, located in Garching, near
Munich.
MPE website
Synonyms: MPE
Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics/Albert Einstein Institute
See Albert Einstein Institute.
Synonyms: AEI
Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy
Research institute of the Max Planck Society, dedicated to infrared and radio
astronomy. Founded in 1966, the institute is located in Bonn and Bad Münstereifel-
Effelsberg, Germany.
MPIfR website

===== PAGE 51 =====
Max Planck Society
German organisation dedicated to basic research; operates 84 Max Planck Institutes
(as of January 2018) dedicated to research in specific fields of science – see the
entries directly above. Founded in 1948 as the successor of the Kaiser Wilhelm
Society; administrative headquarters are located in Munich, Germany.
MPG website
Synonyms: MPG
Maxwell’s equations
The four fundamental equations of electromagnetism that describe how magnetic
and electric influences (in physics language: electric and magnetic fields) are
produced: Electric fields are produced whenever there are electric charges or,
alternatively, when magnetic fields change over time. Magnetic fields are produced
whenever there are electric currents (moving electric charges), but also whenever
electric fields change over time. The fact that electric and magnetic fields can exist
without the presence of charges or currents, simply by mutual excitation where a
change in the magnetic field produces an electric field and vice versa, is the basic
phenomenon behind electromagnetic waves.
mechanics
Branch of physics dealing with the motions of objects and how they react to forces
acting on them. Depending on the framework used, there is classical mechanics,
relativistic mechanics and quantum mechanics.
mechanics, classical
Synonym: Newtonian mechanics. According to classical mechanics, the movements
of bodies are regulated by Newton’s three laws of mechanics. The first law states
that bodies on which no external force acts stay at rest or move with constant speed
along a straight path (“law of inertia”). The second law relates the force acting on a
body, the body’s mass and the acceleration caused by the force: Force is equal to
mass times acceleration. The third law is the law of “action equals reaction”: If a
body A acts on a body B with a certain force, then A itself experiences B acting on it
with a force that is equal in strength but has the opposite direction.
An alternative version of the second law uses the concept of momentum: The force
acting on a body is equal to the change of that body’s momentum over time.
Synonyms: classical mechanics
mechanics, relativistic
The generalization of classical mechanics that takes into account the effects of
special relativity. The basic laws are almost unchanged: First of all, bodies on which
no external forces act stay at rest or move with constant speed along straight paths –
in the language of special relativity: such bodies move on straight lines in
spacetime. Secondly: The total force acting on a body is equal to the change of its
momentum over time (but notice: this momentum is defined using the body’s

===== PAGE 52 =====
relativistic mass, which depends on the bodies speed relative to the observer).
Thirdly, mass and momentum are conserved quantities – their total sum is the same
whenever particles interact (this is equivalent to a slightly modified version of the
“action equals reaction” principle of classical mechanics).
There exists an elegant reformulation of these laws of mechanics using four-
dimensional concepts adapted to the geometry of spacetime, such as the “four-
momentum”.
Synonyms: relativistic mechanics
Mercury
The planet closest to the sun. In the context of general relativity it is of interest
because, for this planet, the deviation from the orbits of Newtonian gravity the
theory predicts, the relativistic perihelion shift, is especially great. The concord
between prediction and observation for this shift constitutes the first successful test
of general relativity.
merger
A merger occurs as a consequence of an inspiral, when two black holes collide to
form one single bigger black hole. The emission of gravitational waves peaks
during a merger.
metre
In the international system of units (SI), the basic unit for length. Since 1983, the
official definition uses the constancy of the speed of light as postulated in special
relativity: the metre is defined with the help of the basic unit for time, the second: a
metre is the distance that light travels in a vacuum in one 299792458th of a second.
Synonyms: metre
MeV
See electron volt
Synonyms: Mega-electronvolt
micro
“Micro” as a prefix denotes “one millionths”, making a micrometre a millionth of a
metre.

===== PAGE 53 =====
microquasar
An astronomical object comparable in size to a star, which emits enormous amounts
of energy; the processes responsible for the emission are similar to those which
happen in quasars or other active galactic nuclei. The key component of a
microquasar is a central stellar black hole; more information about how black holes
can lead to such enormous energy output can be found in the spotlight text
Luminous disks: How black holes light up their surroundings.
microwaves
Electromagnetic radiation with wave-lengths between a millimetre and 30
centimetres, corresponding to frequencies between some and some hundred billion
oscillations per second.
Looking up to the night sky, almost all energy that reaches us of the cosmic
background radiation is in the form of microwaves.
Milky Way
1. Our home galaxy – a spiral galaxy, a disk of stars with a diameter of roughly
hundred thousand light-years and a thickness between three- and six thousand light-
years, containing about 100 billions of stars. It also contains a supermassive black
hole in its centre – more about that in our spotlight topic The black heart of the
Milky Way.
2. As our sun is located within the disk of the Milky Way galaxy, there are
directions in which we can observe comparatively few of the other stars in our
galaxy (namely as we look perpendicularly to the disk, or nearly so) and directions
in which we can see a large amount of stars (as we look approximately in parallel
with the disk plane). The result is that there is a dim band in the night sky marking
the disk plane (the directions where we see a lot of the other stars). This band is also
known as the Milky Way.
milli
“Milli” as a prefix denotes “one thousandth”, making a millimetre a thousandth of a
metre.
minute of arc
See arcminute, arcseond.
molecule
Composite object consisting of two or more atoms, bound together by
electromagnetic forces.
Synonyms: molecules
momentum
Physical quantity that is equal to a body’s mass times its velocity (in special
relativity: its relativistic mass times its velocity).

===== PAGE 54 =====
What makes momentum a useful quantity is that it is conserved – if several bodies
interact, the sum of their momenta before and after the interaction is the same.
Momentum is neither created nor destroyed, merely passed on from one body to
another.
In general relativity, momentum is one of a number of quantities (like mass and
energy) that acts as a source of gravity.
muon
An elementary particle which is a somewhat heavier version of the electron. Its
electric charge is the same as that of the electron, and like that particle, it does not
interact via the strong force. The muon’s mass is about 207 times that of the
electron.
naked singularity
In general relativity, singularities – environs of infinite curvature – that form in the
collapse of massive bodies or in similar processes are typically hidden inside black
holes, in other words: spacetime in their vicinity is distorted so much that no
information about the singularity can ever reach the outside world. Hypothetical
singularities which are not cloaked in this way, and thus are visible to the rest of the
cosmos, are called “naked”. By the cosmic censorship hypothesis, no realistic kind
of collapse can lead to the formation of a naked singularity.
nano
“Nano” as a prefix denotes “one billionth”, making a nanometre one billionth of a
metre.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Part of the US government in charge not only of manned space missions, but also
responsible for numerous highly successful satellite and probe missions. NASA is a
partner in projects such as the Hubble space telescope or the gravitational wave
detector LISA.
NASA website
Synonyms: NASA
National Radio Astronomy Observatory
US national institute for radio astronomy, located in Charlottesville, Virginia.
Responsible for operating the Very Large Array of radio telescopes in New Mexico
and the Very Large Baseline Array, an array of ten far-apart radio telescopes.
NRAO website
Synonyms: NRAO

===== PAGE 55 =====
neutrino
Type of elementary particle that is related to the electron, but carries no electric
charge and has an extremely small mass. There are three types of neutrinos, called
electron-neutrino, muon-neutrino and tau-neutrino.
Synonyms: neutrinos
neutron
Particle that is electrically neutral and comparatively massive; the atomic nuclei
consist of neutrons and protons.
Neutrons are not elementary particles, they are compound particles consisting of
quarks that are bound together through the strong nuclear interaction . Collectively,
neutrons, protons and a number of similar particles are called baryons.
Neutron stars are mainly made of neutrons.
Synonyms: neutrons
neutron star
Final stage of massive stars that explode as a supernova. In the explosion process,
the core of the star collapses to form a compact object with roughly 1.4 solar
masses that mostly consists of nuclear matter, predominantly of neutrons.
For astronomers, neutron stars are of interest as there exists a variety called pulsars
from which they receive highly regular pulses of electromagnetic radiation. For
relativists, they are interesting as the typical effects of general relativity are very
pronounced in objects that compact (compare PSR 1913+16, double pulsar PSR
J0737-3029A/B).
Newton
English physicist of the 16th/17th century, see Newtonian gravity, below.
In the international system of units (SI) the unit of force, abbreviation N. One
Newton is the force needed to impart on a body of mass one kilogram an
acceleration of one metre per second-squared.
Newton’s constant
See gravitational constant
Newtonian gravity
In pre-Einstein mechanics, which goes back to the English physicist and
mathematician Isaac Newton (1643-1727), gravity is a force with which masses act
on each other. As other forces do, they cause bodies to accelerate.
In its simplest form, Newton’s law of gravity describes the force acting between
two spherical, symmetric masses: The force with which the first sphere acts on the
second is equal to the mass of the first sphere times the mass of the second sphere

===== PAGE 56 =====
times Newton’s gravitational constant, divided by the square of the distance
between the centre-points of the two spheres.
How to remove from this law more complicated gravitational effects, see the article
The gravitation of gravitation. The differences between Newton’s gravitation and
Einstein’s theory of gravitation, the theory of General Relativity, can be described
systematically in the frame of the so called post-Newtonian approximation.
Synonyms: Newton's law of gravity
nitrogen
Chemical element whose atoms have seven protons each in their nuclei.
In the context of relativity, more concretely: cosmology, nitrogen is interesting as an
indicator of chemical evolution: Its nuclei are not produced during Big Bang
Nucleosynthesis, but they are produced by nuclear fusion reactions in the interior of
stars. The presence of nitrogen (or, for that matter, of other elements such as oxygen
or iron) in an astronomical object is an indicator that stellar fusion has taken place,
and hence that the abundances of the different elements do not reflect the element
abundances in the early universe.
no-hair theorem
See black hole uniqueness theorems.
nonlinear
In some physical theories, influences can simply be added up – take the electric
force associated with one particular charged body, the electric force associated with
a different body, and their sum will be the electric force felt by a test particle when
both bodies are present. Such theories are called linear; theories where separate
contributions do not simply add up are called nonlinear, an important example
being Einstein’s general relativity.
Synonyms: nonlinearity
nuclear fission
Processes in which a heavier atomic nucleus splits up into several lighter nuclei. If
the initial nucleus is heavy enough, energy is set free in the split. Nuclear fission
reactions are used in nuclear reactors to produce electrical energy, and in nuclear
weapons to power an energetic explosion.
Some more information about nuclear fission can be found in the spotlight topic Is
the whole the sum of its parts?. The role played in nuclear fission and fusion by
Einstein’s famous formula E=mc² is the subject of the spotlight topic From E=mc²
to the atomic bomb.
nuclear force
Force that binds protons and neutrons together to form atomic nuclei; a side-effect
of the strong interaction.

===== PAGE 57 =====
See also strong interaction and weak interaction.
nuclear fusion
Processes in which two lighter atomic nuclei merge to form a more massive
nucleus. For nuclei lighter than those of iron, energy is released in fusion. This is
the main source of energy of ordinary stars like our sun.
Some more information about nuclear fusion can be found in the spotlight topic Is
the whole the sum of its parts?. The role played in nuclear fusion and fission by
Einstein’s famous formula E=mc² is the subject of the spotlight topic From E=mc²
to the atomic bomb.
nuclear physics
That branch of physics dealing with the properties of atomic nucleus. One
connection to relativistic physics is the fact that nuclear physics is needed to
describe the properties of matter in the early universe of the big bang models and in
the interior of neutron stars.
nucleosynthesis
See Big Bang Nucleosynthesis.
nucleus
Extremely dense central region of an atom, consisting of protons and neutrons held
together by nuclear forces. The number of protons determines what chemical
element a nucleus represents.
Typical diameter for atomic nuclei are in the region of a quadrillionth of a metre=
10-15 metres. This makes nuclei about a hundredth of a thousandth as large as
atoms.
Synonyms: nuclei
numerical relativity
Subdiscipline of physics devoted to the use of computer simulations for exploring
the structure and consequences of Einstein’s theories, special and general relativity.
Notably, the centerpiece of general relativity are Einstein’s equations, which relate
certain properties of the matter contained in a spacetime to that spacetime’s
geometry. A model universe in which matter distorts the geometry – and is in turn
influenced by those distortions – in exactly the way prescribed by Einstein’s
equations is called a solution of these equations. Some simple solutions can simply
be written down on a piece of paper (“exact solutions”). More complicated
situations can only be described by simulating space, time and matter in a computer
(“numerical solution”), and this is one of the main tasks of numerical relativity.
Numerical relativity has led to interesting results about black holes and gravitational
waves, for instance about the gravitational wave produced when two black holes
collide and merge. They have also shed light on what general relativity predicts for
the properties of spacetime close to a black hole’s central singularity (further

===== PAGE 58 =====
information about this can be found in the spotlight text Of singularities and
breadmaking). The branch of numerical relativity that is of interest for the study of
phenomena such as supernovae, jets, and merging or collapsing neutron stars is
relativistic (magneto-)hydrodynamics, more about which can be found in the
spotlight text The realm of relativistic hydrodynamics.
observer
In the context of relativity, “observer” can mean two different things.
Often, observer is synonymous with reference frame or (spacetime-)coordinate
system: An observer in this sense is someone who assigns coordinates to everything
that happens around him. In particular, all events are assigned space coordinate
values and a time coordinate value. In the context of special relativity, it is often the
case that when one talks about an observer, what is really meant is an inertial
observer, corresponding to a special type of reference frame.
On other occasions, the term is used in a more narrow sense – in those cases, an
observer is someone sitting at a certain point in space and using the light signals
reaching that location to construct an image of his surroundings. In the context of
optical effects in relativity, for instance gravitational lensing, observer is usually
meant in this way.
Olbers’ paradox
In an infinitely extended universe that does not change over time and is evenly
filled with stars, the “night sky” would look as bright as the surface of the sun. The
reason: The farther away a star, the weaker the light we receive from it. But: The
greater the distance, the greater the number of stars that have exactly that distance
from us. In an eternal and infinite universe, the two effects cancel exactly.
The big bang models based on Einstein’s general theory of relativity, with a
changing universe evolving out of a hot initial state, make no such counter-factual
prediction.
oxygen
Chemical element whose atoms have eight protons each in their nuclei.
In the context of relativity, more concretely: cosmology, oxygen is interesting as an
indicator of chemical evolution: Oxygen nuclei are not produced during Big Bang
Nucleosynthesis, but they are produced by nuclear fusion reactions in the interior of
stars. The presence of oxygen in an astronomical object is an indicator that stellar
fusion has taken place, and that the abundances of the different elements thus do not
reflect the element abundances in the early universe.

===== PAGE 59 =====
parsec
Astronomical unit of distance:
1 parsec = 3.26 light-years
= 200 000 astronomical units
= 20 trillion miles
= 30 trillion kilometres.
Abbreviation: pc. Parsec is an acronym for “parallax second”.
particle accelerator
The most important experimental technique of particle physics: accelerating
electrically charged particles with the help of electric forces, make them collide
with each other and, from the result of the collision, draw conclusions about the
properties of elementary particles and their interactions.
It is an intriguing possibility, suggested by models based on the ideas of string
theory, that particle accelerators such as the LHC might actually produce miniature
black holes (for more about this, see the spotlight text Particle accelerators as black
hole factories?).
particle physics
The branch of physics that deals with particles that are, to the best of today’s
knowledge, not made up of more fundamental sub-units, for instance with electrons,
quarks or neutrinos. Also included is the study of some species of particles that do
have more elementary constitutents, such as protons or neutrons, but not of larger
systems such as atomic nuclei (that would be nuclear physics) or, even worse,
whole atoms. Questions such as, whether the particles nowadays thought to be
elementary really are elementary, or are, for instance, different manifestations of
one and the same species of string, fall within the scope of particle physics.
The theoretical tools of particle physics are the so-called quantum field theories
which allow the description of elementary particles on the basis of both quantum
theory and special relativity, while the main experimental tools are particle
accelerators in which particles are accelerated and then brought to collision.
path integrals
Synonym: Sum over histories. A technique for performing calculations in quantum
theory. Roughly speaking, the probability for a certain outcome (for instance, a
particle reaching location A at time t) is calculated by performing a sum over all
possible ways in which this particular outcome can come about.
A description of the path integral formulation of quantum theory can be found in the
spotlight text The sum over all possibilities.
Pauli exclusion principle
Basic principle of quantum theory stating that no two fermions can be in exactly the
same state – for instance: no two fermions with identical properties can be at the
same location. Formulated by the physicist Wolfgang Pauli.

===== PAGE 60 =====
Electrons are fermions, and the Pauli exclusion principle plays a crucial role in
bringing about the properties of matter as we know them: It is responsible for the
fact that the electrons of atoms do not all cluster together in the lowest-energy state
close to the atomic nucleus, but instead spread out, occupying different states. This
is what gives atoms their shell structure, responsible for different atoms’ different
chemical properties.
perihelion
For a planet or other heavenly body orbiting the sun on an elliptic orbit, that point
of the orbit closest to the sun. In the context of general relativity, the perihelion is of
great interest as that theory predicts a slight motion of this point around the sun, cf.
(relativistic) perihelion shift.
perihelion advance, relativistic
For planetary orbits, there is a small difference between the predictions of
Newtonian gravity and general relativity. For instance, in Newton’s theory, the
orbital curve of a lonely planet orbiting a star is an ellipse. In general relativity, it is
a kind of rose or rhodonea curve. Such a curve is similar to an ellipse curve, which
shifts a bit with each additional orbit. The shift can be defined by looking at the
point which is closest to the sun (perihelion) on each orbit. The additional
relativistic shift is, hence, called relativistic perihelion shift or relativistic perihelion
advance. A picture can be seen on the page A planet goes astray in the chapter
General relativity of Elementary Einstein.
Synonyms: perihelion shift, relativistic
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics
Privately funded institute for basic research in theoretical physics, located in
Waterloo, Canada. Currently, the main areas of research are quantum computing,
the foundations of quantum theory, and quantum gravity.
Perimeter Institute website
photo effect
When light shines onto a metal, it can knock electrons out of the metal’s atoms.
This is the photoelectric effect, and its properties – how does the number and
energy of the electrons depend on the frequency and intensity of the light? – can
only be explained if one accepts that light is no mere electromagnetic wave, but
somehow made up of some kind of light particles. With this postulate, Einstein, in
1905, paved the way for the later development of quantum mechanics.
Synonyms: photoelectric effect
photon
Synonym: light particle, light quantum. In quantum theory, light is not a continuous
electromagnetic wave, but a steady stream of tiny energy packets – photons.
Synonyms: photons

===== PAGE 61 =====
photon radius
In a certain distance from a spherically symmetric black hole, the deflection of light
because of the black hole’s gravity is so great that light can move on closed circular
orbits – photons (light particles) can, at this distance, orbit the black hole like a
planet the sun. This particular distance is called the photon radius.
An observer at rest at this distance can see the back of his or her own head (or at
least a small region thereof), as the photons emitted by the back of the head travel
once around the black hole and fly directly into his or her eyes.
Pierre Auger Observatory
An observatory in western Argentina built to study high energy cosmic rays. From
the viewpoint of relativity, one interesting aspect of this is the possibility that such
cosmic rays might produce miniature black holes (see the spotlight text Particle
accelerators as black hole factories?).
Auger Observatory website
Planck energy
Natural unit of energy that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural
constants that govern spacetime, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the
gravitational constant, Planck’s constant and the speed of light. Whenever
elementary particles reach this kind of energy, in addition to the effects of quantum
theory, the effects of general relativity should become important, in short: such
situations could only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.
Compare: Planck length, Planck time, Planck mass.
Planck length
Natural length that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural constants
that govern spacetime, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the
gravitational constant, Planck’s constant and the speed of light. It amounts to
roughly 1.6·10-35 meters [see exponential notation].
At such length scales, both the effects of quantum theory and those of general
relativity should become important, in short: whatever concerns such scales can
only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.
Compare Planck time, Planck energy, Planck mass.
Planck mass
Natural unit of mass that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural
constants that govern spacetime, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the
gravitational constant, Planck’s constant and the speed of light. Compared with the
masses we’re used to in everyday life, the Planck mass is rather small, a mere 2
hundredth of a thousandth of a gram. However, if this mass is concentrated in a
single elementary particle then, in addition to the effects of quantum theory, the
effects of general relativity should become important, in short: such a particle could
only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.

===== PAGE 62 =====
Compare Planck length, Planck time, Planck energy.
Planck time
Natural interval of time that can be obtained by combining the fundamental natural
constants that govern spacetime, the strength of gravity and the quantum world: the
gravitational constant, Planck’s constant and the speed of light. It amounts to about
5·10-44 seconds [see exponential notation] and is the time it takes light to traverse
one Planck length’s worth of distance.
At such time scales – for instance: at cosmic time comparable to the Planck time in
the big bang models – both the effects of quantum theory and those of general
relativity should become important, in short: such time intervals and what happens
in them can only be described adequately using a theory of quantum gravity.
Compare: Planck length, Planck energy, Planck mass.
Planck units
Natural units for length, time, energy and mass, obtained by combining the
fundamental natural constants that govern spacetime, the strength of gravity and the
quantum world: the gravitational constant, Planck’s constant and the speed of light.
See: Planck length, Planck time, Planck energy, Planck mass.
Planck’s constant
Fundamental constant of quantum theory; of the dimension energy times time. For
instance, the energy of a single photon is equal to Planck’s constant times the
photon’s frequency. Abbreviated as h in formulae.
Planck’s radiation law
The fundamental law governing the properties of the simplest form of thermal
radiation – that emitted by a blackbody. It describes the spectrum of such radiation
in terms of universal constants and a single parameter – the body’s temperature. The
result is also called a blackbody spectrum.
plane
A surface within which the axioms of Euclidean geometry (synonym: plane
geometry) hold – the rules of geometry as they are taught in high school, with well-
known formulae such as Pythagoras’s theorem and “the perimeter of a circle is 2
times pi times its radius” hold.
planet
Planets are not-too-small companions of a star that are not stars themselves (nor
ever were stars). In our solar system, the planets are, listed from the one closest to
the sun to the one farthest: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune. As of August 2006, Pluto, which used to be a proper planet, is officially a
“dwarf planet”. In the night sky, the distinguishing characteristic of planets is that
they move around relative to the unchanging background of stars – which gave
them their name, loosely translated from Greek as “wanderers”.

===== PAGE 63 =====
plasma
State of matter in which the atoms are largely or even completely separated into
electrons and atomic nuclei, which fly around in a highly energetic mixture.
Compare the other states of matter: solid state, gas, liquid.
point
Elementary “building block” of geometrical entities such as surfaces or more
general spaces. For instance, a surface is the set of all its points, of all possible
locations on the surface, and all geometrical objects in that surface are defined by
the points that belong to them – for instance, a line on the surface is the set of
(infinitely many) points.
polarization
Waves that are especially simple can be completely described by stating the
direction in which they propagate, their speed of propagation, frequency, and
amplitude. But there are also simple waves where these quantities are not sufficient
for a complete description – for these waves, the oscillation has an orientation in
space. This orientation, which is called polarization, needs to be specified as well.
For example, for electromagnetic waves, the polarization describes the directions of
the electric and the magnetic fields. For gravitational waves, the polarization
describes the orientation of the two orthogonal directions in which distances are
maximally stretched and squeezed as the gravitational wave passes.
positron
Positrons are the anti-particles of electrons: light elementary particles with positive
electric charge.
Synonyms: positrons
post-Newtonian formalism
For situations in which gravity is very weak, general relativity and Newton’s theory
of gravity lead to very similar predictions for the motion of bodies (e.g. the planets
in our solar system) and the propagation of light. Such situations can be described
by starting out with the Newtonian description and then, step by step, adding
correction terms that take into account the effects of general relativity. The post-
Newtonian formalism is a method for performing those step-by-step corrections. As
the correction terms are ordered in a systematic way (the largest effects are called
“of first post-Newtonian order, 1pN”, the next smallest ones of second order, and so
on), the progression of ever smaller corrections is also called the post-Newtonian
expansion.
The post-Newtonian formalism is also crucial to describe relativistic effects in
binary systems (binary neutron stars or black holes). It therefore plays a key role in
the direct detection of gravitational waves: Based on the post-Newtonian formalism,
various possible gravitational waveforms are modeled and used for searching the
detector data for signals. The post-Newtonian formalism is a vital ingredient for all
waveform models, but is particularly important for binary neutron stars. For those

===== PAGE 64 =====
systems, most of the observed signal is in the regime where post-Newtonian terms
are dominant. It was thanks to a post-Newtonian model that gravitational waves
from the merger of two orbiting neutron stars were detected for the first time in
2017.
 
Synonyms: post-Newtonian expansions
potential energy
When an object is being acted upon by a force like the electric or gravitational
force, then it can be assigned an energy that depends only on its location relative to
the source of the force. This energy is called the potential energy – “potential” as it
can easily be transformed into kinetic energy, energy associated with the object’s
motion: As the object yields to the pull or push of the force, its potential energy
decreases while the energy associated with its motion increases.
pressure
A measure for the strength of the resistance with which matter (for instance a gas)
resists attempts to decrease the volume it occupies.
primordial
In cosmology: At, from, or relating to the beginning (or at least the early phases) of
the universe. For example, the primordial abundances of the chemical elements are
the abundances right after Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, at a cosmic time of a few
minutes.
proton
Particle that carries positive electric charge and is comparatively massive; the
atomic nuclei consist of protons and neutrons.
Protons are not elementary particles, they are compound particles consisting of
quarks that are bound together through the strong nuclear interaction . Collectively,
protons, neutrons and a number of similar particles are called baryons.
Synonyms: protons
PSR1913+16
A specific binary system consisting of two orbiting neutron stars, one of which is a
pulsar from which we here on Earth receive regularly spaced radio pulses. From the
point of view of general relativity, the system is interesting not only because, using
the pulses, one can measure effects such as Shapiro delay with impressive precision,
but because it has given us the first indirect proof for the existence of gravitational
waves: the orbital period of the two stars becomes slightly shorter with each orbit,
exactly in the way predicted by general relativity due to the energy the system
radiates away in the form of gravitational waves.

===== PAGE 65 =====
pulsar
Rotating neutron star from which regular pulses of radiation reach the Earth. Behind
those pulses is the fact that the pulsar sends out narrowly focussed beams of
radiation that, due to the pulsar’s rotation, sweep through space like the beam of a
light-house. An animation illustrating this effect can be found on the page Neutron
stars and pulsars in the chapter Black holes & Co. of Elementary Einstein.
Synonyms: pulsars
Pythagoras’s theorem
For a triangle in the plane (or in a more general flat space), two of whose sides form
an angle of 90 degrees, the following holds: The lengths a and b of the two sides
that form the 90 degrees angle and the length c of the third side are related by the
formula
a²+b²=c².
quantize
First of all, quantization is the process describing the transition from a classical
theory to the corresponding quantum theory. For instance, if you quantize classical
electrodynamics, you will end up with its quantum version, quantum
electrodynamics.
On the other hand, to be quantized means for a physical quantity to be divided into
little building blocks or packets. For instance, in quantum theory, the energy of light
is quantized: a given quantity of light consists of a finite number of energy packets
called photons.
Synonyms: quantization
Quantum chromodynamics
Quantum theory of the strong nuclear interactions between quarks (or compound
particles made of quarks). These interactions are described via the exchange of
carrier particles called gluons, for instance: when two quarks attract each other via
the strong nuclear force, that influence is transmitted by gluons flying back and
forth between them.
Synonyms: QCD
quantum cosmology
According to the big bang models, the energy density of the very early universe was
extremely high, with the contents of the observable universe compressed into a
volume much smaller than that of an atomic nucleus. Under such circumstances, the
effects of quantum physics and of general relativity should become equally
important, in other words: This era of our cosmic evolution should be described
using a theory of quantum gravity. Quantum cosmology encompasses all attempts
to apply various candidate theories of quantum gravity to the physics of the early
universe, and to describe the universe as a whole as a quantum system.

===== PAGE 66 =====
More information can be found in the spotlight topic Searching for the quantum
beginning of the universe. Some quantum cosmological applications of loop
quantum gravity can be found in the spotlight texts Avoiding the big bang and
Taming infinities with loops.
quantum effects
All effects and phenomena that follow from the fact that, deep down, our world
obeys not the laws of classical physics, but those of quantum theory. Examples are
tunneling and consequences of the Pauli exclusion principle for the structure of
atoms.
Quantum electrodynamics
Quantum theory of electromagnetic interactions. These interactions are described
via the exchange of carrier particles called photons, for instance: when two
electrons repel each other via the electromagnetic force, that influence is
transmitted by photons flying back and forth between them.
Quantum electrodynamics is one facet of the standard model of particle physics. It
is also the simplest example for a relativistic quantum field theory – a theory that is
both a quantum theory and based on the principles of special relativity.
Synonyms: QED
quantum field theory, relativistic
Collective name for theories that are quantum theories based on the principles of
special relativity. Typically, in relativistic quantum theory there exists for every
species of particle a corresponding species of anti-particle; forces are transmitted by
the exchange of carrier particles.
The simplest example of a relativistic quantum field theory is quantum
electrodynamics.
quantum gravity
Theory based both on the effects, concepts and laws of quantum theory and on
those of general relativity. To date, no complete such theory exists; the best-known
candidate theories are string theory and loop quantum gravity.
Some information on the question of quantum gravity can be found in the chapter
Relativity and the quantum of Elementary Einstein, starting with the page Border
regions of gravity.
Selected aspects of quantum gravity are described in the category Relativity and the
quantum of our Spotlights on relativity.
quantum mechanics
In a more general sense: synonymous with quantum theory. In a more restricted
sense: The quantum theory of particles moving under the influence of forces –
wherein the particles are described as quantum objects, while the forces are not. An
important application of quantum mechanics is the physics of the electron shells of

===== PAGE 67 =====
atoms (“atomic physics”, for short). Attempts to extend the quantum laws to govern
the forces themselves lead to relativistic quantum field theories.
quantum particles
In classical physics, one can picture particles as little clumps of matter. At every
time, such a clump has a definite location in space. In quantum theory, on the other
hand, (quantum) particles are much more elusive. Their most complete description
involves an abstract “state” that allows one to calculate probabilities, in particular:
how likely it is to detect the particle, at a given time, at a given location.
quantum physics
Quantum physics comprises all theories, models, experiments and applications that
are based on the laws of quantum theory.
quantum theory
The framework for formulating the physical laws that govern the world at
microscopic length-scales – the physics of the micro-world, for instance of atoms,
atomic nuclei or elementary particles, but also the physics of ultra-precise
measurements such as those made by gravitational wave detectors.
The laws of quantum theory are fundamentally different from our everyday
experience and from those of classical physics.
The first unusual feature is that, in many cases, quantum theory merely allows
statements about probabilities. For instance, in classical physics, one can assign to
every particle, at every point in time, a location and a velocity. Whosoever can
measure those quantities precisely can, in principle, predict where the particle in
question can be found at every point in the future. In quantum theory, all one can
assign to a system of particles is an abstract quantum state from which can be
derived no precise predictions, but merely the probabilities for detecting a specific
particle at a given time in a given place. Whether or not one will really find the
particle at that location is governed by chance.
The second unusual feature is a fundamental restriction placed on the exactness of
certain measurements (Heisenberg uncertainty relation). For instance, the more
precise one measures a particle’s location, the less definite any statements one can
make about its velocity.
The third feature is how quantum theory came by its name: A number of physical
quantities in nature come in little packets, in quanta. For instance, according to
quantum theory, electromagnetic radiation is made of tiny quanta of energy called
photons.
Examples for quantum theories are quantum mechanics and relativistic quantum
field theories such as Quantum electrodynamics or other parts of the standard model
of particle physics.
quark
Elementary particle that is subject to the strong interaction. Quarks come in six
species: up, down, strange, charme, bottom and top (with the last two sometimes
called beauty and truth).

===== PAGE 68 =====
Quarks are the constituents of protons and neutrons, and thus the material atomic
nuclei are made of.
Synonyms: quarks
quark-gluon-plasma
An exotic form of matter which was in all probability present in the early universe
shortly after the big bang. Under ordinary circumstances, quarks only occur inside
larger particles, such as protons or neutrons, tightly bound together as they are by
the carrier particles of the strong nuclear force, which are called gluons. However,
at extremely high densities and temperatures it is thought that these larger particles
break up, creating a dense and strongly interacting soup of quarks and gluons – a
quark-gluon-plasma.
It should be possible to create a quark-gluon-plasma artificially at particle
accelerators; in fact, there are strong indications that particle physicists have
managed to do just that using the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider.
quasar
Class of active galactic nuclei. First noticed by radio astronomers as exceedingly
bright radio sources that, in the night sky, did not appear more extended than
ordinary stars – thus their name, a contractino of quasi-stellar radio source.
Synonyms: quasars
quasi-normal modes
Quasi-normal modes are a mathematical description of the energy dissipation of a
perturbed black hole while it settles towards stationary configuration, which
corresponds to its ringdown frequencies.
radar
Abbreviation for “radio detection and ranging” – how to detect objects, and
measure their distance, by means of sending out radio waves and detecting their
reflection. Widely used in air and sea traffic; for general relativity, radar is of
interest as radar signals reflected by planets can be used to measure the Shapiro
delay – the fact that it takes those signals passing close to the sun a little longer to
reach us than expected by classical physics.
radiation
In a general sense: Collective name for all phenomena in which energy is
transported through space in the form of waves or particles. In a more restricted
sense, the word is often used synonymously with electromagnetic radiation.
radio astronomy
Branch of astronomy dedicated to the detection and evaluation of radio waves from
outer space. Such observations have led to the discoveries of radio galaxies, quasars
and pulsars.

===== PAGE 69 =====
radio galaxy
One variety of the active galactic nuclei of young galaxies, whose central region
radiates extremely great amounts of energy. Radio galaxies are distinguished by
radiating off extremely high energies in the form of radio waves (more than
1035 Watts), from sources that are often located outside the visible part of those
galaxies. Usually, the sources are radio bubbles, huge regions of gas whose
radiation is stimulated by jets.
To the best of current knowledge, what’s behind all that energy output is a
supermassive black hole in the galactic core.
radio signals
See radio waves
radio telescope
Any antenna used for radio astronomy, for instance to observe pulsars or radio
galaxies.
radio waves
Variety of electromagnetic radiation with frequencies of a few thousand to a few
billion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths of a few kilometres
to a few centimetres. True to their name, these are the electromagnetic waves that
bring radio and TV programs from the broadcast towers to our personal antennas
and receivers. Cosmic radiowaves also make for interesting observations – see radio
astronomy.
Synonyms: radio signals
recombination
In the early universe as described by the big bang models: transition that occurs at
cosmic time around 380 000 years. At this point, the universe has cooled down
sufficiently for atomic nuclei and electrons to form atoms – without immediately
being ripped apart by electromagnetic radiation. The etymology of recombination
does not quite correspond to the physics – this is not a re-combination, it is the first
such combination in the universe as we know it. In the process, the cosmic
background radiation decouples from the material universe.
Synonyms: recombination phase
redshift
The frequency of a simple light wave is directly related to its colour (cf. spectrum).
For the lowest frequencies of visible light, that colour is red, light of the highest
frequencies appears blue. If the frequency of a light wave is shifted towards lower
frequencies (for instance by the doppler shift), that corresponds to a colour shift
towards the red end of the spectrum, and is hence called a redshift. Consequently, a
shift towars higher frequences is called blueshift.

===== PAGE 70 =====
From this, “redshift” has come to acquire a more general meaning. It is used to
denote any shift towards lower frequencies, even for types of electromagnetic
radiation where the frequencies do not correspond to any visible colour, and more
generally still, for other types of waves as well (for instance for gravitational
waves).
In the context of general relativity, the gravitational and the cosmological redshift
are of particular interest.
redshift, gravitational
In general relativity, light moving away from a mass or other source of gravity
experiences a shift towards lower frequencies. This is called the gravitational
redshift; on the other hand, light falling towards a mass is blueshifted. Both effects
together are called the gravitational frequency shift. The gravitational redshift is
closely related to gravitational time dilation.
Information about an astrophysical application of this effect can be found in the
spotlight text Gravitational redshift and White Dwarf stars.
reference frame
Already in special relativity, motion is relative, and whenever there is talk about a
moving clock, one must give the additional information: Moving relative to whom
or what? Such a “whom or what”, in other words: An object together with a recipe
to determine locations relative to that object and to measure time, is called a
reference frame.
In special relativity, there exists a special and very important class of reference
frame, so-called inertial reference frames, in short: inertial frames.
relativistic
Models, effects or phenomena in which special relativity or general relativity play a
crucial role are called relativistic.
Examples are relativistic quantum field theories as theories based on special
relativity, or the relativistic perihelion shift as a consequence of general relativity.
In addition, conditions under which the difference between relativistic physics and
ordinary, classical physics are especially pronounced, are also called relativistic. For
instance, when material objects reach speeds close to speed of light, one talks of
relativistic speeds, while speeds that are so small compared to light as to make
relativistic effects undetectably small are non-relativistic.
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
A particle accelerator operated by Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island,
New York. It brings heavy ions – the nuclei of atoms that have been stripped of all
their electrons – into collision at high energies; the resulting states of matter give
valuable information about the very early high temperature universe, and about the
physics that should be included in the big bang models of relativistic cosmology.
RHIC webpages

===== PAGE 71 =====
Synonyms: RHIC
relativistic mass
One prediction of special relativity is that, the faster an object already is, the more
difficult it is to accelerate it even further. One consequence of this is that it is
impossible to accelerate a material object to the speed of light: The faster the object
already is, the more force has to be used to increase its speed, and close to the speed
of light, this effect becomes so strong that, finally, one would have to use infinite
force to effect the final, decisive acceleration.
Traditionally, in classical physics, the resistance of an object to changes of its state
of motion is its (inertial) mass. The relativistic mass of an object is defined in the
same way, and the value an observer measures for this relativistic mass increases as
an object moves faster and faster relative to that observer.
relativity principle
Basic principle of special relativity: for two observers moving relative to each other
with constant relative velocity (more specifically: for two inertial observers) the
laws of physics are the same. There is no key experiment by which one could argue
that one of the observers is “at rest” in an absolute sense – as far as physics is
concerned, all such observers are equal, no one has more right than another to
regard himself as being at rest, and motion (at least: motion with constant velocity)
is defined only as relative motion of observers with respect to each other.
For an introduction to some of the consequences Einstein derived from the relativity
principle, check out the chapter special relativity of Elementary Einstein.
relativity theory
The modern theories of space and time that go back to Albert Einstein: His special
theory of relativity, which ignores the effects of gravitation, and his general theory
of relativity, in which gravitation is included as a distortion of space and time.
For an introduction to the basics of both theories of relativity, check out the chapters
Special relativity and General relativity in Elementary Einstein.
Synonyms: theory of relativity, theories of relativity
resonant detector
Detector for gravitational waves in which it is attempted to measure the influence of
these waves on an oscillating test mass.
More information about how such detectors work can be found in the spotlight topic
Small vibrations.

===== PAGE 72 =====
rest mass
In special relativity, the (inertial) mass of an object depends on how fast that object
moves relative to the observer. The rest mass is the inertial mass of an object,
measured by an observer relative to whom the object is at rest. With this definition,
the rest mass is a kind of measure for how much matter is contained in a body.
RHIC
See Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC).
Ricci singularity
A type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary of spacetime) that is associated with
infinitely high energy density.
More information about the different types of singularities can be found in the
spotlight text Spacetime singularities.
ringdown
Just like a bell ‚rings‘ for some time after it’s been struck, the collision of two black
holes resonates in the form of gravitational waves. They are fainter than those
released during the merger and occur due to a brief oscillation of the new black hole
while it settles to a stationary configuration. This phase, during which gravitational
waves are still being released, is called the ‚ringdown‘.
Schnelligkeit
In der Physik wird zwischen Geschwindigkeit und Schnelligkeit unterschieden. Die
Geschwindigkeit ist eine gerichtete Größe (ein Vektor), sie enthält also neben einer
Größeninformation auch eine Richtungsinformation.
Die Schnelligkeit is der Betrag der Geschwindigkeit eines Objekts. Also zum
Beispiel die Strecke, die das Objekt während einer bestimmten Zeitspanne
zurücklegt, geteilt durch die Länge des Zeitintervalls. Wenn man das Zeitintervall
unendlich klein macht, ist das Ergebnis die Schnelligkeit des Objekts zu einem
bestimmten Zeitpunkt.
Schwarzschild black hole
A solution of Einstein’s equations found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, which
corresponds to a model universe that contains a single, spherically symmetric black
hole.
More precisely, the Schwarzschild solution is a whole family of solutions:
Schwarzschild’s formulae contain a free parameter m corresponding to the mass of
the black hole. To each concrete value of m corresponds one specific solution to
Einstein’s equations, a spacetime containing a spherically symmetric black hole of
mass m.
The Schwarzschild solution is of practical importance as the outlying regions of the
corresponding model universe describe the spacetime distortion around all kinds of
objects that are spherically symmetric, or nearly so, such as the sun or the earth (cf.
Birkhoff’s theorem).

===== PAGE 73 =====
Synonyms: Schwarzschild solution
Schwarzschild radius
A measure for the size of a spherically symmetric black hole. It is defined using the
area of the black hole’s horizon: In usual high school geometry (the geometry of flat
space), radius and area of a spherical surface are related as
area = 4 times pi times radius².
The Schwarzschild radius is defined indirectly by the formula
Area of the black hole’s horizon = 4 times pi times (Schwarzschild radius)².
It is directly proportional to the black hole’s mass. The Schwarzschild radius for an
object the mass of the earth is 9 millimetres, for an object with the mass of the sun,
2.95 kilometres.
There is a quite general result that says: If a sphere of matter is compressed further
and further, a black hole forms as soon as the sphere’s radius gets smaller than the
Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the matter’s mass.
Schwarzschild solution
See Schwarzschild black hole
second
In the International System of units: the basic unit of time. Defined as a certain
multiple of the oscillation period of electromagnetic radiation set free in a certain
transition within the electron shell of atoms of the type Cesium-133.
second of arc
See arcminute, arcseond.
self-force, gravitational
Gravitational self-force is introduced in black hole perturbation theory in order to
describe the effect of a particle’s own gravitational field on its motion.
Shapiro delay
Also: gravitational time delay. In general relativity, not only are light rays deflected,
in addition gravity can lead to light taking more time in its travels through space
than in classical physics. This is called Shapiro effect of Shapiro delay. It has been
measured numerous times for light signals in the solar system, for instance for radar
waves sent from Earth to Venus and reflected back. These radar signals took
measurably longer when their path led them closely by the massive sun.
Measuring this time delay is sometimes referred to as the “fourth test of general
relativity”, in addition to the three classical tests of that theory.
Synonyms: Shapiro effect

===== PAGE 74 =====
shear
Generically, an extended body in free fall will experience deformation due to tidal
effects. For instance, in a body falling towards Earth, those parts that are slightly
closer to the Earth will experience a slightly stronger gravitational pull than parts
which are further away. Some of the deformation will change the body’s volume.
The shear is that part of the deformation which does not change the volume, only
the body’s shape.
Some examples for shear can be found in the spotlight text Of singularities and
breadmaking.
SI
The international system of physical units, introduced in 1960. It is based on seven
fundamental units; in the context of Einstein Online, the interesting ones are the
metre as a measure of length and distance, the second as the unit of time, the
kilogram as the unit of mass and the Kelvin as the unit of temperature.
By multiplication and division, the seven fundamental units can be used to construct
derived units for all other physical quantities. For instance, the unit of speed is the
distance unit divided by the unit of time, metre per second.
Synonyms: Système International d'Unités International System of Units
sine
The sine, written sin(x), is a mathematical function that is perfectly regular and
repetitive, with maximal and minimal values following each other in endless
procession. The function is plotted here:
Sine waves are the simplest waves imaginable, with crests and valleys following
each other in exactly the way described by a sine function.
singularity
Irregular boundary of spacetime in general relativity – region where spacetime
simply comes to an end. Often, such boundaries are associated with spacetime
curvature growing beyond all bounds and becoming infinitely large – so-called
curvature singularities (notably Ricci singularities or Weyl singularities – but there
are exceptions (for instance a conic singularities).
According to general relativity, a singularity exists inside every black hole, and the
starting point of any universe described by a big bang model is a singularity as well.
The occurrence of singularities is a failure of general relativity – and a strong

===== PAGE 75 =====
indication that the theory is incomplete. Instead, one could describe the earliest
universe and the interior of black holes using a theory of quantum gravity.
More information about singularities can be found in the spotlight texts Spacetime
singularities and Of singularities and breadmaking.
Synonyms: spacetime singularity
singularity theorems
Theorems, proven by Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking, that state under which
circumstances singularities are inevitable in general relativity. As the theorems
assume the laws of general relativity and certain general properties of matter, but
nothing else, they are valid quite generally. In particular, these theorems prove that,
in the frame-work of general relativity, every black hole must contain a singularity,
and every expanding universe like ours must have begun in a big bang singularity.
solar mass
The sun has a mass of 1.989·1030 kilograms [see exponential notation] what is
equal to 332 946 earth masses.
In astronomy, the solar mass is frequently used as a unit of mass (“Neutron stars
typically have a mass of 1.4 solar masses”), sometimes written as M⊙.
solar system
Our cosmic neighbourhood, consisting of a star – the sun -, eight planets orbiting
the sun, numerous smaller bodies, dust and gas.
In the context of relativity, the solar system is interesting as a natural laboratory in
which the prediction of general relativity can be tested – in particular those that
differ from the predictions of classical, Newtonian gravity. Examples are the
relativistic perihelion shift of planetary orbits, the deflection of light close to the sun
and the Shapiro effect.
solid state
State of matter in which the atoms or molecules are bound so tightly to each other
so that they form a solid, stable lump. In contrast with fluids, whose form adapts to
whatever container they are placed in, solid bodies keep their form.
Compare the other states of matter: liquid, gas, plasma.
Synonyms: solid body
solution
In the context of general relativity: a solution or, more precisely, a solution of the
Einstein equations is a model universe that follows the law of gravity as prescribed
by general relativity. See also exact solution.

===== PAGE 76 =====
space
In a strict sense: Space as we know it from everyday life: the totality of all locations
in which objects can sit, with three dimensions.
In a more general sense used by mathematicians, all kinds of sets of points are
spaces – a line for instance, which has but a single dimension, or a two-dimensional
surface, but also higher-dimensional spaces. Also, in such more general spaces,
geometry can be different from the standard Euclidean geometry taught in high
schools – such spaces can be curved.
Space Telescope Science Institute
The institute operating the Hubble space telescope; located in Baltimore, USA.
Space Telescope Science Institute website
spacetime
Already in special relativity, observers in motion relative to each other will not, in
general, agree as to whether two events happen simultaneously, or as to how great is
the distance between two objects. They do, however, agree as to what events there
are, although not to when and where they happen. This observer-independent
totality of all events is called spacetime. How spacetime is split into space and time
can differ from observer to observer.
Every-day space has three dimensions. Adding time adds another dimension –
spacetime has four dimensions, all in all.
We are used to the idea of a point in space – an object that has only one location and
is completely defined once its space coordinates are given. In spacetime, a
spacetime point is an object defined completely once its space coordinates and its
time coordinate are given – which makes a spacetime point nothing but an
elementary event.
The idea of spacetime is, in addition to its role in special relativity, a building block
of general relativity. Analogous to how a plane is flat, but the surface of a sphere is
curved, in general relativity, curved or distorted versions of the simple, flat
spacetime of special relativity play a role. Spacetime curvature, in general relativity,
is intimately connected with gravity.
For an introduction to the basics of both theories of relativity, check out the chapters
Special relativity and General relativity in Elementary Einstein. Sometimes, it can
be helpful to view spacetime in analogy to ordinary space – such analogies are
explored in the spotlight topics Time dilation on the road (for time dilation) and
Twins on the road (for the twin effect).
spacetime singularity
See entry singularity above.
special relativity
Albert Einstein’s theory of the fundamentals of space, time, and movement (but not
gravity). For a brief introduction, check out the chapter Special relativity of
Elementary Einstein.

===== PAGE 77 =====
Selected aspects of special relativity are described in the category Special relativity
of our Spotlights on relativity.
Synonyms: special theory of relativity
spectrum
The electromagnetic radiation reaching us from an astronomical object or other
source is a mix of electromagnetic waves with a great variety of frequencies. The
spectrum lists the composition of this mix: For every frequency, it states the amount
of radiation energy contributed by waves of that particular frequency.
Synonyms: spectra
speed
An object’s average speed is the distance it moves during a given period of time,
divided by the length of the time interval. If you make the time interval infinitely
small, the result is the object’s speed at one particular moment in time. The notion
of speed can be applied to waves in different ways; for instance, for a simple wave,
the phase speed is the speed at which any given wave crest or wave propagates
through space.
See also the more general entry velocity.
speed of light
The speed at which light or, more generally, electromagnetic radiation propagates
through space (especially: through empty space). Central quantity in special
relativity: There, the constancy of the speed of light is a basic postulate: every
observer (more precisely: every inertial observer) that measures the speed of light in
vacuum obtains the same constant value, c=299,792,458 metres per second.
Another important relativistic aspect of the speed of light is that it defines an
absolute upper speed limit: In special relativity, nothing can move faster than light,
and information or influence at most be transmitted at light-speed. In general
relativity, the same law is in force locally: No object, no matter, no information can
directly overtake or catch up with light (cf. causality).
Basic information about the role of light speed in special relativity can be found in
the chapter Special relativity of Elementary Einstein.
sphere
A spherical surface is a simple example for a curved surface. It is easily pictured as
a surface embedded in three-dimensional space: a spherical surface is the set of all
points at a certain fixed distance from a given point (the point being the centre of
the sphere).
Mathematically, a spherical surface can be described without recourse to three-
dimensional space – when mathematicians talk of the geometry of such a surface,
they (almost) always mean the “inner geometry”: Those properties of the surface
noticeable to two-dimensional beings, living and working in that surface, capable of
measuring distances and angles in it.

===== PAGE 78 =====
Sphere is regularly used as a synonym for spherical surface (instead of describing a
solid, three-dimensional ball). And not only for the two-dimensional spherical
surface described above, but also for its analogues in lower and higher dimensions.
A one-sphere, for instance, is the same as a circle, a two-sphere is the spherical
surface defined above, a three-sphere its three-dimensional analogue.
spin
Fundamental quantum property of elementary as well as of compound particles. For
elementary particles, the spin determines whether the particle is a matter particle
(half-integer spin such as 1/2, 3/2, 5/2 etc.) or a force particle (integer spin such as
0, 1, 2 etc.).
spin network
In loop quantum gravity (one of the candidates for a theory of quantum gravity), the
underlying microscopic structure of space is a spin network – a graph consisting of
lines and nodes where each line is assigned a label consisting of a half-integer
number. Mathematically, that number is closely connected with the spin of
elementary particles.
More information about spin networks can be found in the spotlight topic The fabric
of space: spin networks.
standard acceleration
The acceleration imparted by the earth’s gravitation to a body located on the earth’s
surface: If you raise such a body up a bit and let it fall, it will accelerate 9.81 metres
per second squared, in other words: in every second, its speed will increase by 9.81
metres per second.
Standard acceleration, abbreviated as g, is often used as a measure for accelerations.
For instance, an acceleration of 2 g corresponds to 2·9.81=19.62 m/s².
standard model of cosmology
Another name for the big bang models.
standard model of elementary particle physics
The current state of the art for describing the basic properties of matter and forces.
The standard model theories are based on special relativity and quantum theory and
they describe the behaviour of elementary matter particles such as electrons,
neutrinos and quarks as well as their anti-particles. It also describes three quantum
forces acting between them: electromagnetism, the weak nuclear force and the
strong nuclear force. These forces act by the exchange of force particles. There is
one elementary force for which no such quantum description exists, and which is
not part of the standard model: gravity.
Synonyms: standard model of particle physics
star
A cosmic gas ball that is massive enough for pressure and temperatur in its core to
reach values where self-sustained nuclear fusion reactions set in. The energy set

===== PAGE 79 =====
free in these reactions makes stars into very bright sources of light and other forms
of electromagnetic radiation.
Once the nuclear fuel is exhausted, the star becomes a white dwarf, a neutron star or
a black hole.
Synonyms: stars
states (of matter)
Depending on parameters like temperature or pressure, matter can exist in different
states with greatly varying physical properties. The most important states of matter
are the solid, liquid, gaseous and plasma states (the latter three forms of matter are
also called fluid). At very low temperatures, atoms bind together to form a solid
body with a definite shape. As temperature increases, many solid bodies melt,
turning into a liquid or, at even higher temperatures, a gas, an ensemble of atoms
and/or molecules wildly scurrying back and forth. A further increase in temperature
transforms matter into a plasma. In this state atoms disintegrate into atomic nuclei
and electrons.
stationary
Roughly speaking, in relativity, a situation or a spacetime is stationary if there is no
change over time.
To be more precise, one has to take into account that, in general relativity, time can
be defined in many different ways, all of them equally valid for formulating the
laws of physics. This leads to a modified definition: A situation or a spacetime is
stationary if it is possible to define time in a way so that there is no change of its
properties over time – if you follow the properties of a given region of space over
time, they will not change.
Stefan-Boltzmann law
One of the laws governing the properties of the simplest form of thermal radiation –
that emitted by a blackbody: The total energy emitted by such a body is
proportional to the fourth power of its temperature (measured in Kelvin).
stellar black holes
Stellar black holes are black holes with between a few and a dozen solar masses that
are formed when the core of a massive star collapses.
Basic information about black holes can be found in the chapter Black holes & Co.
of Elementary Einstein.
straight line
In the plane, in three-dimensional everyday space or in more general flat spaces:
Any line that forms the shortest connection between two given points.
In the spacetime of special relativity: The world-line of an object moving with
constant speed on a path that is straight in space.

===== PAGE 80 =====
Synonyms: straight line in space straight line in spacetime
string theory
Candidate for a theory of quantum gravity; a quantum theory, where the
fundamental building blocks are tiny, one-dimensional, oscillating entities, called
strings.
A brief description can be found on the page String theory in the chapter  Relativity
and the quantum of Elementary Einstein.
Synonyms: string, strings
strong force
One of the four fundamental forces in our universe (the others are
electromagnetism, weak nuclear force and gravity). The strong force binds the
quarks to form compound particles such as protons and neutrons. Indirectly, it is
also responsible for holding together protons and neutrons in atomic nuclei.
Synonyms: strong nuclear force
sun
The central (and most massive) body of our solar system; the star closest to us; a
ball of gas with a radius of ca. 700000 km (for comparison the radius of the earth:
12756 km) and a mass of 1.989·1030 kilograms [see exponential notation].
In the interior of the sun, nuclear fusion processes run their course; they are
responsible for the sun’s impressive brightness.
supergravity
Class of models that generalize Einstein’s general theory of relativity in a way that
it satisfies the requirements of supersymmetry.
Today, supergravity is of interest in the context of string theory: In the limiting case
of low energies (where low energies includes everything accessible with modern
particle accelerators), the physics of string theories can be described with the help
of certain supergravity models.
supermassive black holes
are black holes with masses of more than a million solar masses. As far as we know,
such holes can be found in the central regions of almost all galaxies. Central black
holes are the energy source for radio galaxies and other active galactic nuclei.
Basic informations about black holes in general can be found in the chapter Black
holes & Co. of Elementary Einstein.

===== PAGE 81 =====
supernova
Highly energetic explosion that ends the life of stars with more than about ten solar
masses. In this explosion, the outer layers of the stars are ejected into space, while
the core regions collapse to form a neutron star or even a black hole.
superstring theory
Synonym: supersymmetric string theory. String theory that satisfies the
requirements of an abstract symmetry called superymmetry. All models of string
theory that are realistic candidates for a theory of quantum gravity, are superstring
theories.
supersymmetry
Abstract symmetry that some of the models of particle physics satisfy: in such
models, for every species of particles, there is a partner species with the same mass.
If the particles are matter particles (fermions), then the partner particles are force
particles (bosons), and vice versa.
surface
Geometric space with two dimensions. Examples include the plane or the surface of
a sphere.
surface gravity
The acceleration due to gravity which is experienced by an object resting on the
surface of some solid body is called the body’s surface gravity (as most of the solid
bodies in question are shaped by gravity, the value for the surface gravity tends to
be the same everywhere on the body’s surface). For the Earth, the surface gravity is
9.81 metres per square second, the so-called standard acceleration.
symmetry
A situation has a symmetry if certain changes make no difference. For instance: a
mirror-symmetric image that you view in a mirror looks the same. A perfect sphere
looks the same, even if it is rotated around an arbitrary axis through its centre point
(“spherical symmetry”).
In particle physics, there are more abstract symmetries, less readily pictured, such
as supersymmetry.
synchrotron
A particle accelerator, in which particles are accelerated with the help of electric
fields, while strong magnetic fields keep them on track (the fact that ever-stronger
magnetic fields are needed as acceleration proceeds is a consequence of the fact that
relativistic mass increases with speed.)
synchrotron radiation
Electromagnetic radiation produced when electrically charged particles (for
instance, electrons) are made to follow a curved trajectory in a particle accelerator,
or when these particles undergo comparable accelerations in nature.

===== PAGE 82 =====
Due to effects that can be derived from special relativity, synchrotron radiation is
densely concentrated and very intense. These properties, together with the fact that
it is very easy to produce synchrotron radiation with a clearly defined frequency,
make this type of radiation a valuable tool for research not only in basic physics,
but also in biology and medicine.
When it was first discovered, synchrotron radiation was an (annoying!) side effect,
observable at particle accelerators which were used for research into the basic
properties of elementary particles. Nowadays, there are many accelerators whose
main purposes is the production of this radiation!
For a list of important European Synchrotrons, have a look at > FIS-Landschaft,
with BESSY II, PETRA III or the ESRF.
In the US, you can find the > National Synchrotron Light Source II at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Syracuse University
Research university (enrolment ca. 20,000) in New York State. Research topics of
the physics department include classical and quantum gravity, cosmology and
gravitational waves.
Theoretical Cosmology and Elementary Particle Physics at Syracuse University
Gravitational Wave Group at Syracuse University
Système International d’Unités
See SI, International System of Units
Synonyms: International System of Units
temperature
In systems consisting of many particles, be they solid bodies, fluids or gases, the
constitutents are in constant, chaotic motion: the atoms in a solid crystal oscillate a
bit, the molecules of a gas are in rapid, disordered motion, and so on. The average
energy with which each constitutent contributes to every part of the disorderly
motion is the same, and it is called the temperature of the system. High average
energy corresponds to high temperature – atoms vibrating wildly, gas molecules
zipping around very fast -, low average energy to low temperature.
In a slightly different context, certain mixtures of electromagnetic radiation can be
assigned a temperature (“radiation temperature”), a single parameter that
completely defines the basic properties of the radiation (more precisely, its
spectrum). It corresponds to the thermal radiation emitted by a hot body with
precisely that temperature.
In physics, temperature is measured in Kelvin, in everyday life, depending on the
country, in Fahrenheit or Celsius.
templates
When measuring gravitational waves, researchers use so-called templates in order
to separate real gravitational wave signals from background noise. For this purpose,

===== PAGE 83 =====
they calculate the waveform of gravitational waves of certain different origins, such
as coalescing black holes. Knowledge of the signals’ shapes facilitates their
identification in the detector data.
test particles
In the context of gravity: body whose mass is so small, that it can be used to probe
the gravitational influences of their bodies, as its own gravitational field is too small
to affect or change the situation in any significant way.
Analogously, in electromagnetism: small, charged body with so little charge that it
can be used to explore the electromagnetic influence of other bodies without its
presence affecting or changing the situation in any significant way.
tests of general relativity, classical
The first two tests of general relativity were the comparison between prediction and
observation for the perihelion advance of the planet Mercury and for the deflection
of light near the Sun. In 1959, measurements of the gravitational redshift provided
an additional test. All three effects in questions were predicted by Einstein, and
these and subsequent measurements are known as the classical tests of general
relativity. Measurements of the Shapiro time delay are sometimes called the “fourth
test of general relativity”.
More information about the deflection of light can be found in the spotlight text The
gravitational deflection of light, while the connection of this effect with one of the
fundamental principles of general relativity is explored in The equivalence principle
and the deflection of light.
Synonyms: classical tests of general relativity
TeV
See electron volt
Synonyms: Tera-electronvolt
theory of relativity
See relativity theory
Synonyms: theories of relativity
thermal energy
The energy contained in the disordered motion of a body’s constituents – for
instance, the energy of the disorderly motion of the atoms or molecules of a gas, or
their oscillation in a solid body. If one increases a body’s thermal energy, one also
raises its temperature.

===== PAGE 84 =====
thermal motion
What we call heat in everday life corresponds to disordered motion of the
microscopically small constituents of matter (say, atoms or molecules) – one
example being the chaotic dance of the molecules making up a gas, another the
oscillation of the molecules forming a solid body. This disordered motion is called
thermal motion, and its average energy defines a system’s temperature (cf. the
preceeding entry on thermal energy).
thermal radiation
In a narrow sense: synonym for infrared radiation.
In a more general sense: The electromagnetic radiation emitted by every body with
non-zero temperature due to the laws of thermodynamics. The properties of this
radiation (in particular: its spectrum) depend on the body’s temperature – in the
simplest case, that of what is called a blackbody, they even depend on nothing but
the temperature and some universal constants.
For everyday temperatures, such as those of a hotplate, thermal radiation is emitted
mainly in the form of infrared radiation. At higher temperatures, significant
amounts of visible light are emitted, as well: a hotplate that is very hot indeed looks
dark red or even light red; molten metal looks yellow or even white. In more
extreme situations, thermal radiation can have energies that are even higher – for
instance, the gases in the accretion discs of black holes are so hot that they emit
great amounts of thermal radiation in the x-ray region.
thermodynamic equilibrium
A physical system is in thermodynamic equilibrium if its energy is distributed
evenly among all the different ways in which its components can move or vibrate –
what physicists call the system’s “degrees of freedom” – and there is no flow of
energy within or at the boundaries of the system. The average energy per degree of
freedom is a direct measure of the system’s temperature.
For example, for a gas, the kinetic energy of all its many particles is, on average, the
same.
The totality of all electromagnetic fields is a physical system as well. More
information about how thermal equilibrium of a hot body and the electromagnetic
fields leads to the emission of thermal radiation can be found in the spotlight text
Heat that meets the eye.
The situation is slightly more complicated in systems that allows transmutations –
for instance a system consisting of particles of species A and particles of another
species B, where A-particles can change into B-particles and the other way around,
For such a system, equilibrium at a certain temperature implies definite values for
the relative abundances of the different particle species – how many particles of
species A there should be, on average, for each particle of another species B. Such
equilibria are of great importance for the physics of the early universe, as described
by the big bang models.

===== PAGE 85 =====
third-generation gravitational-wave detector
Third-generation gravitational-wave detectors are supposed to measure gravitational
waves with higher sensitivity than current detectors such as Advanced LIGO or
Advanced Virgo. Examples for such projects are the Einstein telescope and Cosmic
Explorer. More information is available in our related spotlight article: Third-
generation gravitational-wave detectors.
tidal effects
Idealized situations apart, the gravitational influences acting on an object depend on
the object’s position. Take two small objects in the neighbourhood of a massive
body: If one of them is closer to the massive body, it will be subject to a stronger
gravitational pull. All effects that can be traced back to this variation of
gravitational influences from location to location are called tidal effects.
Whenever gravitation is regarded as a force (notably in Newton’s theory of gravity),
tidal effects are caused by minute force differences – differences in the strength and
direction of the gravitational force at one point in space, as compared to a
neighbouring point. These force differences, in turn, are called tidal forces.
The best-known example for tidal effects is the one responsible for their name:
High tide and low tide at the sea-shore are caused by position-dependent variations
of the gravitational force – very roughly speaking, the oceans on the side of the
earth facing the moon are pulled towards that heavenly body more strongly than the
solid globe of the earth, and that globe in turn feels a stronger pull than the oceans
on the side facing away from the moon.
In the context of general relativity, tidal forces are especially interesting where
singularities are concerned – in fact, the theory predicts that regions near a
singularity are dominated by very strong and rapidly changing tidal forces (for more
information on this, see the spotlight text Of singularities and breadmaking.
Synonyms: tidal forces
time
It is a fact of life that not all events in our universe happen concurrently – instead,
there is a certain order. Defining a time coordinate or defining time, the way
physicists do it, is to define a prescription to associate with each event a number so
as to reflect that order – if event B happens after event A, then the number
associated with B should be larger than that associated with A. The first step of this
definition is to construct a clock: Choose a simple process that repeats regularly.
(What is “regular”? Luckily, in our universe, all elementary processes such as a
swinging pendulum, the oscillations of atoms or of electronic circuits lead to the
same concept of regularity.) As a second step, install a counter: A mechanism that,
with every repetition of the chosen process, raises the count by one.
With this definition, one can at least assign a time (the numerical value of the
counter) to events happening at location of the clock. For events at different
locations, an additional definition is necessary: One needs to define simultaneity.
After all, the statement that some far-away event A happens at 12 o’clock is the
same as saying that event A and “our clock counter shows 12:00:00” are
simultaneous. The how and why of defining simultaneity – a centre-piece of

===== PAGE 86 =====
Einstein’s special theory of relativity – are described in the spotlight topic Defining
“now”.
With all these preparations, physicists can, in principle, assign a time coordinate
value (“a time”) to any possible events, and describes how fast or how slow
processes happen, compared to that time coordinate.
time dilation
In special relativity: From the point of view of an observer (more precisely: an
inertial observer), a moving clock goes slower than an identically built clock at rest.
All other processes moving alongside the clock (for instance: everything happening
aboard a rocket speeding by) are slowed down in an identical fashion.
Time dilation can be mutual: When two inertial observers speed past each other,
each will find that the other’s clocks go slower.Some aspects of this unfamiliar
mutuality are explored in the spotlight topic The dialectic of relativity; a geometric
analogy is presented in Time dilation on the road.
In general relativity, there is the phenomenon of gravitational time dilation:
Roughly speaking, clocks in the vicinity of a mass or other source of gravity run
more slowly than clocks which are farther away. This phenomenon is closely
related to the gravitational redshift.
torus
A torus (pl. tori) is a surface shaped like that of a donut or bagel.
It is possible to define analogous geometric objects, all of them finite in extent and
closed in upon themselves, with more dimensions than two. These are also known
as tori; whenever it is necessary to indicate such an object’s dimensionality, one can
simply add a qualifier to the name: The donut surface is a two-torus (two-
dimensional), its three-dimensional analogue is a three-torus, and so on.
transversal
A wave is called transversal if the effects associated with it (the electric forces
associated with an electromagnetic wave, or the space distortions caused by a
gravitational wave) act only in directions perpendicular to the wave’s direction of
propagation. For gravitational waves, some more information about this property
can be found in the spotlight text The wave nature of gravitational waves.
Synonyms: transversality
Transversalwelle
Bei einer Transversalwelle erfolgt die Schwingung senkrecht zur
Ausbreitungsrichtung. Bei einer elektromagnetischen Welle sind dies
elektromagnetische Kräfte, bei einer Gravitationswelle die Deformation der
Raumzeit. Mehr Details zu dieser Eigenschaft von Gravitationswellen finden sich
im Vertiefungsthema Die Wellennatur der Gravitationwellen.

===== PAGE 87 =====
triangle
In a plane and other flat space: Geometrical object consisting of three points
(“vertices”) with three connecting straight lines.
The definition can be made more general, in a way that applies to curved spaces, as
well: A geometric object consisting of three points (“vertices”) connected by three
segments of geodesics.
tritium
Variety of hydrogen in which the atomic nucleus contains two neutrons and a
proton. In ordinary hydrogen, the nucleus consists of a single proton; in heavy
hydrogen (deuterium) there is one additional neutron.
In the context of general relativity, tritium is of interest as one of the species of light
atomic nuclei that formed in the early universe during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis.
tunnel effect
A quantum mechanical phenomenon that can be pictured as follows. Imagine a ball
rolling towards a hill:
Leaving quantum effects aside (in other words, in classical physics), we expect that
what happens depends on the ball’s energy: If the ball moves fast enough (i.e. has
sufficient energy), it will climb the hill, pass the peak at B and roll down on the
other side. If the ball is too slow, it will reach some maximum height and then begin
to roll back down without having passed B.
In the analogous situation for a quantum particle, there is another possibility. Even
an incoming particle with enough energy to climb to the height A, but not to pass
the peak B, can appear on the right-hand side of the hill at point C and continue
onwards. Such a transition is called tunneling – it is as if the particle had taken a
secret tunnel from A to C to avoid the forbidden peak around B and arrive directly
at C.
More generally, tunneling describes any transition from a state A to a state C that a
quantum system can make, but that is forbidden to analogous systems in classical
physics, since there, getting from A to C would only be possible by passing through
a forbidden state B.
Synonyms: tunnelling, tunneling
twin effect
Effect of special relativity, variant of the time dilation effect: A twin that uses a
high-powered rocket to travel in space with a speed near that of light before
returning ages less than his twin sibling that has remained on Earth.

===== PAGE 88 =====
The question why this is sometimes thought to be a paradox, while it really isn’t, is
explored in the spotlight topic The case of the travelling twins; a geometric analogy
that is not about time, but about distance, is developed in Twins on the road.
Synonyms: twin paradox
ultraviolet
Variety of electromagnetic radiation with frequencies between a few and a few
hundred quadrillion oscillations per second, corresponding to wave-lengths between
a few hundred and a few billionths of metres. Known in everyday life as that part of
the radiation we receive from the sun that causes our skin to tan
Synonyms: ultraviolet radiation
uncertainty principle
See Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle
unified field theory
Collective designation for Einstein’s unsuccessful attempts to formulate a theory in
which gravity and other interactions, notably electromagnetism, are described in a
unified manner – a theory in which gravity and electromagnetism would be no more
than different facets of one and the same underlying structure, in the same manner
in which magnetism and the electrostatic force are facets of a more general
description of electromagnetism.
After Einstein, quite a number of scientists have searched for a unified description
of all interactions; the best-known modern incarnation of the idea of unification is
string theory.
uniqueness
Given a set of physical laws, one interesting class of question is aimed at finding
out the variety of situations those laws allow. For example, is there only a single
kind of rotating black hole, or do the laws of general relativity admit an infinite
variety of such objects? Theorems addressing this kind of question are generally
known as uniqueness theorems – in their purest form, they state that, given a certain
set of physical laws and a certain set of additional conditions, there is no more than
one configuration of spacetime and matter that fits the bill.
In general relativity, the most famous such theorems are the black hole uniqueness
theorems. They are explored in the spotlight text How many different kinds of black
hole are there? A different aspect of the question of uniqueness is addressed in the
spotlight text The many ways of building an empty, unchanging universe.
Synonyms: uniqueness theorems
UV radiation
See ultraviolet radiation.

===== PAGE 89 =====
velocity
In physics, velocity is a combination of two aspects: First of all, how fast an object
is, in other words: how long a distance it moves in a given time (its “speed”).
Secondly, the direction in which an object moves. Physicists combine these two
informations into a single mathematical object, called a “vector”, and this is what is
called the velocity. For instance, when a car goes around a curve with 100 miles per
hour, its speed is constant, but as it changes its direction of movement, its velocity
changes correspondingly.
Virgo
Virgo is a gravitational wave detector that was collaboratively built by French and
Italian labs and was in operation until 2011. Then, the instrument was
decommissioned and adapted to achieve 10 times higher sensitivity. Advanced
Virgo started operation in 2017. Together with LIGO, GEO600 and KAGRA, it has
since served the purpose of investigating space using gravitational wave signals.
Virgo Cluster
The galaxy cluster closest to our own, roughly 50 million light years away. It
consists of about 2000 galaxies. In the night sky, as viewed from Earth, it is located
in the constellation virgo.
Synonyms: virgo galaxy cluster
visible light
In astronomy, the word light is often used to denote any kind of electromagnetic
radiation, from infrared radiation to X-rays and beyond. If, in contrast, an
astronomer is talking about the ordinary light to which our eyes are susceptible –
electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths between about 400 and 700 nanometers
(400 to 700 billionths of a metre) – he or she will use the expression “visible light”.
wave
In a general sense: any travelling pattern, whether or not it involves matter being
transported as well. Simple examples are water-waves – wave crests and troughs
travelling over a water surface, and a Mexican wave in a football stadium, with fans
alternately standing up and sitting down – the pattern moves throught the stadium,
not the fans themselves.
An especially simple form for a wave is a sinus wave, a regular pattern of wave
crests and troughs.
Synonyms: waves
wavelength
For simple waves, where maxima and minima – wave crests and troughs – follow
each other with perfect regularity, one can define a characteristic wavelength: the
never-changing distance between two subsequent wave crests.

===== PAGE 90 =====
weak force
One of the basic interactions in the standard model of particle physics. It is
responsible for certain radioactive decays, such as the one where a neutron is
transformed into a proton, sending out an electron and a neutrino.
Synonyms: weak nuclear force weak interaction
weightlessness
From everyday life, we’re used to the Earth’s gravity pulling every body down to
the ground, and the strength of that force is called its weight. If no such force is
present, then bodies placed at a certain location in space simply stay where they are,
even without any support. Whenever that is the case, we are in a situation of
weightlessness.
There are two types of situation in which weightlessness occurs. First of all, one
could move far, far away into space, distancing oneself from all massive bodies so
far that their gravitational influence becomes negligible. This would be a truly
gravity-free situation. The second type of situation is more common. In free fall –
be it an elevator plunging to earth, be it a space-station like the ISS in orbit around
the Earth – bodies are weightless. The fact that, at least locally, there is no way to
distinguish between these two types of weightlessness is embodied in the
equivalence principle, one of the fundamental building blocks of the general theory
of relativity.
Weyl singularity
A type of spacetime singularity (i.e. a boundary of spacetime) that is associated with
infinitely strong tidal forces.
More information about the different types of singularities can be found in the
spotlight text Spacetime singularities.
White dwarf
When stars with up to ten solar masses have exhausted the fuel of light atomic
nuclei they need to sustain nuclear fusion reactions, they collaps to form a White
Dwarf: a comparatively small ball of gas, prevented from further collapse by a
quantum mechanical phenomenon, the so-called degeneracy pressure of its
electrons.
One way of determining the masses of White Dwarfs uses an effect of general
relativity, namely the gravitational redshift – more information about this can be
found in the spotlight text Gravitational redshift and White Dwarf stars.
Synonyms: White dwarf star
Why now? puzzle
From astronomical observations, it follows that the density associated with dark
energy in our universe has the same order of magnitude as the density of the matter
content of the universe. That is remarkable – in the past, the matter density will
have been much larger than that of the dark energy, and in the far future, the roles

===== PAGE 91 =====
will be reversed. Is it coincidence that we make our observations precisely at the
time when the two densities are of comparable size, or is there a physical
explanation for it?
Synonyms: "Why now?" puzzle
Wien’s law
One of the laws governing the properties of the simplest form of thermal radiation –
that emitted by a blackbody: the product of such a body’s temperature (measured in
Kelvin) and the wavelength at which it emits maximal amounts of energy is a
universal constant.
Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe
NASA satellite telescope dedicated to observations of the cosmic background
radiation.
WMAP website
Synonyms: WMAP
world-line
The path of a pointlike object in four-dimensional spacetime is a line called the
object’s world-line. To every moment in time corresponds one point of that world-
line giving the position of the object in space at that particular moment.
X-ray astronomy
Branch of physics devoted to the observation of X-rays reaching us from the depths
of space. Such radiation is typically produced as the thermal radiation of matter at
extremely high temperatures. An important example are the hot gases in the
accretion disc of a black hole.
X-rays
Highly energetic electromagnetic waves with frequencies between a few hundred
Quadrillions and a few hundred Quintillions of oscillations per second,
corresponding to wavelengths of a few billionths to a few trillionths of a metre.
Most people know of these ray’s medical applications – with their help, images of
the interior of human bodies can be taken – however, they are also used in (X-ray)
astronomy.
XMM Newton
Satellite project of the European space agency ESA. Launched in December 1999,
XMM Newton is a space-based X-ray telescope; as such it is especially suited for
research on the luminous phenomena associated with black holes.
XMM-Newton Pages at NASA
XMM-Newton Science Operations Centre Home Page (ESA)

===== PAGE 92 =====
What is Einstein Online?
Einstein Online is a web portal with comprehensible information on Einstein's
theories of relativity and their most exciting applications from the smallest particles
to cosmology.
Einstein Online is provided by the
Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics
(Albert-Einstein-Institut)
About Einstein Online
Includes information on our authors and contributing Institutions, and a brief
history of the website.
Glossary
More than 400 entries from "absolute zero" to "XMM Newton" - whenever you see
this type of link on an Einstein Online page, it'll take you to an entry in our
relativistic dictionary.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
Links & Literatur
Our recommendations for books and websites on relativity and its history.
© Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics, Potsdam
Legal notice | Privacy policy

===== PAGE 93 =====

