===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
Resolving the Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen, Bohm, and 
Aharonov Paradox with Non-relativistic Quantum 
Mechanics… for Photons                                  
Lincoln Stoller, Mind Strength Balance 
Email: LincolnZStoller@gmail.com 
copyright © 2026, Lincoln Stoller 
 
Abstract                                                                                   
The results of a previous analysis of the Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen, Bohm, and Aharonov (EPRBA) 
experiment for electrons presented a local-theory calculation of the correct quantum correlation results. 
This result was obtained through disentanglement, the correct use of the SU(2) symmetry of the 
particles, a recognition that spinors are not 3-dimensional, an exact mapping of spinors onto three 
dimensions, and an inclusive path integral treatment of the unobservable perpendicular components of 
spin. Here, the same formalism is applied to photons which obey the same SU(2) symmetry and map 
onto the same three dimensions. However, photons provide a deeper understanding of the wave 
function, disentanglement, and the 3-dimensional mapping. In the end, we arrive at the same 
conclusion: a correct handling of spin shows that standard quantum theory is local. 
 
Keywords                                                            
EPR Experiment, Spinors, Nonlocality, Local Realism, Decoherence, Quantum Variables, Bell’s 
Theorem, Photons                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bohm and Aharonov’s version (Bohm 1957) of the Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen (1935) thought 
experiment is phrased as applying to electrons. Experimental tests have been conducted with electrons 
(Hensen 2015) and protons (Lamehi-Rachti 1976) but the predicted observations were, and continue to 
be, most practicable using photons. For that reason, most discussions of the effect are tested and 
described in terms of photons, and carried out with laser beams, polarizers, and photodiode detectors. 
As discussed in the previous article (Stoller 2026), many of these experiments aim to explore Bell’s 
Theorem (Bell 1964) and, through this, substantiate the general conclusion that quantum mechanics is 
nonlocal. Such conclusions are misunderstood because the Bell inequalities only apply to classically 
local theories. Bell’s and related inequalities do not impose any condition on local variable quantum

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
theories. This is implicit in Bell’s work, is stated explicitly by Clauser (1969), and demonstrated in our 
previous article (Stoller 2026). 
A local variable quantum theory refers to a theory of non-commuting operators with spatially localized 
effects. A local quantum theory is one that only predicts local effects. This would be a theory whose 
expectation values for observations at any point only involve values at that point, or at points causally 
connected to the point of observation through the retarded effects of interactions, fields, or potentials. 
Bell and CHSH-type (Clauser 1969) theorems tell us that the predictions of quantum theory cannot be 
reproduced by a local classical theory, which is a theory based solely on local interactions and 
classically commuting parameters. These theorems tell us nothing about the structure of quantum 
theories outside the classical realm. 
Bohm (1952) presented his De Broglie-Bohm pilot-wave theory (Holland 1995, p.26) as a nonlocal 
classical theory that reproduces the results of quantum mechanics. Bell-CHSH theorems indicate that 
no such local classical theory can do the same. In Particular, Bell-CHSH theorems do not tell us 
whether or not there can exist a local non-classical theory that will reproduce the predictions of 
quantum mechanics. Fisher (2023) has recently pointed out that stochastic local theories can reproduce 
the predictions of quantum mechanics. Standard quantum mechanics is such a theory. 
Bell-CHSH theorems do not tell us quantum mechanics is nonlocal. That conclusion has been inferred 
from various quantum descriptions that use nonlocal constructions. The claim that quantum mechanics 
is always nonlocal requires the additional claim that such nonlocal constructions are always required. 
In our previous paper (Stoller 2026) we showed that nonlocal constructions are not required for Bohm 
and Aharonov’s paradigmatic, massive, spin-½ particle, thought experiment. We do this by providing a 
causal, local construction that generates the observed results. We also showed that this does not conflict 
with Bell-CHSH inequalities. Our description uses the standard SU(2) spin representation in a path 
integral formulation that, we claim for the first time, treats spinors correctly. 
In the current paper we extend this to experiments with photons. We show that nonlocal constructions 
are again unnecessary and that a locally constructed quantum theory is sufficient. That is, pure quantum 
mechanics, using local quantum variables, generates the observed quantum correlations, and does not 
have recourse to the acausal, nonlocal assumptions. Part of this demonstration rests on a careful 
understanding of the different meanings of similar ways the wave function can be written. 
1 - Choice of the Wave Function 
Quantum mechanics distinguishes between pure and mixed states. Pure states can be written as a single 
product of eigenstates; mixed states can only be written as a sum of products of eigenstates. Pure states 
exist in a single Hilbert space and can be represented by a single vector. Mixed states exist in a vector 
sum (irreducible sum) of Hilbert spaces where each space represents a different and exclusive reality. 
A system in a pure state is in a single, certain configuration while a system in a mixed state is in a 
classically uncertain configuration. Classically uncertainty means that the observed configuration will

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
be one of many that are possible, or that many states are contemporaneously superposed and we are 
uncertain which actually represents the system. This ambiguity between what exists and what will be 
observed occurs in many quantum descriptions of a system’s configuration. It is this ambiguity that 
gives rise to Everett’s “Many Worlds” interpretation of quantum mechanics (DeWitt 1973, Varshovi 
2025). 
Quantum mechanical representations do not distinguish between the superposition of pure states and a 
mixture of pure states. That is, a state ɸ = ϕ1 + ϕ2 can represent a state where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are in the same 
Hilbert space, such as two electrons sharing a 2p orbital, or in different Hilbert spaces, such as two 
nonoverlapping electrons that are distinguishably separated. If the components are in the same space, ɸ 
is a pure state. If they are in different spaces, ɸ is a mixed state. The states may formally look the same, 
depending on the formalism used, but generate different predictions. 
An entangled state is a special form of mixed state where the components exist simultaneously in the 
same Hilbert space, or a tensor product of Hilbert spaces, but cannot be expressed as a pure state. 
Entangled states mix separate states that exist at the same time within the same vector space. The 
components of entangled states can interfere because they are co-located, while the components of 
mixed states cannot because they are not and cannot overlap. 
A wave function can also represent an ensemble, which is a sum of inequivalent wave functions 
defined at different times contributing probabilities to the predicted outcome of a repeated experiment. 
We distinguish ensembles from mixed states by looking for interference or transitions between the pure 
states. Ensembles lack transitions between their components because the components of ensemble 
states do not co-exist. 
The behavior of quantum states depends on what they’re designed to represent. Ensemble, entangled, 
and mixed states can be written as superpositions that are formally indistinguishable. They are 
distinguishable only when the state spaces of their components are identified. 
If we cannot test for interference or transitions, and if we are uncertain whether we’re looking at one 
system and or an ensemble of systems, then we cannot distinguish an ensemble from a mixed state. We 
may get the same results from calculations done in either representation, but we’ll interpret the results 
differently. 
Photons present a particular difficulty in this regard since they are not localized. This makes it difficult 
to determine whether a state function that represents a collection is a mixture of separate photons, a 
self-interfering entanglement represented by a single photon, or an ensemble of noninteracting photons. 
Consider the typical pure product state |+1,–2> representing spin component of electron number 1 in a 
spin-up state and electron 2 in a spin-down state. The spatial components of these two electrons may be 
identical or overlapping and are left unspecified. When we define a mixed state’s spin component Ψ = 
1/√2(|+1,–2> + |–1,+2>) as the spin component of two electrons sharing the 2p orbital in a triplet

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
configuration we’re saying that quantum statistics requires this symmetrized form of the wave function 
in order to describe the state of both electrons co-located in space and time. 
We cannot distinguish these electrons and we cannot observe their separate effects while they’re in 
spatially overlapping states. This is a mixed state, not an ensemble, and the uncertainty is quantum 
mechanical not classical. That is, the electrons are in a combination of both states at once, but will only 
be seen in one or the other. 
In contrast, when we write Ψ = 1/√2(|+a,–b> + |–a,+b>) to represent the wave function of two electrons 
that have left the 2p orbital and separated to distinct locations a and b, then we can either be specifying 
a 2-electron mixed state or an ensemble of two 2-electron states. If we’re specifying a mixed state, then 
the measurement at either location has a 50% probability of detecting an electron at that location in a + 
or – state, a zero probability of both electrons being in the same state at the same location, and a zero 
probability of neither electron being in a + or – state at either location. 
But if we are specifying an ensemble, then different tests at different times will reveal different 
elements in the ensemble. In this case, observations might show there to be – states and + states at both 
locations at different times. 
2 - Ensembles 
To avoid the above-mentioned confusion in the case of photons, experimenters strive to limit 
themselves to observations of coincident pairs. That is, observations that involve only a single pair of 
correlated photons. In this way it is asserted that these experiments involve mixed state wave functions. 
These are called entangled wave functions because the state is a simultaneous mixture of two 
configurations and they are not a classically uncertain mixture of one configuration or the other.  
In the following sections we argue that coincident pairs do not sufficiently distinguish multi-photon 
ensembles from single photon mixed states, and that experiments of the sort considered below likely 
involve a form of multi-photon ensembles. 
An entangled wave function can be built by combining two distinct two-state systems. If ϕ(+1,–2) 
represents the pure-state of positive polarization at location 1 and negative polarization at location 2, 
and ϕ(–1,+2) represents negative polarization at location 1 and positive at location 2, then we can 
create the entangled state—sometimes called “the Bell state” which is the symmetrized polarization 
state—by creating the combination: 
 Ψ(+,–) = (1/√2) (ϕ(+1,–2) + ϕ(–1,+2)) 
When locations 1 and 2 overlap, and the spins at those locations cannot be distinguished, there is no 
conflict in saying the wave function Ψ represents a single, symmetrized system. We cannot make a 
measurement to determine the polarization states at locations 1 and 2 because we cannot distinguish the 
two locations, consequently the question of how information flows between the two locations has no 
meaning.

===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
However, when these locations are separate and distinct we can determine the polarization states at the 
respective locations. Observing a polarization value of + or – at location 1 then immediately requires 
the – or + polarization to manifest at location 2, while the other polarization values, namely the values 
that match what was found at location 1, disappear or “collapse.” 
Such an observation generates the paradox of how this instruction was conveyed between locations 1 
and 2 when this effect is presumed to be instantaneous and the distance between 1 and 2 is finite but 
unbounded. This is the EPRBA paradox. 
On the other hand, if ϕ(+1,–2) and ϕ(–1,+2) represent a mixture of two 2-particle systems separated in 
space and/or time, then what happens to or at one pair bears no relation to, and has no effect on, the 
other. There is no EPR paradox when the combined 2-particle wave function is interpreted as a 
mixture. 
The problem, or paradox, of spontaneous collapse is also avoided by replacing Ψ(+,–) with a pure state. 
Additionally, reinterpreting Ψ(+,–) as an ensemble also avoids the instantaneous collapse paradox. In 
this case, we’re interpreting the wave function as a description of a system that is in one or another of 
the pure states, we just don’t know which. Observation just opens one of the doors of possibility; 
nothing “disappears” from behind the other door because there was nothing behind the other door in the 
first place. 
Given that pure states can represent the required correlations, as we have shown, why do we bother 
with the entangled states? There are two parts to the answer to this question. The first is the claim that 
the entangled states are realistic because they give correct predictions. The second is that the pure states 
either don’t have the right properties, cannot reproduce quantum results, or fail to predict observations. 
We consider these reasons in what follows. 
3 - Ensembles Don’t Collapse 
Any mixed state can be expressed as a linear combination of the orthogonal eigenfunctions of some 
observable. When a measurement of this observable is made on a system that is in this mixed state—
which presupposes measurement using an instrument that measures these eigenstates—only one of the 
eigenvalues is recorded. Since all the components of a mixed state are presumed to be simultaneously 
present—as the mixed state is a superposition of states—all the other eigenstate contributions 
“instantly” vanish through the acausal mechanism we call “collapse.” This collapse is instantaneous 
over all distances, as far as the formalism is concerned. 
This “collapse of the wave function” presents a problem to those who would ascribe reality to all those 
components that disappeared. It must be noted that this feature of quantum mechanical state evolution 
is what makes quantum mechanics so widely applicable: as long as you provide the right transition 
probabilities, the quantum formalism doesn’t care how the state evolves. The formalism simply waves 
away the question of how the state evolves as if it were magic!

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
Here again, the observations of Minev et al. (2019) on superconducting, artificial, three-level atoms 
demonstrate that there are unknown mechanisms behind the collapse. This indicates that, at least in 
these cases, the quantum state has not been completely described. This should not surprise us since the 
linear quantum formalism, relying on the linear Schrodinger equation, does not apply to nonlinear 
dynamics. 
Besides the existence of unrecognized mechanisms, such as we describe here in section 12 between the 
polarization and the polarizer, we argue that there is no collapse at all. This is the case for the ensemble 
and the mixture, where the wave function’s components do not interfere and there is no tunneling 
between them. In these cases, the emergence of one component from many simply reflects that the 
system being observed was only composed of this one component from the start. 
A combination of polarized photons has ensemble properties in that the photon polarizations interfere 
but do not interact: they add when superimposed but they are not changed. In theory, they can be 
separated and then recombined and restored to their initial values. This means that when an observing 
device, such as a photomultiplier tube, interacts with one photon in a group of photons, it removes that 
photon’s energy and polarization from the group without changing the contributions from the other 
photons. 
If the subtraction of a photon or pair of photons is equal to the addition of such photons with negative 
phase components, then the registration of photon in a mixed state is a process of selection of one 
among several, rather than a registration of one and a collapse of all others. 
The “collapse,” in this case, is just a collapse of our ignorance regarding which of several states we’re 
detecting. Ignorance collapses instantly across any distance; it is not limited by the speed of light. This 
behavior conflicts with nothing. 
4 - Confusing Nonlocality and Acausality 
Authors often fail to clarify the difference between nonlocality and acausality. Nonlocality means the 
effects at one location are determined by causes at separate locations without any conditions on time or 
mechanism. Newton’s theory of gravity is a nonlocal theory as it expressed the force between two 
bodies in terms of their masses and a separation defined by two different locations. 
Acausality means that either there is no cause for an effect or observation, there is no mediating 
mechanism connecting the cause to the effect, or the precipitating event acts instantly and with or 
without a causal connection. Linear quantum mechanics is an acausal theory in the sense that it does 
not attempt to describe systems during periods of nonlinear time evolution and, instead, just works with 
states constructed ab inititio.  
Bell (ref) defines causality as a theoretical structure that correlates actions with events in their past light 
cone. This only enforces a context for time ordering but does not provide or require any mechanism. 
Such a definition of causality allows for action-at-a-distance as long as the action occurs in the 
rearward light cone of the induced effects.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
Linear quantum mechanics is more a structure for theories of correlation than a causal theory of 
anything. It gives us transition amplitudes but not transition mechanisms. Causal explanations require 
more refined theories, such as quantum electrodynamics. 
Whenever the actions at a point are due to many time-varying sources, whose simultaneous effects are 
determined by their instantaneous locations, and are then summed at the same time as the observed 
effect, the action is being described both nonlocally and acausally. When the retarded nature of 
intermediary effects is taken into account, and there is some mechanism of communication such as a 
field, the description becomes causal, but it remains nonlocal. 
The interference effects of multiple paths that converge at a point of observation, as demonstrated in 
how quantum mechanics treats the double-slit experiment, are nonlocal but causal. The collapse of the 
wave function, presumed to occur in many quantum mechanical superpositions, is nonlocal and 
acausal. 
Effects whose predicted values involve space-like separated wave function components are nonlocal. 
When these occur within a region where wave functions spatially overlap, such as the transition 
between atomic orbitals or through a transistor, the effects are local within that location. However, if 
they are still lacking a mechanism, they remain acausal. That is not to say the phenomena cannot have a 
cause, rather that quantum mechanics need not, and usually does not, provide one. 
5 - Quantum Local Variables 
There is a general confusion about the meaning of local variables (Wiseman 2006, Vaidman 2019, 
Fisher 2021, Brown 2016) that results from failing to distinguish between theories involving classical 
or quantum parameters. Classical variables are c-numbers that commute, while quantum variables are 
q-numbers or operators that may not commute. This confusion is reflected in this passage by Abner 
Shimony (1986, p.185): 
“A hidden variable theory, which maintains that a complete specification of a physical system 
requires the supplementation of the quantum state, the supplementary information being commonly 
known as ‘hidden variables.’ If this avenue is taken, then quantum indefiniteness can be understood 
epistemically, as incomplete knowledge of the details concerning the system. Quantum mechanical 
probabilities can then be interpreted in the same way as probabilities of classical statistical 
mechanics when some physical constraints are imposed.” 
The above statement is definitively false with regard to the use of quantum hidden variables 
implemented here. We are not supplementing or replacing quantum variables with c-number variables, 
rather we are correctly managing spinor q-number variables. Neither are we supplementing the 
quantum state, instead we are handling existing spin variables correctly. As we understand these spin 
variables, they are “hidden” not because they give rise to some new variable, but because they don’t 
exist as c-numbers in three dimensions. Their pre-measurement values are unknowable and, even after 
measurement, these c-number values are not “real” in the sense of being intrinsic to the system being 
observed.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
Q-number spin variables are not, as Bell (1966) describes, “‘hidden’ because if states with prescribed 
values of these variables could actually be prepared, quantum mechanics would be observationally 
inadequate.” Bell does not clearly state that the hidden variables he’s describing are classical, but this is 
what we must conclude because all theories of classical hidden variables satisfy the Bell-CHSH 
inequalities, whereas quantum theories violate these inequalities. 
Quantum spin variables can behave in ways that disobey classical statistical mechanics. In what is 
probably the simplest example, classical statistics requires the average (or expected) value of a sum of 
observations to be equal to the sum of the average values of the observations. Quantum mechanics will 
violate this requirement whenever the observations involve non-commuting operators whose 
eigenvalues relate to different eigenvectors in the Hilbert space. 
The expectation values of such incompatible observables require different vectors in the same Hilbert 
space, and so are not averaged over the same ensemble of classical states. This is a fundamental 
requirement for classical statistics, and quantum mechanics violates this, which is shown in following 
example. This deviant quantum behavior underlies the Bell-CHSH inequalities. 
If Ai and Bi are the predicted results over a set {i} of observations interpreted according to a classical 
theory, where i=1,2...N, and {A+B} represents the average of their sum, then 
{A+B}=!
"∑ (A#+B#)"
$%! =!
"∑ A#
"
$%! +!
"∑ B#
"
$%! ={A}+{B}, for any A and B. 
In quantum mechanics the values of <A> and <B> depend on the state of the system. For these values 
to be known with certainty A and B must be compatible, commuting observables: [A,B] = 0. If they are 
incompatible observables, then they will both only have certain values when evaluated with respect to 
different eigenstates. If |Ψ> is an eigenstate of A, |ɸ> an eigenstate of B,  [A,B] ≠ 0, and |Ψ> ≠ |ɸ>, 
then  
<Ψ |A + B|Ψ> ≠ <ɸ|A+B|ɸ> ≠ <Ψ |A|Ψ> + <ɸ |B|ɸ> . 
Or in brief, when A and B are noncommuting operators, {A+B} ≠ <A+B>, and nothing can be done to 
restore this to an equality. 
Because of this discrepancy between classical and quantum expectation values, where the classical 
expectation value satisfies Bell’s inequality and the quantum expectation value violates it, Shimony 
(1986, p.190 and p.200) concludes: 
“Hence no hidden variables theory satisfying relativistic locality (as construed above) can agree 
with all the predictions of quantum mechanics… The evidence is overwhelming against the family 
of local hidden variables theories...These results can be stated with great confidence.” 
The fully quantum, relativistically local calculation of section 12 shows this conclusion is incorrect as it 
fails to make an exception for quantum mechanics itself as a relativistic, local hidden variables theory. 
Einstein's original German phrase for what has been translated as "spooky action at a distance" is 
"spukhafte Fernwirkung," which he used in a 1947 letter to Max Born. We suggest “ghostly action at a

===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
distance” would be a better translation. Einstein was not “spooked,” and our translation suggests that he 
was pointing to an unrecognized ghost in the quantum machine. 
This ghost is the quantum spinor which, when treated correctly as we have done, provides the missing 
mechanism connecting the particle’s state with the state of the detector, and from that the correlation 
between detectors. This mechanism makes it unnecessary to invoke nonlocal, acausal effects. It stands 
to reason that the information that correlates the spins of remotely separated entities is embedded in the 
local values of the spins themselves. 
6 - Single Photon Entangled States May Be Unrealistic 
Arthur Zajonc (2003, p.S-3) notes, 
“Unlike other observables in quantum theory, there is no Hermitian operator that straightforwardly 
corresponds to position for photons. Thus, while we can formulate a well-defined quantum-
mechanical concept of position for electrons, protons and the like, we lack a parallel concept for the 
photon and similar particles with integer spin. The simple concept of spatio-temporal location must 
therefore be treated quite carefully for photons.” 
In the previous article we argued that there was no reason to model the free particle situation of two 
separate and correlated fermions with the anti-symmetric, entangled spin-state given by the 2-particle 
fermionic bound state. Without a compelling reason for using the entangled state that leads to a 
prediction of action-at-a-distance, which is what this wave function collapse amounts to, this entangled 
state should be considered unphysical. 
Photon states are more difficult to describe than massive particle states because photons can interact 
with anything, do not form localized bound states, and can only be contained through reflections that 
cause decoherence and change phase and polarization relationships. Note also that a photon condensate 
is not a localized bound state (Stein 2019). 
One cannot redirect photons without employing reflection or absorption and re-emission, which leads 
to decoherence and ensuing phase and polarization randomization. Superpositions of photons with 
random phase relationships are equivalent to a mixture (Greenstein 2016, p.197), or what I’m calling “a 
simultaneous mixture.” Mixed-state wave functions no longer behave like superpositions. 
We cannot assign a definitive location to a photon. We can create a situation where we know there to 
be one photon within a volume with some volumetric uncertainty, but reducing this uncertainty to zero 
is not possible. This raises questions about the form of the wave function that results when we combine 
photons.  
When we “add together” two photons of uncertain location, how do we know if we’ve created a 
superposition or a mixture? Most optical superpositions describe beams not individual particles. When 
we contain photons within a reflecting cavity, even just a single photon, we lose phase and polarization 
information.

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
The general test of a superposition is the generation of interference, but a single photon, given by a 
wave function with a single term, a can be broken into two terms by a basis rotation and can then 
interfere with itself. We believe a better test of entangled superposition is observable evidence of the 
necessary measurement-induced collapse. This need not be nonlocal or acausal, though it is both in the 
case of space-like separated components. In Appendix-I we suggest two experiments that would 
demonstrate the reality of nonlocal, acausal wave function collapse in situations such as we’re 
concerned with here. 
Glancy and Vasconcelos (2008) discuss several methods to produce superpositions of optical coherent 
states. Each method is described using different formalisms resulting in different descriptions, such as 
semi-classical, first, and second quantized. These techniques are difficult to realize and remain largely 
theoretical. And while these states do exhibit quantum properties, the question of whether they’re 
composed of discrete photons or represent a single quantum state is unclear. Questions of the Bose-
Einstein condensate nature of light continue to be explored (Kraus 2025). 
The perfect and enduring anti-correlation we see between pairs of photons and pairs of electrons, which 
persists despite the fragile and easy decoherence of the entangled states, argues against entanglement 
and collapse as the mechanisms of anti-correlation between pairs.  
The continued belief that the entanglement of two, single-photon states is the explanation for the 
correlations, as manifest by the probability of transmission of light through relatively oriented 
polarization filters, is based on the Bohm and Aharonov (1957) argument that pure states (i.e. 
nonentangled states) don’t conserve angular momentum, and the Bell-CHSH theorems that are believed 
to prohibit a local description. 
However, pure states do conserve angular momentum and Bell-CHSH related theorems do not prohibit 
a local description, as is revealed from a careful analysis of these theorems, and through the counter-
example provided here. 
The conservation of angular momentum for pure states follows from the invariance of the expectation 
value of spin correlation of correlated particles under an arbitrary rotation. This invariance is 
demonstrated by showing the following correlation has the value of –1 independent of a general 3-
dimensional rotation 𝛉: 
⟨S&!(1)S&!(2)⟩=0+!10−’1U((𝛉)S&(1)S&(2)U(𝛉)1+!41−’4=	−1 
Here |+!⟩	and	|−’⟩ are the spin-up and down kets of particles 1 and 2, relative to some z-axis. The z-
component of spin for a particular particle is given by the expectation value ⟨S&(1)⟩ and ⟨S&(2)⟩ for 
particles 1 and 2. The generator of arbitrary rotations is given by U(θ) = exp(-i/2(σ·θ)), where σ are the 
Pauli matrixes σx, σy, σz, and θ are rotations θx, θy, θz around the x, y, and z axes. This calculation is 
presented in detail in the previous work.

===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
7 - Photon Ensembles Appearing as Superpositions 
The fundamental source of nonlocal acausality in the EPRBA paradox is the description of the system 
using an entangled wave function. This wave function specifies probabilities for certain correlations 
across distances separated by space-like intervals or, more accurately, instantaneously manifesting 
nonlocal correlations. 
The argument for entanglement is either that we’ve intentionally created it, or that it arises due to the 
symmetric or anti-symmetric nature of identical particles. However, wave function symmetrization has 
no physical consequence until a measurement is made and entanglement only persists as long as the 
system can be isolated and decoherence avoided. In Appendix II of our previous work, we demonstrate 
that experiments based on the creation of entangled photon states fail to discriminate between their use 
of entangled versus mixed states. 
All situations where symmetrization has measurable consequences—paradoxical, nonlocal, acausal, 
ambiguous situations of the EPRBA sort excepted—involve spatially overlapped identical particles (or 
composites). The Lamb shift is an obvious example. Wherever entanglement appears describing 
spatially separated components, the measurement-induced observation of only one component requires 
the theoretical assertion of the collapse of the wave function. 
“In order to understand why interference effects occur in some cases and not in others, we need to 
recall that interference is the physical manifestation of the intrinsic indistinguishability of the 
sources or of the photon paths. If the different possible photon paths from source to detector are 
indistinguishable, then we have to add the corresponding probability amplitudes before squaring to 
obtain the probability... On the other hand, if there is some way, even in principle, of distinguishing 
between the possible photon paths, then the corresponding probabilities have to be added and there 
is no interference.” — L. Mandel (1999) 
Based on the above principle of quantum mechanics, we suggest the following clarifying principle: 
wave function symmetrization and anti-symmetrization is only required when “identical” particles 
cannot be identified, which only occurs when their physical wave functions overlap. We suggest that 
wave functions lose their symmetrization when their identical constituents become separated by space-
like intervals. 
Our argument, explained in section 11 for this case, is that the entangled wave function is a 
combination of a physical product state and a simultaneous mixture. This requires no change in the 
formalism. It follows from this principle that a simultaneous mixture exhibits no wave function 
collapse and no acausality. 
Arguments based on environmentally induced decoherence reach the same conclusion but require 
measurable environmental interactions. We claim vacuum fluctuations can cause decoherence of 
nonlocal entanglement. Such terms are not “real” in a directly observable sense; they arise from higher 
order terms in the renormalization of a wavefunction described using a propagator formalism. Vacuum

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 
fluctuation induced decoherence is an actively discussed topic (Gundhi 2023, 2025), but distinctions 
between nonlocal entanglement and local superposition are still unclear. 
From a theoretical standpoint it is simpler to recognize the effects of symmetrization to be dependent 
on the spatial overlap of the entangled terms that appear in the wave function. This is the same overlap 
that underlies quantum tunneling and electron band theory which both depend on some overlap of the 
spatial wave functions.                                                       
Applying this suggestion, we reinterpret the physical superposition, as generated by symmetrization for 
disjoint systems, as a mixed state that represents our ignorance of how the symmetrized terms 
decoupled. We reinterpret this mixed state contribution—assuming measurement or decoherence has 
not washed it away in the meantime—as a superposition at such a time when the disjoint systems are 
recombined and indistinguishability is regained. 
If we don’t do this, and instead insist that the superposition persists for space-like, disjoint separations 
of the system’s components, then we find ourselves in the position of claiming that all particles are 
perpetually entangled in a universal wave function. This creates the belief that everything is always 
connected, a notion embraced by mystically inclined nondualists (Chopra 2019 [popular commentary], 
Laudisa 2025). While existentially meaningful, this claim is measurably meaningless. 
The belief that certain remote correlations are the result of nonlocal, acausal relationships applied to 
entangled quantum systems, and that this precludes all forms of local variables, is supported by a 
misunderstanding that Bell-CHSH inequalities. This has led Bancal (2012) to suggest the observation 
of remote correlations could be due to some form of superluminal connection and that, 
“Quantum non-locality must necessarily relate discontinuous parts of the universe that are 
arbitrarily distant. This gives further weight to the idea that quantum correlations somehow arise 
from outside spacetime, in the sense that no story in space and time can describe how they occur.” 
However, as we show here, there is no such need for descriptions of this sort. In the words of E. T. 
Jaynes (1980, p.42), we need not resort to “medieval necromancy”. 
8 - Pure-State Wave Functions 
A wave function can represent a single object or an ensemble of things, and the formalism of quantum 
mechanics does not distinguish between them. The difference is determined by what the wave function 
is intended to represent or by how we construct it. 
Given a continuous or discrete Hilbert space we can assign elements of this space to a wave function in 
order to represent an integral “thing.” We call this a pure state and assign quantum numbers to it. 
In the case of two correlated spins, as claimed in our previous paper’s analysis of the EPRBA situation, 
each component is in a pure spin state. These pure spin states are defined with respect some angle in 3-
dimensional space—usually a measurement angle—with respect to which their spin is parallel or anti-
parallel (labeled + or –) at a specified location.

===== PAGE 13 =====
13 
  ϕ(±j) ≡ spin ± with respect to some fixed angle at location j. 
In the case of spin, ϕ(±j) are basis states in a 2-dimensional Hilbert space and there is an independent 
Hilbert space for each particle. 
The product of two wave functions, each representing a particle, is itself a pure state in the combined 
Hilbert space of the two spins. The pure, two-state component wave functions are separable; they are 
formed as the product of two, orthogonal Hilbert spaces. All of these two-state wave functions 
represent correlated spins. 
 ϕ(+1,–2) = ϕ(+1)⊗ ϕ(–2), and  ϕ(–1,+2) = ϕ(–1)⊗ ϕ(+2) 
Where ϕ(+1,–2) means + spin of particle 1 at location 1, and – spin of particle 2 at location 2. The 
states ϕ(±j,±k), where j≠k, form the basis states in a 4-dimensional Hilbert space. There is an 
independent Hilbert space for each particle location j and k.  
Pure states for a given particle can be expressed using different bases, and the basis components in one 
base are generally not orthogonal to the basis components in another. That is, any state in one Hilbert 
space can be represented as a combination of base states in an equivalent Hilbert space. Each basis 
element, or vector, in any one Hilbert space can be written as being composed of a linear combination 
of basis vectors in another basis of the same Hilbert space. 
How one maps one basis to another is determined by the algebra of the space. This algebra determines 
how one “rotates” from one basis to another. Such a rotation algebra is closed and complete; different 
bases are isomorphic. For electron spins and photon polarizations, rotations between different spin or 
polarization bases are governed by the SU(2) algebra. 
9 - Entangled Wave Functions 
Because the Schrodinger equation is linear, all linear combinations of solutions are also solutions. 
Linear combinations of pure states are called entangled states. When such combinations are not a 
rotation of the basis vectors, they are no longer pure states. ψ(±), given as a linear combination of 
product states, is such an entangled state: 
 ψ(±) = ϕ(+1,–2) ±  ϕ(–1,+2) 
Each ϕ(±i,±j) components is a pure state that’s represented by a single ray in a multiplicatively 
combined Hilbert space. Such rays present a complete specification of system properties. 
We can interpret this wave function ψ in one of three exclusive ways. Because the formalism looks the 
same in each case, we must provide additional specifications or perform additional experiments in 
order to distinguish them. 
Entangled State: A single system that is in multiple pure states simultaneously, each of which 
contain all information about the system. Unless these can be rotated into a single pure state, their 
superposition provides an over-specification of the system.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 
Mixed State: A system that is in one of several distinguishable pure states and is described as a 
statistical combination of them. 
Ensemble: A combination of distinguishable, identically prepared, noninteracting systems. 
Pure and entangled states can be rotated in Hilbert space. By doing so, they can be decomposed into 
different Hilbert basis vectors. As long as the relative phases of their components are retained, their 
components can be physically separated and recombined (if the means exist) with no loss of 
information. When split into their components, the components of these states can interfere with each 
other. 
Mixed and ensemble states represent mixtures of quantum states. These mixtures and ensembles obey 
classical statistics in the sense that expectation values for observables are calculated with respect to the 
same basis for all components. This means their component properties are separately and 
simultaneously measurable, though the component systems retain their quantum character. 
“Technically, classical ignorance cannot be described as a simple quantum state, but rather requires 
a distinct treatment known as a mixture… The mixture describes a state of whose nature we are 
unsure—not for any reasons involving quantum-mechanical uncertainty, but simply because of 
classical ignorance… This is a very general point: superpositions allow for interference, but 
mixtures do not.”— George Greenstein (2006, p. 188) 
The elements of mixtures and ensembles lack relative phase information and do not interfere. These 
elements either do not simultaneously exist in the same location or, if they do, they have been 
incoherently combined. Interference effects may be found within each system of a mixed state but not 
between the states of the mixture. Their probabilistic nature represents a lack of knowledge of the 
system rather than inherent quantum uncertainty. 
Superposed states can lose the phase relationships of their components through a process of 
decoherence. When this happens, a superposition becomes a mixed state and the ability to create 
predictable, phase-induced interference between the state’s components is lost. In addition, when we 
combine pure states, we can create either a superposition or a mixed state depending on whether or not 
we preserve the phase relationships between the components. 
For example, a spin-1/2 particle in a spin-up state can pass through a left-right Stern-Gerlach machine 
and be decomposed into a superposition of spin-left and spin-right states. The spin-up particle is then 
described by a superposition of two components that retain their relative phase information. The 
original spin-up state is regained when the two phase-intact components are recombined.  
This superposition only becomes a mixture when the relative phase information is lost. This happens 
through decoherence, such as when we create a situation where we can observe one of the two 
components. It is important to note that the phase relationships are not lost by the process of 
observation, but by the process of creating the situation in which they are lost, that is by our forcing 
them onto distinguishable paths, whether we perform the observations or not.

===== PAGE 15 =====
15 
The point is that unless we additionally specify these phase relationships, the mathematical 
specification of the state does not indicate whether or not phase relationships are preserved. Hence, 
without the phases being specified we don’t know whether a quantum state combination is a 
superposition or a mixed state. To make matters more complicated, we can also have quantum states 
that are combinations of superposed and mixed state components. 
10 - Beyond Superpositions 
The entangled states presented as describing EPRBA situations exhibit space-like separation between 
observations, nonlocal acausality, and are said to experience wave function collapse. After this collapse 
they exhibit path-specific nature. 
Although the wave functions for each particle of the correlated pairs can be decomposed into pure state 
components—such as spin-up and spin-down—and each pure state can be represented by a 
superposition of orthogonal components—such as a combination of spin-left and spin-right 
components—the components of one particle does not interfere with the components of the other 
particle. They do not interfere because, after the wave function has collapsed, they follow specific paths 
and those paths are distinct. 
In the case of a pair of fermions, each fermion of the correlated pair passes through a separate Stern-
Gerlach machine. The two Stern-Gerlach machines are rotated relative to each other by a known angle 
in the plane perpendicular to the fermions’ direction of travel. 
In the case of photons, each photon of the correlated pair passes through a linear polarizing filter. The 
two linear polarizing filters are rotated relative to each other by a known angle in the plane 
perpendicular to the photon’s direction of travel. 
It is the path-specific requirement that is said to collapse the entangled wave functions. The observation 
of the resulting paths provides the measure of the pair’s correlation. 
In the fermion version of the EPRBA experiment we measure the paths the correlated fermions take 
upon exiting the Stern-Gerlach machines; in the photon version of the EPRBA experiment we measure 
the coincidence rate at which correlated photons are transmitted through the relatively oriented 
polarization filters. 
Explorations of interference between a wave function’s components require the existence of phases that 
interfere. As these component phases are lost, either through environmental decoherence or 
experimental measurement, the signature correlations that define the EPRBA paradox are also lost. 
Although the so-called Bell states involved in the EPRBA situations do not require us to observe 
interference patterns, we continue to describe the states as superpositions of correlated, space-like 
separated components. Physical measurements on such states act to select one observable and exclude 
the other pure-state components. This selection is interpreted as an instantaneous collapse of the wave 
function into the observed state. This collapse is central to the paradox in that it begs an explanation of 
how space-like separated components enforce their correlations.

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 
In the previous paper we trace the provenance of the supposedly entangled states used to confirm the 
disparity between observed quantum correlations and the limits given by the Bell-CHSH inequalities. 
There we show that the selection criteria used to identify and explore entanglement did not distinguish 
entangled from mixed states. Statistical differences do exist between the behavior or entangled and 
mixed states but these distinctions were not applied. As a result, to our knowledge, all of the “loophole 
tests” of the Bell-CHSH theorems could have involves mixed rather than entangled states. This does 
not mean that these tests were flawed as they unequivocally recorded quantum results, it’s rather that 
they did not distinguish between different quantum state configurations. 
11 - Localizing Quantum Spin 
In our previous study of the EPRBA situation for fermionic particles, we argued that the collapse of the 
superposed singlet wave function occurred within the time-like region at the source where the two 
particles initially overlapped. The particles then diverge from this region, moving in opposite 
directions.  
This is an essential point: we are now working with a disentangled wavefunction: a wavefunction that 
is now a mixture of pure states. Having taken this step, we are no longer working in the same state 
space as those authors who derive the Bell-CHSH inequalities. Neither is this the same state space 
that’s presumed by those whose work confirms the results of experiments on entangled “Bell states.” 
With that point established, we then showed that Bell-CHSH theorems exclude classical but do not 
prohibit non-classical local variables from reproducing the quantum results. We did this by relaxing 
Bell’s overly restrictive local factoring assumption and introducing a local SO(3) vector variable λ 
representing quantum spin.  
This local variable represents spin’s noncommuting properties. It is treated as a classical vector for the 
purpose of establishing a measure that allows us to integrate—in the sense of a path integral—all of the 
contributions that quantum spin makes to the observed correlation between detectors.  
We need some analytic measure of the particles’ azimuthal spin contributions if we are to arrive at the 
correct predicted correlation for remotely correlated particles. Using this vector as a means of including 
spin’s azimuthal contributions enables us to obtain the observed angular dependency in the correlation 
formula. 
Bell claimed this result could not be obtained with a classical theory, and this is not a classical theory. 
The SO(3) vector λ that we’ve introduced allows us to include the effects of spin on the SO(3) vector a 
that defines the orientation of our measurements, but the vector λ is not “real” in the sense of appearing 
in the expression for any observable, or being observed itself in any way. This is both a relaxation of 
Bell’s reality assumption, which is implicit in what we mean when we refer to a classical variable, and 
a realization of his objective of introducing an additional, local parameter. That is, our SO(3) vector is 
local and 3-dimensional, but it is not classical.

===== PAGE 17 =====
17 
12 - Local Factoring 
Bell considered an expression F(a,λ) that gives the probability of observing a spin-up state when 
measuring the spin orientation using a Stern-Gerlach machine oriented an angle a from the vertical, 
which depends on a hidden variable λ. His factoring assumption is that F can generally be considered to 
be the product of a value function A(a,λ)—which only generates values +1 and -1—and a weighting 
function f(λ) —whose values range between 0 and 1. That is that F(a,λ) = f(λ)A(a,λ). 
Bell originally considered his factoring assumption to be a consequence of local causality (Brown 
2016), but his is a specific and not a general assumption. That is to say Bell’s factoring is not the only 
factoring that’s consistent with his definition of locality, and he later suspected as much. We 
generalized Bell’s factoring to allow functions f and A each of which depend on the angle a and the 
vector variable λ, that is F(a,λ) = f(a,λ)A(a,λ).  
In our model the weighting function, f(a,λ), depends on the detector setting a and includes a similar 
weighting function relating the variable λ to the orientation of the second detector. Shimony, Clauser, 
and Horne (1976) noted the possibility of such a dependence in the weighting functions and objected to 
Bell’s exclusion of this possibility. Extending their comments, Moldauer (1976) added that such an 
extension, “should cause no conceptual difficulties, and I believe that it permits us to restore local 
causality.”  
These authors did not develop any model using this form and surmised that including such an 
interaction between the intrinsic variable λ and the randomly chosen detector orientations “would rely 
upon a metaphysics which has not been proved.”  
It seems to us that coupling λ to the random value of spin is not more metaphysical that coupling it with 
the random orientation of the detectors. What’s more, the use of such a coupling provides a 
deterministic mechanism that correctly couples the remote detectors. Our work partly confirms 
Moldauer’s suspicion, but in our model, disentanglement was also required. 
It could be argued that this form for F(a,λ) is not a “valid Bell-type hidden-variable model” which 
should avoid “any specific commitment about what physically exists and how it acts. (Norsen 2011)” 
This is true and it is exactly the point. We are not concerned with hidden-variable models that don’t 
reproduce quantum results or don’t specify local, causal mechanisms; we have developed a formulation 
that does both of these things. Our only concern with the Bell-CHSH inequalities is stay outside their 
limits in order to calculate results that are consistent with the observations. 
In our model, λ is not a single-valued hidden variable, and f(a,λ) is not a finite polynomial function of 
it. As we’ll see in section 14.3, the weighting function f(a,λ) has a value given by the vector inner 
product of its components, namely a·λ. Think of f(a,λ) as a weighting function which, when convolved 
with A(a,λ), generates a contribution whose sign is given by the projection of the polar component of 
the spin on the detector angle vector a. This is developed explicitly in the following sections. 
Our variable λ is an SO(3) 3-vector representation of quantum spin which is a vector in SU(2). It is not 
and cannot be treated as a simple 3-vector in 3-dimensional space, which is why it only appears in the

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 
nonlinear functions f(a,λ) and A(a,λ). Neither of these functions are observable, and the expression for 
the correlation that’s derived from them, which is observable, and no explicit λ dependence. 
In our previous work we used this nonclassical, local, causal, hidden-variable construction to reproduce 
the correct quantum mechanical result for the correlation between spins. This result was considered 
impossible by those who believe Bell-CHSH theorems prevent the reproduction of the quantum result 
through the use of local variables. The key point is that it is not locality that prevents the observed 
quantum correlation, it is “classicality,” which is to say that it is the classical nature of the theory in 
which the variables appear. 
Finally, we noted that this construction was, in fact, a version of non-relativistic quantum mechanics in 
which spinor degrees of freedom are handled using a path integral formalism with a well-defined 
measure. Which is to say that in this context normal, non-relativistic quantum mechanics is a local, 
causal theory. 
In the current work we add a third possibility for recasting the superposition of photons as a mixed 
state. Rather than argue that the superposed components have experienced decoherence at the point of 
creation, which is when the bound state decomposes, we argue that the entangled wave function 
experiences decoherence and epistemic reduction due to the path-forcing choice of our measurement 
apparatus. That is to say, decoherence results from our preparation of the system for observation. It 
may be that these two points of view are the same in some sense—as is reflected in the delay-choice 
double-slit experiment (Zwirn 2017, Huang 2022)—but we do not explore that here. 
13 - Simultaneous Mixtures 
When we specify a component of the wave function as having a particular spin or polarization, we are 
specifying an observable result, not a preexisting intrinsic property of the object being measured. As 
we described in the previous work, assigning a particular 3-dimensional direction to quantum spin only 
tells us that the spin carried before observation lies on the forward-pointing unit-hemisphere of spin 
values, and that the axis of this hemisphere coincides with the specified eigenvalue’s direction, which 
is the direction along which the measurement will be or has been made. 
This hemisphere is half of a S2 sphere (the 2-dimensional surface of a 3-sphere) in 3-dimensional space 
whose axis is aligned with the spin or polarization direction to be measured. The hemisphere defines 
the terminal points on the sphere, or unit Young polarization vectors on the Poincaré sphere. None of 
these vector values co-exist in three dimensions simultaneously with the value of spin (or polarization) 
vector, whose value is defined as a direction of the eigen basis in the Hilbert space. 
That is to say, when we specify a spin along a positive z-axis in three dimensions, or a polarization on 
the Poincaré sphere, we are saying that only one 3-space direction is well defined. We can only 
simultaneously measure stationary spin values in directions parallel or antiparallel with the z-axis or the 
polarization axis.

===== PAGE 19 =====
19 
We can specify a spin-1/2 particle’s intrinsic spin as having one of two possible values but, unless or 
until we have prepared the particle in this way, we will not know what value the particle is carrying. 
Lacking this information, we cannot assign a spin direction to the particle. Instead, we assign a 
superposition of both. This a combination of our uncertainty of the binary direction, which is well 
defined but unknown, with our uncertainty of the latitudinal and longitudinal directions which are 
indeterminable, incommensurable with the direction given by z-axis eigenvector, and unknown. 
The resulting symmetrized or anti-symmetrized wave function for a single particle α is: 
 ψ(±, α) = ϕ(+, α) ±  ϕ(–, α) 
Where ϕ(±, α) indicates a particle α with a positive or negative spin along the z-axis, or a positive or 
negative polarization along the Poincaré sphere axis. For a correlated pair of particles this symmetrized 
or anti-symmetrized 2-particle wave function would be written as: 
 ψ(±, α, ß) = ϕ(+, α) ϕ(–, ß) ±  ϕ(–, α) ϕ(+, ß) 
The essential point is that ϕ(+, α) and ϕ(–, α) represent the intrinsic state of the particle, while the 
addition or subtraction of the additional reversed component represent our ignorance. To put this 
another way, while the 2-particle wave function is a combination of two particles, it is a mixture of 2-
particle states. 
Despite these two 2-particle states being coincident in space and time, only one of these two 2-particle 
states exists. There is no interference between the two 2-particle terms because they are exclusive. We 
can call such a combination an “simultaneous mixture” to distinguish it from the superposition that 
describes the simultaneous and interfering presence of a wave function in each of the two arms of a 
Mach-Zehnder interferometer. What we’ve called a simultaneous mixture mixes potentiality with 
actuality. 
“If the wave function is a real physical entity, its collapse implies a physical discontinuity in nature. 
If, however, it represents our knowledge, collapse simply reflects an update in information. 
Quantum mechanics itself does not clarify which of these perspectives is correct.” — Rajendra 
Kumar and Aram Singh (2025, p.43)                                                                                   
Because this 2-particle superposition is really a simultaneous mixture it does not experience a collapse. 
An observation merely tells us which of the two correlated arrangements existed before the 
measurement was made. The “reality” is that we have one or another local, 2-particle wave function 
component. 
There remains the question of how the purely local wave function components, previously represented 
by the mixture, carry the remote correlation. The claim that local wave functions cannot reproduce the 
correct quantum correlations, motivated by the Bell-CHSH theorems, asserts this cannot be done. 
This question is resolved for bosons in the same manner we previously resolved it for fermions, namely 
by showing that local correlations naturally result from local quantum variables when the photon’s

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 
internal spin is handled correctly. Bell-CHSH theorems present no obstacle because quantum spin is 
not “locally real” in Einstein’s sense. 
This resolution of the EPRBA paradox involves three steps which, in logical order, are: 
1- Recognition that spin or polarization specifications reflect prepared rather than intrinsic values. 
2- Recognizing that the nonlocal wave function is a simultaneous mixture and, as such, does not 
physically collapse. 
3- Demonstrating a local mechanism for the correlation of remote pairs. 
In the previous work the step of localizing the wave function, given as step 2 above, was argued on the 
basis of decoherence at the source of their separation for fermions. We are going in the opposite 
direction here, starting with the nonlocal, entangled wave function and pointing out that its 
specification reflects what we have prepared for observation (Greenstein 2016, p.219ff) rather than a 
superposition that describes the system absent of such preparation. 
14 - Correlation Between Detectors 
We want to know the probability that a photon polarized in one direction, that is to say a photon that 
passes through a polarization filter oriented along a specific axis, will pass through a second filter 
whose axis is rotated by an angle θ relative to the first. The rotation is in the plane perpendicular to the 
photon’s direction of travel, and θ is the physical angle between the polarizers as set by experiment. 
We can assume one detector (which selects the polarization of the particles that pass through it) is 
aligned with the vertical z axis. We can equivalently ask for the probability that this state of 
polarization, which is along the z-axis—which is known because the polarizer is oriented along the z-
axis and the particle is first passing through this filter—will pass through the second filter which is 
rotated by an angle θ with respect to the first filter. Computing this correlation as a function of θ will 
give us the general relation for correlations between two filters as a function of their relative angles of 
rotation. 
14.1 - The Nonlocal Quantum Result 
Quantum mechanics provides an algebraic means of calculating correlations without reference to time, 
distance, or mechanism. We do this by simply projecting one state onto another. 
We start with a state that represents the initial photons after they have passed through the filter at 
location A whose orientation is aligned with the z-axis. The second state, which we will project onto 
the first state, represents the same photons before passing through the first filter and after passing 
through the second filter that has been rotated with respect to the z-axis. The projection of the first state 
on the second, which is a rotated version of the first, gives the amplitude for photons to pass through 
both filters.

===== PAGE 21 =====
21 
The photons are represented by the 2-dimensional spinor |Ψ〉. |Ψ〉 is rotated using the SU(2) rotation 
operator R(θ), as described in van der Warden (1974, p.92). 
 R(θ)==
cosA"
#B −𝑖	sinA"
#B
𝑖	sinA"
#B cosA"
#BE 
If we define the polarization of the state that passes through either filter as positive and those that don’t 
as negative, then we can represent the wave function’s polarization as a combination of negative and 
positive components. We say that after it passes through the filter each photon is in a pure positive 
state, and if it is reflected from or absorbed by the filter it is in a purely negative state. We can write it 
as |Ψ+〉 ≡ F1
0H, and |Ψ–〉 ≡ F0
1H, where F1
0H and F0
1H	are the basis vectors in the eigenbasis defined with 
respect to the z-axis. 
Defining the rotated positive state R (θ) |Ψ+〉 as |Ψ´+〉, the probability amplitude for detecting the 
rotated positive state in the unrotated (z-aligned) positive state gives the amplitude that the photon will 
pass through both filters. This amplitude is: 
 〈Ψ+| R (θ) |Ψ+〉 ≡ 〈Ψ+| Ψ´+〉    
   =  (10)=
cosA"
#B −𝑖	sinA"
#B
𝑖	sinA"
#B cosA"
#BEF1
0H 
                         =  (10)=cosA"
#B
𝑖	sinA"
#BE 
   = cosA"
#B 
Squaring the amplitude gives the probability as cos2(θ/2).  
The probability amplitude for detecting the rotated positive state, |Ψ+〉, in the unrotated (z-aligned) 
negative state, |Ψ–〉, is: 
 〈Ψ–| Ψ´+〉 = (01)=cosA"
#B
𝑖	sinA"
#BE 
 = i	sinA"
#B 
The absolute square of this amplitude, sin2(θ/2), gives the probability of detecting the rotated positive 
state as a negative state.  
The correlation for measuring the same states at both locations A and B is the probability of measuring 
both rotated states to be in the positive state minus the probability of measuring them in positive and

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 
negative states. The correlation measuring positive states at A and B with a relative rotation of θ is 
defined as E(+, A, B, θ) where 
E(+,A,B,θ)	=(|〈Ψ+|Ψ´+〉|’−	|〈Ψ−|Ψ´+〉|’)
(|⟨Ψ+|Ψ´+⟩|’+	|〈Ψ−|Ψ´+〉|’) 
=
(cos’A)
’B	−sin’A)
’B)
(cos’A)
’B+sin’A)
’B)
 
 =cos’A"
#B	−sin’A"
#B 
However, we’re not focusing on either positive or negative states in particular, but only symmetric or 
anti-symmetric combinations. We want to include the correlations before and after rotation of the 
negative states. That is, we want to add, |〈Ψ–| R (θ) |Ψ–〉|2 – |〈Ψ+| R (θ) |Ψ–〉|2 which generates the 
same probability as E(+, A, B, θ). Consequently, we multiply the numerator in the previous result by 2.  
We normalize this result by dividing by the sum of the probabilities of all events, up and down, which 
is, 
|⟨Ψ+|Ψ´−⟩|’+|⟨Ψ−|Ψ´−⟩|’+|〈Ψ+|Ψ´+〉|’+|〈Ψ−|Ψ´+〉|’ 
 =2Fcos’A"
#B+sin’A"
#BH 
 = 2. 
Adding the separate correlations for positive and negative polarizations gives the combined correlation 
for symmetric and antisymmetric observed states as, 
 E(A, B, θ) = E(+, A, B, θ) + E(–, A, B, θ)  
=2(cos’A)
’B	−sin’A)
’B)
2(cos’A)
’B+sin’A)
’B)
 
  = cos2
A"
#B – sin2
A"
#B 
  = cos (θ)       (1)                                                                     
14.2 - Representing Photon Polarization on the Poincaré Sphere 
The crux of the EPRBA paradox is the assertion that the correlated 2-particle spin states are represented 
by an entangled, superposed wave function. This was asserted by Bohm and Aharonov (1957) and 
seems to be accepted as fact. The assertion is incorrect, as we showed in the previous paper by 
calculating the invariance of the correlated particles’ total spin under arbitrary rotations. 
The entangled wave function suggested by Bohm and Aharonov is a mixture, not a superposition. It is 
not a representation of physical reality as they claim, but representation of what we don’t know. Its 
components may be real, but the “collapse” is an epistemic phenomenon. To demonstrate that this is

===== PAGE 23 =====
23 
the case, we show here that the information that establishes the correlation between photons is carried 
locally in their polarizations. 
We want to calculate the probability that each of two photons, correlated so as to have net zero 
polarization, will each pass through a linear polarization filter when the axes of the two polarization 
filters, set in the same plane perpendicular to the photon’s direction of travel, differ by an angle we’ll 
now designate as ω. 
Let J and J' be two opposite-pointing, unit 3-vectors J on the Poincaré sphere representing the 
polarizations of the two anti-correlated photons. In this case, J' = –J. These are not 3-space vectors 
they are Jones vectors, or qubits (Dür 2013). The J vector has only one stationary component defined 
by the direction in which J points on the Poincaré sphere. We denote this direction as the z-axis, and 
this component of the Jones vector as Jz. Jones vectors transform as spinors (del Castillo, 2013); their 
three components represent polarization not spatial direction. 
Note that every pure, spin-1/2 electron (or spin-1 photon) wavefunction carries a spin (or polarization) 
J that is anti-correlated with its partner, for a pair whose total spin (or polarization) is zero. The 
directions of these vectors are always correlated, so any measurement of spin (or polarization) with 
respect to the same axis of measurement will yield exact anti-correlation. This result is not weakened 
by the integration we will do later in this section to calculate the weakening of the anti-correlation 
when measurements are made at unequal measurement angles. 
In the semi-classical picture, the points on the surface of the Poincaré sphere represent the relative 
phases of the photon’s two electric field components perpendicular to the direction of propagation. In 
the quantum picture, the Poincaré sphere represents the range of possible values of an internal quantum 
variable that correlates with the electric field but transforms according to SU(2) and not SO(3). 
In the semi-classical picture, points around the sphere’s equator represent polarization states where the 
two electric field values have real-valued, relative phase differences ranging from 0 to 2π, while points 
on the upper and lower half of the sphere represent complex-valued phase differences that range from -
iπ/2 to +iπ/2. 
All points on the surface of the Poincaré sphere can be specified using an azimuthal angle θ that ranges 
from 0 to 2π, and a polar angle ϕ that ranges from -π/2 to +π/2. Horizontal and vertical polarization are 
represented by antipodal points on the equator at θ = 0 and θ = π. Photons of +45º and -45º polarization 
are represented by equatorial points at θ = π/2 and θ = -π/2 and ϕ = 0. Right and left circular 
polarization is located at the poles, perpendicular to the equatorial plane, at the polar angle values of ϕ 
= ±π/2. 
Every point on the surface of the Poincaré sphere represents a polarization value. Any value can be 
transformed into another by a rotation of vectors on the sphere, and opposite polarization values always 
lie at antipodal points. 
Note that orthogonal polarizations are represented by anti-parallel Jones vectors radiating from the 
center of the sphere, with a relative angle of π. In contrast, orthogonal vectors on the S2 unit sphere in

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 
physical 3-space are perpendicular and have relative angle of π/2. This is typical of both classical and 
quantum spinors and leads to the appearance of half-angle relationships when comparing spinor 
rotations with 3-D vector rotations. 
While beams of photons can be unpolarized, which means the polarizations of the constituent photons 
are random, individual photons are always polarized. In the classical picture there is always some time 
invariant phase between a photon’s perpendicular electric field components. In the quantum picture, 
every photon always has some value of internal “spin.” We can never know the polarization of a given 
photon unless we have either prepared it, measured it, or measured another particle whose polarization 
is correlated with it. 
We can assign a polarization value to a photon for calculational purposes, but we can never know a 
photon’s polarization before measurement, and measurement entirely erases a photon’s previous 
polarization. As such, unmeasured photon polarization can be considered a hidden quantum variable, 
something we can manipulate mathematically but to which we cannot assign a fixed value. 
14.3 - Detector Correlation Based on Polarization Values 
Define A(a, J), following Gu (2022), as the function that tells us whether we measure the photon at A 
either passing through or being reflected by a polarizing prism (Wyatt 1978, p.154) oriented at an angle 
given by a physical vector a. 
For linearly polarized light the vector a lies in the yz-plane perpendicular to the photon’s direction of 
motion along the x-axis. For circularly polarized light a lies along the x-axis, with or against the 
photon’s direction of travel. For elliptically polarization a lies off the yz-plane pointing in the forward 
or rearward direction. 
The vector a has unit length and indicates a direction in physical space. J is the value of the Jones 
vector associated with the photon at A. The value A(a, J) = +1 indicates the photon is transmitted 
(passes through), while A(a, J) = –1 indicates that the photon is reflected or absorbed.  
J' is assigned to the second particle as the negative of J. We define a similar function B(b, J ') at B, 
such that B(b, J ') = B(b, – J) = – B(b, J) = A(b, J). That is, B gives the negative of A for the same 
arguments. The function B indicates the photon’s polarization measured at B using a machine oriented 
at the angle given by b. Like a, the vector b is also a vector on the S2 unit sphere. 
The functions A and B only return the values ±1 indicating polarization with respect to the 
measurement angles indicated by the vectors a and b. A returns +1 when J projects along the direction 
of a, and B returns -1 when J projects along the direction of b. Let A and B return zero when the 
directions of their vectorial arguments are perpendicular. 
As an ansatz, following Bell (1964, p.197), we define A(a, J) and B(b, J ') operationally as: 
 A(a, J) = sign (a · J)       (2) 
 B(b, J ') = – sign (b · J ') = – sign (b · –J) = sign (b · J)

===== PAGE 25 =====
25 
 and sign (0) = 0.                                                                                                                                           
Notice that when a = b, A(a, J) = – B(a, J) for all a and J. This means the measurement of individual 
particles with respect to the same angle of measurement always results in exact anti-correlation. 
This ansatz is substantiated using the following reasoning: 
1. The polarization must have some representation in SO(3) if its contributions to observables in 
SO(3) are to be calculated in any form. 
2. We know the polarization vector J cannot be represented by an observable 3-space vector since it 
has only one stationary component, whereas an observable SO(3) vector requires three. 
3. We know there are additional polarization contributions besides that given by the one observable 
polarization direction because, from the spinor algebra, |J|2 > Jz2. 
4. We know the two opposite polarizations are binary, antisymmetric, and exclusive (orthogonal). 
5. We know the additional polarization contributions must be azimuthally symmetric because there 
is no observable azimuthal coordinate to break the “virtual” azimuthal symmetry. 
The polarization vector J does not represent a direction of the electric field because J is a spinor, and 
spinors are not vectors. It is only the integrated value of J over the Poincaré sphere, multiplied by a 
weighting of that value of J, that maps onto the electromagnetic polarization of the photon, and only in 
the context of a particular measurement. Through this process we obtain the correct quantum 
mechanical correlation between the detection of polarized photons, as we now show. 
14.4 - Coupling Vectors to Spinors 
Notice when a = b the recordings at A and B are made along the same axes. In this case A(a, J) and 
B(b, J) are of opposite sign. This indicates the photons are anti-correlated. 
Here a · J and b · J ' are simple inner products of these pairs of 3-component objects. The function 
sign( · ) returns the values +1 or – 1 depending on the sign of these inner products. Equation (2) is 
written in terms of classical variables, treating all components of J as equally physical, and expresses 
the quantum result. 
There is no classical explanation for equation (2) as it reflects the mapping of the properties of quantum 
SU(2) spinors onto our classical SO(3) space. J is represented by a vector for computational purposes, 
but it does not behave like a classical variable. Its behavior derives from the non-commutative 
properties of the Pauli matrices. 
Because we never know and cannot measure the values of J or J' they must not appear in any physical 
result. We ensure the disappearance of J from our result by integrating over all values of it. Setting J' = 
–J gives: 
E(A,𝐚,B,𝐛)=−∫Λ	ρA(𝐚,𝐉)	A(𝐚,𝐉)	ρB(𝐛,−𝐉)	B(𝐛,−𝐉)	d𝐉

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 
Since the density functions ρA and ρB are symmetric in J and are multiplied by the orientation functions 
A(a, J) and B(b, J), which are anti-symmetric in J, we replace ρB(b, – λ) B(b, – λ) with –	ρB(b, λ) B(b, 
λ) to get: 
E(A,𝐚,B,𝐛)=∫Λ	ρA(𝐚,𝐉)	A(𝐚,𝐉)	ρB(𝐛,𝐉)	B(𝐛,𝐉)	d𝐉   (3) 
Here ρA(a, J) and ρB(b, J) are the densities of A(a, J) and B(b, J) and Λ is the unit Poincaré sphere 
over which the single vector J is uniformly distributed.  
The densities ρA(a, J) and ρB(b, J) are equal to the absolute value of the vector inner product of their 
arguments. The vectors a and b are of unit length. Their arbitrary angles reflect the measurement angles 
set by experiment. 
 ρA(a, J) = | a · J | and ρB(b, J) = | b · J | 
ρA(a, J) A(a, J) =  | a · J | sign (a · J), and this equals a · J. ρB(b, J) B(b, J) =  | b · J | sign (b · J) 
which equals b · J. Applying these to equation (3) gives, 
 E(A,𝐚,B,𝐛)=∫Λ(𝐚·𝐉)(𝐛·𝐉)	d𝐉 
This expression for the second moment of an isotropically distributed vector J is a standard vector-
calculus expression. Rewritten in the spherical coordinates appropriate for integration,  
E(A, a, B, b) =  ∫Λ (a · J) (b · J) sinθ dθ dφ, where integration over Λ means integration over the 
azimuthal angle ϕ = from 0 to 2π, and the polar angle θ = from 0 to π. Note that these angles exist in 
different spaces. The angles for a and b are in physical 3-space while the angles for J parameterize the 
Poincaré sphere. We are convolving identically dimensioned objects defined in different parameter 
spaces.                                                                                                                                                 
Writing J in rectangular coordinates as                                                                                                                                            
 J = (r cosϕ sinθ, r sinϕ sinθ, r cosθ ) 
gives us the same expression we presented in the previous work, namely: 
E(A, a, B, b) = r2(∫∫(a1b1	cos2ϕ	sin2θ+a2b2	sin2ϕ	sin2θ+a3b3	cos2θ	)	sinθ	2𝜋
ϕ=0
𝜋
θ=0 dθ dφ + 
+∫∫(a1b2+a2b1)sinϕ	cosθ	sin3θ	dθ	dφ+	
2𝜋
ϕ=0
𝜋
θ=0
 
+∫∫(a1b3+a3b1)	cosϕ	sin2θ	cosθ	dθ	dφ+	
2𝜋
ϕ=0
𝜋
θ=0
 
+∫∫(a2b3+a3b2)	sinϕ	sin2θ	cosθ	dθ	dφ	2𝜋
ϕ=0
𝜋
θ=0  (4)

===== PAGE 27 =====
27 
where ai and bi, i = 1,2,3, are components of a and b. Equation (4) reduces to  
E(A,𝐚,B,𝐛)=4r2π
3(a1b1	+	a2b2	+	a3b3)=4r2π
3(𝐚·𝐛) 
a · b = |a| |b| cos(ω), where ω is the angle between a and b. a and b are unit vectors so |a| = |b| = 1, and 
cos(ω) ≤ 1. We can reset r, which is the length of J, equal to (3/4π)½ to “normalize” the correlation. 
The resulting expression for the correlation is, 
 E(A, a, B, b) = a · b = cos(ω)      (5) 
Equation (5) is identical to the correlation given in (1) which was derived from quantum expectation 
values without any reference to hidden variables. Consequently, we see that it is the correlation of the 
internal angular momentum vector J, which is both theoretically and practically unobservable, with the 
measurement angles given by a and b that explains the cosine relationship we observe.  
There is no nonlocal effect between A and B. There is no physical collapse of the wave function. What 
appears as a collapse is a reduction in our ignorance regarding the spin state of the particle. 
It is interesting to point out that while we think of polarization as an observable quantity it does not 
appear here, nor in any equation for any observable in any form. Quantum polarization is the z-
component of the internal angular momentum to which, Saldanha (2020) argues, we cannot ascribe an 
objective reality even after measurements have been performed. 
14.5 - Internal Spin, Magnetic Moment, and Polarization 
In the previous work the electron’s internal spin aligned with its magnetic moment. In the current work 
the photons internal spin aligns with the Jones vector that represents its polarization. The reader might 
wonder at the disparity in claiming the magnetic moment carries the local information from which we 
establish remote correlation in one case, and the claim that the electric field polarization carries the 
local information in the other. 
We remind the reader that internal spin is neither magnetic nor electric and has nothing to do with the 
classical picture of bar magnets or oscillating electric fields. It is the internal spin that carries the local 
information we use to establish remote correlations, and the internal spin is a quantum property that 
underlies quantum behavior in both cases. It is the quantum properties of spin that establish the correct 
correlations, not the classical field. 
14.6 - Using Jz as a Hidden Variable 
Jz defines an axis through the Poincaré sphere along which our two photons are polarized in opposite 
directions. This axis is defined by an angle in the Poincaré sphere. It is not a physical axis on S2, but 
we are putting it in coincidence with the physical axis along which we define the orientation of our

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 
polarizers. We are using the angles on the Poincaré sphere as variable integration parameters that allow 
us to include the contribution of quantum polarization.  
In the previous work we had the spin eigenvalue Sz whose axis coincided with the axis we used to 
define the orientation of our Stern-Gerlach machines. We used the angles defining the spin directions 
as an integration variable to include the contributions of quantum spin components. 
We can picture the intrinsic angular momenta as oppositely pointing Jones vectors subject to the caveat 
that only the z-component has a well-defined value. It might be better to picture the polarization 
variables as oppositely oriented hemispheres that have a specified z-direction and radius. In terms of 
Euler angles, the azimuthal angle θ of the positive polarization vector is uniformly distributed from 0 to 
2π, while the polar angle ϕ is uniformly distributed between 0 and π/2. The azimuthal angle of the 
negative polarization vector is similarly evenly distributed from 0 to 2π, but its polar component ranges 
from π/2 to π. 
Figure 1: The unobservable directions of the photon polarization Jones vectors, imagined as the vector 
axes of two opposing hemispheres, and the unobservable angles α and β that lie between these axes 
and directions A and B in which the polarizations are measured. 
These hemispheres are an SO(3), vector-based description of the SU(2) spinor that describes each 
photon. The SU(2) spinors have fixed z-components of unknown direction, while the SO(3) vectors are 
constrained to either the upper or lower hemispheres.                                                                                                                         
Once we’ve established a correspondence between the physical direction of the detector and the Jones 
vector of the photon, we integrate over the unobservable Poincaré vector directions leaving a physical 
theory that only contains observable probabilities, which are the square of the transmission or reflection 
amplitudes due to the polarization.  
We integrate over these physically nonexistent directions in the same way the path integral integrates 
over paths we cannot observe. If we attempt to “locate” the polarization components involved in this

===== PAGE 29 =====
29 
integral through filtering, then we destroy the phase relationships that generate the phase correlation 
between the particles. The photon’s internal polarization is the hidden variable that resolves the 
question of how polarization correlation is achieved. 
This is analogous to the situation we encounter in the Young’s Double-Slit experiment (Murray 2020) 
where we only measure one particle location but we must include all the possible paths the particle 
took to get there. Here, we will only measure one direction for the polarization but we must include 
contributions from all polarizations that satisfy the anti-correlation requirement. This is reminiscent of 
a sum over histories approach to calculating the partition function for quantum spin systems (Karchev 
2012). 
We never know nor can we ever assign a direction to the internal polarization before it has been 
measured. After it has been measured it is always transmitted or reflected with respect to the 
orientation of a polarization filter.                                                                                                                                        
All we can observe are the directions A and B with respect to which the polarizations are measured, 
and the angles a and b between these vectors and the z-axis in the laboratory frame. The supposition 
that there exists a well-defined z-component of internal polarization before it has been measured is an 
unobservable construct.  
Figure 2: If when it’s measured in direction A the first particle’s polarization registers as parallel to A, 
then measured in direction B, whose angle is more than π/2 away from A, the second particle registers 
as parallel to B. We infer particle at A was polarized along the axis of the polarization filter, while the 
particle at B was perpendicularly polarized.  
15 - Conclusions 
A mixed state is the correct representation of two polarization-correlated photons, and it reflects our 
lack of knowledge of initial, unmeasured, intrinsic photon polarization. In this case, the wave function 
is epistemic in that its pure-state component reflects the state of the system, while its entangled 
structure represents our lack of knowledge. 
Using nonentangled pure states presents the wave function as one of two nonstatistical, “real”—also 
known as ontological—models of the photons. To this we must “manually” add our ignorance

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 
regarding which of the two possibilities the bound state decomposed into. When this ignorance is 
resolved through observation, we learn which of the two possible forms describes the state. In this case, 
what collapses is our ignorance, not the wave function. 
This collapse of the paradigmatic example of quantum acausality—widely but misleadingly referred to 
as quantum nonlocality—suggests that quantum acausality does not exist. This poses the challenge of 
finding a local mechanism for correlations in other situations. For example, it implies that quantum 
teleportation (Pirandola 2015)—an effect that relies on nonlocal entanglement and lacks a causal 
mechanism—involves unrecognized mechanisms and is similarly misunderstood. 
The difficulty of uncovering these mechanisms does not invalidate the necessity of finding them. It’s 
taken since 1957, when Bohm and Aharonov presented their version of the EPR paradox, to produce 
the explanation given here. It would have taken less time if the absurdity of nonlocal acausality were 
recognized sooner. 
Appendix I: Testing the Projection Postulate 
If we identify the wave function as a complete description of an individual system, then we need to 
determine what happens to those parts of the system that instantaneously disappear, and what 
mechanism accounts for this. 
Von Neumann (1932) asserted that observation reduces a superposed wave function to an eigenstate of 
the observation. This came to be called the phenomena of wave function collapse and was presented 
without further explanation. In the case of the EPRBA situation, where all wave function components 
are assumed to be physically real, the nonlocal nature of this collapse leads to acausal correlations 
between space-like separated observables, namely the correlation between observations at distant 
polarization filters. 
We suggest that this wave function reduction of the entangled “Bell state” is explained by recasting the 
entangled state as a simultaneous mixture. Rather than a superposition of physical objects, the wave 
function is interpreted as a mixture representing an unknown combination. Mixtures do not collapse 
what is real, they only collapse our ignorance of it. The actual wave function does not change, and no 
physical projection occurs. This is testable by the following gedanken experiment. 
Consider the measurements of the correlations of linear polarizations performed on two photons 
belonging to the same pair (Aspect 1982). Previous experiments involving such configurations have 
focused on verifying the violation of Bell’s inequalities, but we are not concerned with Bell’s 
inequalities here. 
In the following proposed experiments, we focus on the effect of one of the two correlated systems on 
the state of the other when the two are separated by a space-like interval. In the conceptually simpler 
case of two correlated fermions, the experiment is shown in Figure 3. There, two particles with anti-
correlated spin are generated in the source marked “S.” These particles travel in opposite directions 
toward two co-aligned Stern-Gerlach machines in the left and right regions, marked region A and B.

===== PAGE 31 =====
31 
Figure 3: Combining two Stern-Gerlach machines and a double-slit apparatus. Does determining the 
path of the particle in Region A through the use of the detector at A affect the path of its correlated 
partner in Region B, and hence the interference pattern built up at the screen of particle detectors D1 
through DN in Region C? 
A particle detector is placed in the path of the higher beam in the left-ward region labeled A. A double-
slit barrier is placed in right-ward region labeled B, and a screen of particle detectors is placed beyond 
the slits at location C.                                                                                                                   
We know that an interference pattern will build up on the screen at C only when we allow the wave 
function to propagate through both slits without measuring the presence of a particle at either of the 
slits. If the particle is recorded as passing through either slit, or if there is any way at all of recording 
through which slit the particle passed, then the double-slit interference pattern is replaced, over 
repeated trials, with the sum of two single-slit interference patterns, one generated from particles 
passing through the top slit and the other from particles passing through the bottom slit. 
It is not necessary that one records which path the particle takes. It is sufficient to configure the 
apparatus so that this information is generated. Note that even a negative observation, the recording of 
no particle behind one of the slits, will determine the particle’s path to have been through the other slit. 
Because we know that interference between the components of a wave function can only occur when 
there is more than one component present in region C, we would like to know if the selection of one of 
two wave function components in region A simultaneously “collapses” the correlated wave function 
located in region C, separated from region A by a space-like interval. 
Since the particles are spin-correlated, a particle that’s recorded as traveling the upper path to the 
detector at A always correlates with a particle traveling in the lower slit at B. By coupling the particle 
detector at A with impacts on the particle detections at C we can determine whether or not recording 
the path detected at A affects the interference pattern that’s built up at C.

===== PAGE 32 =====
32 
If the correlation between particles is nonlocal, then a measurement in Region A will determine the 
path of the particle in Region C. If the conclusion of locality that’s asserted here is correct, then nothing 
that’s done in Region A will have any effect on what’s observed in Region C. 
The symmetry of this spin-1/2 particle experiment makes the possible nonlocal effect between regions 
A and B easy to visualize, but the nature of charged particles, the small dimensions involved, and the 
necessity of building up a spatial interference pattern in region C make this experiment difficult to 
realize.  
An equivalent experiment involving photons is less symmetric and the test of nonlocal effects not as 
easy to visualize. However, the ease of directing, isolating, and recording light, the larger dimensions 
involved, and the simpler task of recording a temporal interference pattern (temporal beats) make this 
experiment easier to conduct. 
The particle and the photon versions obey similar mathematics and test the same physics. Both can 
definitively test whether the wavefunctions of the correlated pairs are entangled or mixed, and whether 
or not a nonlocal collapse of the wavefunction occurs. 
In the photon-based alternative, spatial alternatives of spin-up and spin-down particles reacting to an 
inhomogeneous magnetic field are replaced by oppositely polarized photons interfering when 
superimposed. The resulting single beam that enters the photomultiplier at D will or will not generate a 
temporal interference pattern due to a shift in the relative phases of the beam’s two components. This 
experiment is shown in Figure 4. 
Figure 4: Combining two Fresnel polyprisms, which separate photons of left and right circular 
polarization, and an interference apparatus consisting of a ½-wave plate at B to shift the polarization, 
and a half-silvered mirror at C to recombine the beams. Does determining the path of the photon in 
Region A affect the path of its correlated partner and hence the temporal interference pattern recorded 
at the photomultiplier at D? 
The experiment shown in Figure 4 uses Fresnel polyprisms to separate the correlated but unpolarized 
light generated at the source S into beams of right and left circularly polarized photons (Arteaga 2019). 
The experiment can be performed with single photons (Grangier 1986, 2005) or photon beams. If the 
conclusion of locality that’s asserted here is correct, then, as in the previously suggested experiment,

===== PAGE 33 =====
33 
nothing that’s done in Region A will have any effect on the temporal interference pattern recorded by 
the photomultiplier in Region D. 
The reason that Region A will not affect the observations in Region D is that the emitted photons are 
not prepared in any particular state. Their internal spins are correlated but their individual correlated 
values are unknown and, short of being prepared or measured, are unknowable. 
The observation of a particular value in Region A forces a selection of one of two eigenvalues on the 
basis of the orientation of the detector at A. The result is determined by the spin or polarization of the 
photon at A. The second photon, on the opposite side of the source, is unaffected by this measurement. 
The projection of the observed eigen value of the second particle is determined by the spin or 
polarization carried with this second particle to the detector at D. The photodetector(s) at D continues 
(or continue) to exhibit the usual interference pattern when the path of the second photon through the 
interferometer (or the double-slit apparatus) is unknown. A careful explanation of the detection of a 
photon passing through the interferometer in Figure 4 is provided by Loudon (2003). 
Conflicts of Interest 
The author declares no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this paper. 
References                                                         
Aharonov, A., and Gruss, E. (2005).  “Two-time Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics.” arXiv: 
Quantum Physics. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:117580755 
Annila, A., and Wikström, M. (2024 Jun 27). “Quantum Entanglement and Classical Correlation Have 
the Same Form.” Eur. Phys. J. Plus 139: 559. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjp/s13360-024-05377-8 
Arteaga, O., Garcia-Caurel, E., and Ossikovski, R. (2019). "Stern-Gerlach Experiment with Light: 
Separating Photons by Spin with the Method of A. Fresnel," Optics Express 27 (4): 4758-68. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.27.004758 
Bancal, J-D., Pironion, S., Acin, A., Lian, Y-C., Scarani, V., and Gisin, N. (2012 Oct 28). “Quantum 
Non-Locality Based on Finite-Speed Causal Influences Leads to Superluminal Signaling.” Nature 
Physics Letters. https://doi.org/10.1038/NPHYS2460 
Bell, J. (1964). “On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox.” Physics 1 (3): 195-200. 
https://cds.cern.ch/record/111654/files/vol1p195-200_001.pdf 
Bohm, D., and Aharonov, Y. (1957). “Discussion of Experimental Proof for the Paradox of Einstein, 
Rosen, and Podolsky.” Physical Review 108 (4): 1070-76. 
https://www.informationphilosopher.com/solutions/scientists/bohm/Bohm_Aharonov.pdf

===== PAGE 34 =====
34 
Bohm, David (1952). "A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of 'Hidden 
Variables' I". Physical Review 85 (2): 166–179. 
https://journals.aps.org/pr/abstract/10.1103/PhysRev.85.166 
Bell, J. S. (1966 July). On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics.” Review of 
Modern Physics 38 (3): 447-52. 
Brown, H. R., and Timpson, C. G. (2016). “Bell on Bell's Theorem: The Changing Face of 
Nonlocality,” in M. Bell, and S. Gao [Eds.] Quantum Nonlocality and Reality 50 Years of Bell's 
Theorem, Cambridge U. Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316219393 
Chopra, D. (2019 Apr 29). “Physics Must Evolve Beyond the Physical.” Activitas Nervosa Superior 
61: 126-9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41470-019-00042-3 
Clauser, J. F., Horne, M. A., Shimony, A., and Holt, R. A. (1969 Oct 13). “Proposed Experiment to 
Test Local Hidden-Variable Theories.” Physical Review Letters 23 (15), 880-84. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.23.880 
Clauser, J, and Shimony, A. (1978). “Bell’s Theorem: Experimental Tests and Implications.” Rep. 
Prog. Phys. 41: 1881. 
Dür, W., Heusler, S. (2013 Dec 5). “What We Can Learn About Quantum Physics from a Single 
Qubit.” arXiv: Physics Education. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/259151440_What_we_can_learn_about_quantum_physics_fr
om_a_single_qubit                                                                                 
del Castillo, G.F. T., and Rubalcava-Garcia, I. (2011). “The Jones Vector as a Spinor and Its 
Representation on the Poincaré Sphere.” Revista Mexicana de Física 57: 406–13. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236234550_The_Jones_vector_as_a_spinor_and_its_represen
tation_on_the_Poincare_sphere 
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N. (1935 May 15). “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of 
Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?” Physical Review 47: 777-80. 
DeWitt, B. S., and Graham, R. N. (Eds.) (1973), The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum 
Mechanics, Princeton University Press. 
Fisher, Arthur D. (2021 May). “The Myth of Spooky Action at a Distance in Quantum Mechanics.” 
ResearchGate. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.12940.23681/2 
Fisher, Arthur D. (2023 May). “A Few Insights into Quantum Entanglement.” ResearchGate. 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.16605.90081 
Glancy, S., and Vasconcelos, H. M. (2008 Apr 29). “Methods for Producing Optical Coherent State 
Superpositions.” arXiv [quant-ph]. https://arxiv.org/abs/0705.2045 
Gu, Y. (2020). “A Counterexample to Bell’s Theorem.” Researchgame.net Preprint. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345006335_A_counterexample_to_Bell's_Theorem

===== PAGE 35 =====
35 
Gu, Y. (2022 Jul). “Conceptual Problems in Bell’s Inequality and Quantum Entanglement.” J. Applied 
Math. and Physics. 10 (7): 2216-31. https://doi.org/10.4236/jamp.2022.107152 
Gundhi, A., and Bassi, A. (2023 Jun 1). “Motion of an Electron Through Vacuum Fluctuations.” Phys. 
Ref. A 107: 062801. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2301.11946 
Gundhi, A., and Ulbricht, H. (2025 July 7). “Measuring Decoherence Due to Quantum Vacuum 
Fluctuations.” Phys. Rev. Lett. 135: 020402. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2501.17928 
Greenstein, G., and Zajonc, A. G. (2006). The Quantum Challenge: Modern Research on the 
Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 2nd Ed. Jones and Bartlett, Sudbury, MA. 
Grangier, P., Roger, G., and Aspect, A. (1986 Feb 15). “Experimental Evidence for a Photon 
Anticorrelation Effect on a Beam Splitter: A New Light on Single-Photon Interference.” Europhysics 
Letters 1 (4): 173-9. 
Grangier, P. (2005). “Experiments with Single Photons.” In: Damour, T., Darrigol, O., Duplantier, B., 
Rivasseau, V. (eds) Einstein, 1905–2005. Progress in Mathematical Physics, 47. Birkhäuser Basel. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-7643-7436-5_5 
Huang, C., Huang, Y. C. & Nie, Y. Y. (2022 Aug 24). “New Quantum Physics, Solving Puzzles of 
Wheeler’s Delayed Choice and a Particle’s Passing N Slits Simultaneously and Quantum Oscillator in 
Experiments.” Scientific Reports 12, 14410. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-17667-1 
Jaynes, E. T. (1980). “Quantum Beats”. In A. Barut (ed.), Foundations of Radiation Theory and 
Quantum Electrodynamics, pp.37–43. New York: Plenum Press. 
Karchev, N. (2012 Nov 19). “Path Integral Representation for Spin Systems.” arXiv. 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1211.4509 
Kumar, R., and Singh, A. (2025 Oct). “Wavefunction Collapse and the Measurement Problem: An 
Analytical Inquiry into the Ontological, Mathematical, and Epistemological Foundations of Quantum 
Measurement and the Emergence of Classical Reality.” Int. J. Eng. Sci. Invention 14 (10): 41-51. 
https://ijesi.org/papers/Vol(14)i10/14104151.pdf 
Kraus, J., Stein, F., and Plester, A. (2025 Oct 7). “From Lasers to Photon Bose–Einstein Condensates: 
A Unified Description via an Open-Dissipative Bose–Einstein Distribution.”  arXiv [quant-ph]. 
https://arxiv.org/html/2510.05917v1 
Lamehi-Rachti, M., and Mittig, W. (1976). “Quantum Mechanics and Hidden Variables: A Test of 
Bell's Inequality by the Measurement of the Spin Correlation in Low-Energy Proton Proton 
Scattering.” Phys. Rev. D 14: 2543-55. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.14.2543 
Laudisa, F. (2025). “Between Myth and History: von Neumann on Consciousness in Quantum 
Mechanics.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2025.102083.

===== PAGE 36 =====
36 
Hensen, B., Bernien, H., Dréau, A. E., Reiserer, A., Kalb, N., et al.  (2015). “Loophole-free Bell 
Inequality Violation Using Electron Spins Separated by 1.3 Kilometres.” Nature 526: 682–86. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15759 
Holland, Peter R. (26 January 1995). The Quantum Theory of Motion: An Account of the de Broglie-
Bohm Causal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-
48543-2 
Kocher, C. A. (2024 Aug 22). “Quantum Entanglement of Optical Photons: The First Experiment, 
1964-67,” Front. Quantum Sci. Technol. 3:1451239. https://doi.org/10.3389/frqst.2024.1451239 
Loudon, R. (2003). “What Is a Photon?” Optics and Photonics News 14 (10). 
https://scispace.com/pdf/the-nature-of-light-what-is-a-photon-1jy9qvjnas.pdf 
Mandel, L. (1999). “Quantum Effects in One-Photon and Two-Photon Interference.” Reviews of 
Modern Physics 71 (2). 
Minev, Z., Mundhada, S., Shankar, S. et al. (2019). “To Catch and Reverse a Quantum Jump Mid-
flight.” Nature 570, 200–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1287-z 
Mochizuki, R. (2021 Apr 29). “Decoherence As an Inherent Characteristic of Quantum Mechanics.” J. 
of Mod. Phys. 12: 700-29. https://doi.org/10.4236/jmp.2021.125045 
Neumann, J. von (1932). Matematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik, Springer, Berlin. 
Norsen, T. (2011 Dec 1). “John S. Bell’s Concept of Local Causality.” American Journal of Physics 79 
(12). 1261-75. https://doi.org/10.1119/1.3630940 
Moldauer, P. A. (1976 Oct). “A Remark on Local Causality.” Epistemological Letters 13: 9-10. 
https://doi.org/10.7274/24742626.v1 
Murray, A. (2020 Feb 18). “Double Slits with Single Atoms.” Physics World 33 (2): 31. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-7058/33/2/34 
Neumann, J. von (2018). Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics: New Edition. Nicholas A. 
Wheeler (Ed.), Princeton U. Press. https://dokumen.pub/mathematical-foundations-of-quantum-
mechanics-new-edition-newnbsped-9781400889921.html, 1983 edition: 
https://archive.org/details/mathematicalfoun0000vonn 
Pirandola, S., Eisert, J., Weedbrook, C., Furusawa, A., and Braunstein, S. L. (2015). “Advances in 
Quantum Teleportation.” Nature Photonics. 9: 641-52. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2015.154 
Saldanha, P.L. (2020 May 9). “Inconsistency of a Realistic Interpretation of Quantum Measurements: 
A Simple Example.” Braz J Phys 50, 438–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13538-020-00757-8 
Schlosshauer, M. (2019). "Quantum Decoherence." Physics Reports 831: 1-57. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2019.10.001, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.06282 
Schlosshauer, M., and Fine, A. (2019a).  “Decoherence and the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.”

===== PAGE 37 =====
37 
in (Eds. J. Evans and A. S. Thorndike) Quantum Mechanics at the Crossroads: New Perspectives from 
History, Philosophy and Physics. Springer: p.125-48. 
https://faculty.up.edu/schlosshauer/publications/decoherence_book.pdf 
Shimony, A., Clauser, J. F., and Horne, M. A. (1976 Oct). “Comment on: ‘The Theory of Local 
Beables.’” Epistemological Letters 13: 1-8. https://doi.org/10.7274/24742626.v1 
Shimony, A. (1986). “Events and Processes in the Quantum World.” in Quantum Concepts in Space 
and Time, edited by R. Penrose and C. J. Isham. Oxford U. Press. 
Stein, E., Vewinger, F., and Pelster, A. (2019 Oct 23). “Collective Modes of a Photon Bose–Einstein 
Condensate with Thermo-Optic Interaction.” New J. Phys. 21: 103044. 
https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1367-2630/ab4b06 
Stoller, L. (2026 Aug). “Resolving the Einstein, Rosen, Podolsky, Bohm, and Aharonov Paradox with 
Non-relativistic Quantum Mechanics.” J. Applied Mathematics and Physics 14 (8): 2917-66. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/jamp.2026.148144 
Vaidman, L. (2009). “Counterfactuals in Quantum Mechanics.” In: (Eds. Greenberger, D., Hentschel, 
K., Weinert, F.) Compendium of Quantum Physics. Springer, Berlin. https://arxiv.org/pdf/0709.0340 
Vaidman, L. (2019). “Quantum Lonlocality.” Entropy 21 (5):447.  https://doi.org/10.3390/e21050447 
Varadarajan, V. S. (2007). Geometry of Quantum Theory, Second Edition. Springer, NY. 
Varshovi, A. A. (2025). “Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: A Logically Paradoxical 
Picture.” Philarchive.org. https://philarchive.org/rec/VARMIO-2 
Waerden, B. L. van der (1974). Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics. Springer-Verlag. NY. 
https://archive.org/details/grouptheoryquant0000waer/page/n5/mode/2up 
Wiseman, H. M. (2006). “From Einstein’s Theorem to Bell’s Theorem: A History of Quantum Non-
locality.” Contemporary Physics, 47 (4), 79–88. https://doi.org/10.1080/00107510600581011, 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/0509061 
Wyatt, C. L. (1978). Radiometric Calibration: Theory and Methods. Academic Press, London.  
Zajonc, A. (2003). “Light Reconsidered.” Optics and Photonic News 14 (10). 
https://scispace.com/pdf/the-nature-of-light-what-is-a-photon-1jy9qvjnas.pdf 
Zeh, H. D. (1996 Oct 10). “What is Achieved by Decoherence?” arXiv.org. https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-
ph/9610014 
Zwirn, H. (2017 Sep). “Delayed Choice, Complementarity, Entanglement and Measurement.” Physics 
Essays 30 (3): 281-93(13). https://doi.org/10.4006/0836-1398-30.3.281
