===== PAGE 1 =====
Home / Biology / Cell & Microbiology
Home / Biology / Molecular & Computational biology
The physics of brain development: How cells pull
together to form the neural tube
by Georgia Institute of Technology
Credit: Current Biology (2026). DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2026.02.068
In about one out of every 1,000 pregnancies, the neural tube, a key nervous system structure, fails
to close properly. Georgia Tech physicists are now helping explain why this happens, having
uncovered the physics that drive neural tube closure in a pregnancy's earliest stages.
Working with collaborators at University College London (UCL), Georgia Tech researchers used
computer models to reveal how, during early development, forces generated by cells physically pull
APRIL 20, 2026
edited by Stephanie Baum, reviewed by Robert Egan

===== PAGE 2 =====
the neural tube closed—like a drawstring. This discovery offers new insight into a critical process
that—when disrupted—can result in severe birth defects such as spina bifida.
"Understanding a complex developmental process like neural tube closure requires a highly
interdisciplinary approach," said Shiladitya Banerjee, an associate professor in the School of
Physics. "By combining advanced biological imaging with theoretical physics, we were able to
uncover the mechanical rules that drive cells to close the tube. My lab builds computational models
to uncover the physical rules of living systems. The neural tube is an ideal focus because its
formation requires incredible mechanical coordination."
The researchers present their findings in Current Biology.
Closing the gap
The UCL team studied mouse embryos, which develop similarly to humans, and Georgia Tech
researchers used that data to construct their models. From the data, they identified the
fundamental physics mechanism that enables neural tube closure in part of the brain. This
mechanism, called a "purse string," is made of actin, a pivotal protein that forms a cell's skeletal
structure. As the purse strings tighten, the tube closes.
"These actin molecules are very important because they give rigidity and shape to cells," Banerjee
said. "During neural tube closure, actin filaments form a ring around the opening and engage
molecular motors—proteins that generate forces inside cells," he said. "As these motors pull on the
actin, they generate tension that tightens the ring and draws the tube closed."
Stretching to fit
As the actin ring tightens, cells stretch and elongate, causing them to align and move together in a
synchronized pattern, like a school of fish. This coordination allows the cells to move faster and
more efficiently, increasing tension and driving a feedback loop that helps seal the neural tube.
The team built a computer model to show how this feedback loop leads to successful neural tube
formation. Further research using the model could help explain why the neural tube fails to close.
"Physics-based modeling of cell and tissue mechanics allows us to connect the dots between
developmental stages in a way that is both robust and quantitative, simulating experiments that are
impossible in biological tissues," said Gabriel Galea, the study co-author and UCL group leader. "In
this case, it allowed us to explain how a cell's mechanical experience impacts its current and future
shapes during a critical step of brain development."
Beyond neural tube development, the findings highlight the power of physics-based modeling to
explain complex biological processes that can't be observed directly. The researchers say this

===== PAGE 3 =====
approach could be applied to other stages of human development where forces, motion, and timing
are just as critical.
Publication details
Fernanda Pérez-Verdugo et al, Mechanosensitive feedback organizes cell shape and motion during hindbrain
neuropore morphogenesis, Current Biology (2026). DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2026.02.068
Journal information: Current Biology
Key concepts
developmental biology hominoids Biomolecular & subcellular processes
Cellular organization, physiology & dynamics Mechanical deformation
Numerical techniques
Provided by Georgia Institute of Technology
Citation: The physics of brain development: How cells pull together to form the neural tube (2026,
April 20) retrieved 7 September 2026 from https://phys.org/news/2026-04-physics-brain-cells-
neural-tube.html
This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private
study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is
provided for information purposes only.
