===== PAGE 1 =====
Long-predicted gravitational effect seen
in a quantum object for the very first time
– Einstein’s theory passes another crucial
test
Story by Dr. Alfredo Carpineti• • 3 min read
IFLScience 25.5K
Follow
Followers
2d
An international team of researchers has demonstrated that the equivalence
principle, a cornerstone of Einstein’s theory of general relativity, holds even in the
quantum world. This is a very important result.
Quantum mechanics and general relativity are the foundations of modern
physics. The first explains the behavior of atoms and tiny objects, while the
second explains how objects fall and gravity shapes the universe.
Do things in the quantum world fall in the same way? It appears to be so. - Image Credit:
FlashMovie/Shutterstock.com
© IFL Science
Sponsored
Try Mmorpg
Unleash your strategy skills and command
epic Champions! Download for Free Now!
Step into a world of strategy and epic champions! Join Now
and Play for Free!
Learn more
Feedback

===== PAGE 2 =====
Together they allow us to explain so much of the universe. They have been tested
time and time again, and yet, combining them to study certain objects and events
- like black holes - leaves us with nonsense.
Physicists believe that there’s another theory out there that can combine these
two into one. We haven’t found it yet, but every crumb or hint might take us a
step closer.
This latest work sits in that tradition, even if it has confirmed that Einstein’s theory
is once again right. It all comes down to the weak equivalence principle, also
known as the free fall principle.
This states that, in a gravitational field, two objects made of different materials
and with different masses fall to the ground with the same acceleration as long as
no other forces are acting upon them.
The principle goes all the way back to Galileo, who demonstrated it by dropping
cannonballs of different masses from the Leaning Tower of Pisa, which
subsequently hit the floor at the same time. More recently, Apollo 15 commander
David Scott demonstrated it on the Moon by dropping a feather and a hammer
and recording them both landing on the surface together.
In the quantum world, the setup was a little bit different. Researchers chilled
rubidium atoms to near absolute zero, and then placed them into a superposition
state that allowed them to travel along two different paths at once. The atoms
can be interpreted as moving in quantum waves.
One part of the atomic wave was then kept stationary by the use of a magnetic
field, while the other was first pushed with a different magnetic pulse, and then
allowed to fall under gravity.
At the end of the free fall, that part of the atomic wave was then brought back to
the position of the part held stationary, at which point the waves interfered with
The free fall principle, on a much smaller scale
Scott Houston The Piano
Guy - Playing Piano Was…
play.pianoinaflash.com·Sponsored
Related video:Quantum discovery at MIT surprises physicists(WooGlobe)
WooGlobe
Quantum discovery at MIT surprises physicists

===== PAGE 3 =====
Sponsored Content
More for You
each other.
This interference allowed the researchers to compare the tiny differences in
quantum phase accumulated while one part was in free fall and the other held
still. That measurement was consistent with the prediction of Einstein's
equivalence principle when applied to a quantum wave, providing an insight into
the space where general relativity meets quantum mechanics.
“We have no consistent theory telling us why quantum physics should fail,”
Professor Vlatko Vedral, from the department of physics at the University of
Oxford, said in a statement. “This experiment pushes quantum mechanics into
one of its most intriguing frontiers, gravity, and shows that, once again, its
predictions hold.”
So, where do quantum mechanics and relativity start to disagree? Another of the
study's coauthors, Professor Sir Roger Penrose, has argued that larger objects
held in very long superpositions might show the cracks in our theories.
Experiments are now underway to recreate this experiment with nanodiamonds.
A paper describing the results was published in Science Advances.
Support Science Journalism. Subscribe Today!
Fisher Investments
13 Mistakes Investors With $1
Million Make—and Ways to
Avoid Them
Sponsored
Loot Horizon
Why This Fantasy RPG Keeps
Growing Years After Its
Release
Sponsored
Bright Side·1w
What Earth and life will really look like in a billion
years
Funny Olde World·3d
 IFLScience·3w
The Top-Rated Fantasy
Game of the Year!
Try Mmorpg·Sponsored
Search the web
Columbus °F64

===== PAGE 4 =====
41 3 They saw eight hollow
structuresdescending
Life on Earth appe
oncebuttwicebo
Live Science·3d
Physicists put Einstein's
'happiest thought' to the
test, uniting relativity and…
91 3
Snopes·1w
Image allegedly shows baby
in car seat suspended
outside vehicle. Is it real?
23 6
GuidetoSchools.com
Music Production
Universities - Degrees in
Music Production - Music…
Sponsored
West Shore Home
Here's What A Wa
Shower Should Co
Columbus
Sponsored
Snopes
Here's how many times
Trump invoked Fifth
Amendment in civil fraud…
1k 302
IGN·2w
Silent Hill Townfall - Official
gameplay trailer
85 2
Phys.org·1w
Meteorite dust holds records
of magnetism that may have
helped form the sun
7
The Columbus Dispatch·
ODOT shares trav
worst times to dri
Labor Day weeken
2
Richard Feynman’s 80-year-old quantum
postulate has now been validated
Story by Karmela Padavic-Callaghan• • 3 min read
New Scientist 17.1K
Follow
Followers
1w

===== PAGE 5 =====
Sponsored Content
A foundational postulate of quantum physics has been directly verified by an
experiment for the first time. Formulated by Richard Feynman nearly 80 years
ago, it has long formed the backbone of much of modern physics.
Quantum particles are notoriously difficult to analyse as interacting with
them affects their properties. But researchers have developed powerful
mathematical tools for predicting what a particle is likely to do under particular
conditions. 
One such tool is the “Feynman path integral”, which posits that the most likely
path a quantum particle will take between two points can be predicted by
performing a calculation that sums all the possible paths between those points in
a special way. Since Feynman proposed it in 1948, his path integral had made its
way into textbooks and is now invaluable for many scientists, including physicists
who study particles. 
Advertisement
Read more
Physicists used ‘dark photons’ in an effort to rewrite physics in 2025
Now, for the first time, Feynman’s idea has been tested directly in an experiment. 
Shi-Liang Zhu at the South China Normal University and his colleagues achieved
Feynman’s “path integral” is a fundamental principle of quantum physics SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY/Getty
Images
Continue reading

===== PAGE 6 =====
More for You
