===== PAGE 1 =====
New theory argues quantum physics must
abandon irrational numbers and the continuum
The mysteries of quantum physics belong to maths, not nature
20th May 2026
 cite
Tim Palmer | Royal Society Research Professor Emeritus in the Department of Physics at the University of
Oxford, and author of The Primacy of Doubt.
2,372 words
Read time: approx. 12 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
Quantum mechanics works perfectly in experiments, but Oxford physicist Tim Palmer
argues it rests on a mathematical fiction: building the theory on the continuum of real
numbers, including irrational numbers like √2. Palmer’s radical alternative abandons
the continuum of real numbers and eliminates quantum mysteries that aren't actually
physical—from Schrödinger's cat, to Einstein’s “spooky action at a distance.” The
theory makes a testable prediction: quantum computers will fail beyond 400 qubits,
hitting a fundamental limit set by the discrete structure of nature itself. The coming
quantum computing race will determine whether Palmer has identified a basic mistake
in our most successful theory.
 
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
The quantum
world reveals
reality is made of
relations, not
objects
Spacetime does
not emerge from
quantum physics
Schrödinger’s
blunder created
the quantum
measurement
problem
The universe is
fine-tuned for
technology, not
just life
Related Videos:
Time's great
mystery
If you know one thing about quantum mechanics, the atomic theory formulated just
over 100 years ago by Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schrödinger, it is that quantum
systems evolve by “jumping” discontinuously from one state to another; indeed, the
words “quantum jump” and “quantum leap” have become part of everyday language.
If you know one other thing about quantum physics, it is that it describes a deeply
mysterious world where cats can be simultaneously alive and dead and where
choices about how we measure quantum systems on one side of the galaxy can
instantaneously alter the states of quantum systems on the other side of the galaxy.
Such weirdness, we are sometimes told, is beyond the capability of the puny human
brain to understand.
In this brief essay, I am going to try to persuade you that you are wrong about both of
these apparent facts. On the first, I will argue that quantum mechanics depends much
more vitally on the continuum of numbers than do the classical theories of physics that
quantum mechanics replaced. Indeed, the iconic quantum jumps only occur at the
endpoint of quantum evolution when we measure or observe a quantum system.
Before then, quantum systems evolve absolutely continuously according to
Schrödinger’s eponymous equation. On the second point, I argue below that if we
“tweak” quantum mechanics by banishing the continuum in favour of a more discrete
structure, all the so-called incomprehensible mysteries vanish in a puff of smoke. I
refer to this theory, where the continuum has been banished, as Rational Quantum
Mechanics (RaQM).
___
RaQM is, on the one hand, based on rational numbers, and
on the other hand, its interpretation is totally
comprehensible.
___
The existence of the mathematical continuum goes back to the fifth century BCE,
when Hippasus of Metapontum showed that not all numbers can be described as the
ratio of two whole numbers. Hippasus famously showed that the square root of 2
cannot be such a rational number. He was punished for having uncovered such a
disturbing truth by being drowned at sea (either by his fellow Pythagorean followers or
by the Gods, depending on which story you read). Today we have become rather
blasé about the irrational numbers. However, I believe we have been lulled into a false
sense of security.
Until Newton and Leibniz invented the calculus, one could view Hippasus’s irrational
numbers simply as an oddity. But the calculus required us to make sense of these
irrational numbers not just here and there, but everywhere. Eighteenth and
nineteenth-century mathematicians like Augustin-Louis Cauchy did their best to tame
the irrational numbers, and in so doing made respectable the continuum field of real
numbers, which combines the rational and irrational numbers into one set of numbers.
Nowadays we hardly bat an eyelid when using the real numbers—not least because

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
Our future
theories of the
universe
Physics has
misunderstood
time
The trouble with
string theory
they provide precisely the tools needed to analyze mathematically the classical
geometry of Euclid.
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.

===== PAGE 4 =====
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
