===== PAGE 1 =====
Start
Elementary Einstein
Special relativity
General relativity
Gravitational waves
Black Holes & Co.
Cosmology
Relativity and the Quantum
Spotlights on relativity
Special relativity
General relativity
Gravitational waves
Black Holes & Co.
Cosmology
Relativity and the Quantum
Complete Spotlights
About Einstein Online
The concept of EO
About Albert Einstein
About Us
Contributing Institutions
FAQ
Copyright policy
Contact
Essentials
Links
Glossary
Further reading
The mathematical universe
Why cosmology is not only a matter for astronomers and physicists,
but also for mathematicians

===== PAGE 2 =====
An article by Alan Rendall
Cosmology, the study of the universe as a whole, is not only a matter for
astronomers and astrophysicists, but also for mathematicians. At the heart of
cosmology, there’s mathematics, and to comprehend the universe, it is not only
necessary to observe and measure it, but also to understand its inner workings; it
takes not only astronomical data, but also a good understanding of the equations
that govern the evolution of the cosmos.
Initial values and evolution
The appropriate physical theory for describing our universe and its gravitational
interactions is general relativity. In addition, one needs to take into account models
for the properties of matter such as gas and electromagnetic radiation. Together, this
defines physical laws which constrain the properties of the cosmos, equations that
any universe must obey. A universe that does satisfy the constraints is, in
mathematical parlance, a solution to these equations, just as x=-2 and x=4 are
solutions to the quadratic equation x2 – 2·x-8=0. In general relativity, the
gravitational field is described by the Einstein equations and the full system may be
referred to as the Einstein-matter equations. These equations determine how a given
universe evolves in time, or more precisely: they determine the rate of change of
important physical quantities, given their values now.
Whenever the values of these quantities are known at some particular time (the
“initial values”), the equations make it possible to determine them at all later times.
The determination of solutions in this way, the so-called initial value problem,
allows solutions to be specified in a controlled way. It is like having a catalogue of
all available solutions of the equations. When specific cosmological models are
needed for comparison with astronomical observations, they can be looked for in
this catalogue. Mathematics provides the building blocks so that astrophysicists can
construct their descriptions of the world.
However, to obtain general knowledge about the equations and their solutions is a
difficult mathematical problem which, in our present state of knowledge, is not
amenable to a complete solution. One way of making progress is to look at model
problems that are especially simple, namely those that contain only very simple
forms of matter and pose very special initial values.
Homogeneous universes
A very basic simplification is suggested by astronomical observations: our universe
is approximately homogeneous (it is the same at all points of space). As an
example, see the following image using data from the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey.
We, the observers, are at the lower end of the wedge. The wedge-shaped region
shows that only part of the sky was searched. Every white dot represents a galaxy,
some of them closer to Earth (closer to the sharp end of the wedge), some of them
farther away. The greatest distance shown, that of galaxies at the upper boundary,
corresponds to a distance of 2 billion light years:

===== PAGE 3 =====
To be sure, the distribution of galaxies shows a characteristic porous structure, with
filaments of higher and regions of lower density. However, subdividing space into
cubes a few hundred light-years across, the average density of each cube is the same
– on large scales, the universe is homogeneous.
A suitable model universe, simple yet not too far removed from reality, can be
obtained by assuming the universe to be exactly homogeneous. Such models are
relatively easy to analyse mathematically. Most predictions of modern cosmology
make use of these simple models. Yet it is important to remember that they are
simplifications. This brings up a question well-known to mathematicians, that of the
stability of particular solutions: Is a certain solution a very special case, or is it
representative of the more general situation which is the ultimate goal of study? In
other words: If some of the assumptions of a special model are relaxed, say, if
regions of slightly higher or lower density are introduced into an initially
homogeneous universe, does the modified universe behave in a completely different
way? Or is the evolution of the simplified model still a good guide to the evolution
of the more realistic, slightly inhomogeneous universe? This leads, in particular, to
the investigation of initial values which are close to those for a known situation
with high symmetry.
De Sitter’s cosmos
A specific example of these general considerations is provided by the situation of
accelerated cosmological expansion, which may be associated with a positive
cosmological constant or, more generally, with dark energy. There is an explicitly
known solution of the Einstein equations with positive cosmological constant and
without matter. This is the de Sitter solution, first formulated in 1917, a useful
simplified model for a universe with accelerating expansion. Adding homogeneous
matter suitable for describing the distribution of galaxies does not greatly alter its
qualitative properties – at least with respect to this modification, the solution is

===== PAGE 4 =====
stable. Thus, although matter is essential in modelling the cosmos, a matter-free
solution can be of great relevance.
In a solution of this kind the distance between galaxies increases exponentially with
time, as shown in the following graph:
It was proved in 1986 that the de Sitter solution is stable in other respects, at least in
the absence of matter: If we disturb its homogeneity by adding weak gravitational
waves, corresponding to slight inhomogeneous distortions of the homogeneous
spacetime, the result is still an exponentially expanding universe which, at late
times, comes closer and closer to the undisturbed de Sitter solution.
To find a similar proof of stability for accelerating universes containing matter is
currently an open problem. Heuristic arguments indicate that the presence of matter
does not fundamentally change the nature of de Sitter expansion, a statement often
referred to as the “cosmic no hair theorem”. The interest of proving this stability is
evident, as our own universe falls into this class of universes. Stability would not
only provide a rigorous justification for the simplified models currently used. It
would also mean that, as in the case without matter, universes like ours should come
closer and closer to homogeneity as time goes by. This provides a way of
understanding how a homogeneous universe like our own can arise over the course
of cosmic evolution, without the need for very special initial conditions. However,
the proof used for the matter-free case is not easy to adapt to the new situation, and
poses something of a challenge. So far, a proof has only be found for certin cases
with symmetry.
At the same time models are being studied where, in addition to ordinary matter
representing the galaxies, there is exotic matter with negative pressure known as
quintessence – another way of obtaining accelerated expansion, distinct from
Einstein’s cosmological constant. Since it is not known in detail what is behind the
tendency of our universe to accelerate, it makes sense to keep all options open and
study the mathematical properties of large classes of models for dark energy.
 
Further Information

===== PAGE 5 =====
For the relativistic ideas behind this spotlight topic, check out Elementary Einstein,
especially the chapters General Relativity and Cosmology.
Related Spotlights on relativity can be found in the sections General relativity and
Cosmology.
More information about the above image showing the distribution of galaxies can
be found on the
Website of the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey
Colophon
Alan Rendall
is professor of mathematics at Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz, Germany.
Citation
Cite this article as:
Alan Rendall, “The mathematical universe” in: Einstein Online Band 04 (2010),
01-1022
Further Articles
Tag Cloud
Basics  Basics  black holes  Black Holes & Co.  Cosmological
applications  Cosmology  Cosmology and quantum gravity  Detecting
gravitational waves  Energy and mass  gauge theory  General
relativity  General theory of relativity  Gravitational wave
Gravitational wave sources  Gravitational waves
Gravitationswellenastronomie  How to track compact objects
Interferometer  Interview  Light in general relativity  Loop quantum gravity
Mass and other sources of gravity  Miscellaneous  neutron stars  Nobel Price
The many ways of
building an empty,
unchanging universe
General relativity /
Elementary Tour part 1:
Einstein’s geometric
gravity
A tale of two big bangs

===== PAGE 6 =====
Numerical relativity  Other approaches to the problem of quantum gravity
Physics in the background  Physics in the background of quantum theory  pulsars
Relativity and the Quantum  Singularities  Special
relativity  Special relativity and time  String theory  The basics of
general relativity  The cosmic background radiation  The first chemical
elements  The mathematics behind general relativity  The physics of black
holes
What is Einstein Online?
Einstein Online is a web portal with comprehensible information on Einstein's
theories of relativity and their most exciting applications from the smallest particles
to cosmology.
Einstein Online is provided by the
Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics
(Albert-Einstein-Institut)
About Einstein Online
Includes information on our authors and contributing Institutions, and a brief
history of the website.
Glossary
More than 400 entries from "absolute zero" to "XMM Newton" - whenever you see
this type of link on an Einstein Online page, it'll take you to an entry in our
relativistic dictionary.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
Links & Literatur
Our recommendations for books and websites on relativity and its history.
© Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics, Potsdam
Legal notice | Privacy policy

===== PAGE 7 =====

