===== PAGE 1 =====
arXiv:2006.11400v2  [physics.hist-ph]  17 Sep 2020
Two Dogmas of Dynamicism
James Owen Weatherall
Department of Logic and Philosophy of Science
University of California, Irvine
Abstract
I critically discuss two dogmas of the “dynamical approach” to spac etime in general rela-
tivity, as advanced by Harvey Brown [ Physical Relativity (2005) Oxford:Oxford University
Press] and collaborators. The ﬁrst dogma is that positing a “space time geometry” has no
implications for the behavior of matter. The second dogma is that po stulating the “Strong
Equivalence Principle” suﬃces to ensure that matter is “adapted” t o spacetime geometry.
I conclude by discussing “spacetime functionalism”. The discussion is presented in reaction
to and sympathy with recent work by James Read [“Explanation, geo metry, and conspiracy
in relativity theory” (20??) Thinking about Spacetime Boston: Birk¨ auser].
1. Introduction
In a recent paper, James Read (20??) has proposed a detente in a n active and ongo-
ing debate in the foundations of spacetime theories, between defe nders of the “geometri-
cal approach” to spacetime structure and those of the “dynamic al approach”, introduced
by Brown and Pooley (1999, 2006) and elaborated and defended by Brown (2005). 1 The
geometrical view, Read suggests, has been given an unfair treatm ent by recent defend-
ers of the dynamical view—including Read and his collaborators (e.g. R ead et al., 2018;
Brown and Read, 2016, 20??). Really, there are two versions of th e geometrical view that
Email address: weatherj@uci.edu (James Owen Weatherall)
1For a recent, but somewhat one-sided, review of this literature, s ee (Brown and Read, 20??). The
dynamical view is clearly articulated in the papers cited in the main text . But since the “geometrical view”
is the received view, it is somewhat diﬃcult to identify a locus classicus for its statement. I would argue
that the view goes back at least to Weyl (1952 [1918]). It is also the view implicitly found in, for instance,
Hawking and Ellis (1973), Wald (1984), and Malament (2012b); see als o Stein (1977), discussed in the ﬁnal
section of this paper. Friedman (1983), Torretti (1983), and Ma udlin (2012) are all sometimes cited as
defenders of the geometrical view.
Draft of September 18, 2020 PLEASE CITE THE PUBLISHED VERSIO N IF AVAILABLE!

===== PAGE 2 =====
Read detects in the literature: what he calls the “unqualiﬁed” and “q ualiﬁed” geometrical
approaches. (I will describe these below.) The ﬁrst of these, he ar gues, is untenable. But the
second, which he tentatively attributes to Maudlin (2012) and more conﬁdently attributes
to me (Weatherall, 2019), is tenable after all, he says. In fact, Rea d thinks, on reﬂection
it is hard to see what the disagreement between the qualiﬁed geomet rical view and the dy-
namical view is supposed to be, at least in the context of general re lativity.2 Indeed, Read
argues that my 2019 is best read as endorsing not only the dynamica l approach, but also a
version of spacetime functionalism, as introduced by Knox (2013, 2 019), which Read sees as
an “extension” of the dynamical approach according to which spac etime is whatever plays
the spacetime role, and “the spacetime role is played by whatever de ﬁnes a structure of local
inertial frames” (Knox, 2019, p.22). 3
There is much to admire in Read’s discussion and I think his ireny is a sign o f considerable
progress all around. To the extent that I have summarized it so fa r, I largely agree with
what he writes, and in what follows, I will oﬀer an analysis that is very s imilar to his. But
I will come at it from a diﬀerent perspective—one closer, I think, to t he received (that is,
geometrical) view, though I am reluctant to take on such a mantle be cause I agree with Read
that the two sides, in their most careful moments, are not so clear ly diﬀerent on the issues
that are generally taken to deﬁne the debate. I think there is some value in rehashing these
issues from this other perspective, both because it can aid in trans lating between somewhat
diﬀerent ways of speaking about the foundations of general relat ivity; and because I think
it will help isolate where disagreements persist.
The paper will proceed as follows. I will begin by restating some key po ints from Read’s
2In the context of special relativity, conceived as a separate theo ry from general relativity, he thinks that
both views are tenable, but that they are clearly distinct and he pre fers the dynamical view. See (Read,
2019) for further discussion of issues that are salient to the deba te in special relativity, but which will not
concern me in the present article.
3See Baker (2019) and Read and Menon (2019) for critiques of Knox ’s view, and (Weatherall, 2019, fn.
40) for a discussion how I see the relationship between my views as dis cussed there and Knox’s.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
paper in a diﬀerent way; as I go, I will explain how I take the issues as I raise them to relate
to what Read writes. I will then discuss one important point on which I think there is still
disagreement. As will be clear, setting aside quibbles about terminolo gy, this disagreement
has little to do with the headline questions that have marked the deba te, such as whether
geometry is “reducible” to dynamics or whether geometry “explains ” the behavior of matter,
and much more to do with the details of what the relationship between dynamics and
geometry is supposed to be. 4 Along the way, I will oﬀer critical comments on two “dogmas”
of the dynamical approach: one, already questioned by Read in som ewhat diﬀerent terms, is
the idea that positing a certain geometrical structure for spacet ime should be understood to
have no consequences for the dynamics of matter; and the secon d, which I think has received
too little attention in the literature, is the idea that the “strong equ ivalence principle”, as
stated by Brown, Read, Knox, and others, suﬃces to explicate th e intended relationship
between matter and geometry in general relativity. I will conclude w ith some remarks
concerning the bearing of these arguments on spacetime function alism as discussed by Knox
and others.
2. Isn’t It Irenic?
Consider the following characterization of general relativity: 5
General relativity is a theory of spacetime geometry according to w hich:
[(g)eometry] Spacetime has the structure of a Lorentzian 4-manifold, ( M, gab),
the curvature of which is related to the distribution of stress-ene rgy in the uni-
4One might wonder whether the remaining disagreement I identify is re ally so far from those headline
issues—or if rather, what I am attempting here is to isolate what has always been the core disagreement,
from which the other debates have followed. Perhaps. But if so, I t hink it is doubly important to focus on
this particular disagreement, because I think it is one that can be su bstantially resolved with new technical
work. Thank you to Sam Fletcher for raising this point.
5I take for granted the technical details of general relativity in wha t follows; for background using similar
notation, see Malament (2012b) or Wald (1984).
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
verse by Einstein’s equation; and
[(d)ynamics] the dynamical evolution of matter is adapted to this geometry.
This characterization of general relativity is stronger than one so metimes seen in the liter-
ature (for instance, it is stronger than what Read (20??, §2.3.2) provides), since it includes
(i) an explicit interpretation of the spacetime metric, namely as a des cription of physical
geometry; and (ii) an analysis of what it means to give the metric this in terpretation, viz.
(d).6 But I also think it is a fair characterization of what one might (or shou ld) mean by a
“geometrical” view of general relativity.
Now, given this gloss on the theory, one may pose the following two qu estions.
(I) Is (d) independent of (g)?
(II) Can (d) be made precise, in the sense of giving conditions on mat ter dynamics such
that those dynamics are “adapted” to the spacetime geometry?
Taking (I) ﬁrst: this question is the central issue at stake for the dynamical view. In
particular, Brown (2005) argues (in diﬀerent terms) that (d) is independent of (g); and
moreover, because (d) is independent of (g), (g) alone cannot “e xplain” how the spacetime
metric, gab, comes to have its “chrono-geometric signiﬁcance”—that is, (g) a lone does not
imply anything about the behavior of light rays, small bodies, or styliz ed measuring devices
(“rods and clocks”). 7 Conversely, Brown and collaborators understand the advocate o f the
6For Read (20??), general relativity, or a “general relativistic the ory”, is a theory in which there are matter
ﬁelds on Lorentzian manifolds, where the matter ﬁelds and metric ar e required to satisfy some system of
diﬀerential equations that includes Einstein’s equation sourced by s ome stress-energy tensor associated with
the matter ﬁelds. This statement is similar to mine, except that no co nstraints are made, in the ﬁrst
instance, on what that system of equations can be, except that it include Einstein’s equation. Note that
both descriptions of the theory are vague on some important issue s, such as how a stress-energy tensor is to
be associated with matter.
7Here and in what follows, I am taking certain stylized facts about the behavior of matter—for instance,
that small massive bodies follow timelike geodesics, light rays follow null geodesics, etc.—to be necessary
for matter to be “adapted” to geometry. (I will have much more to say on this issue below.) To connect
my way of putting things in the main text to other discussions in the lite rature, I take Brown (2005) to be
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
“geometrical view” to deny that (d) is independent of (g), by maintaining that (d) follows
from (g), or at least, that (g) “explains” (d). Read cites authors such as Michael Friedman
(1983) and Tim Maudlin (2012) who speak of spacetime geometry exp laining, for instance,
why light rays follow null geodesics in curved spacetime as committed t o this position; in
earlier work, Brown and Pooley use Roberto Torretti (1983) as a f oil.
Put in these terms, whether the defender of the dynamical view is c orrect that (d) is
independent of (g) depends on what one means by (g). If by (g) on e means—as, apparently,
the defenders of the dynamical approach do, at least when they c riticize the geometrical
approach—some bare metaphysical hypothesis about what the “t rue” geometry of spacetime
is, independent of the behavior of any physical system in that spac etime,8 then it seems true
that (d) does not follow from (g). 9 Indeed, on this interpretation, (g) is explicitly understood
in a way that denies any link with (d). But I want to raise the possibility t hat this is not the
only thing that one might mean by postulating a “spacetime geometry” as in (g). Another
meaning that one might give the expression “spacetime geometry” is precisely that it is
whatever geometry the dynamical evolution of matter is adapted t o, in a sense that is at
least roughly understood from examples such as Maxwell’s theory in c urved spacetime. From
this perspective, (d) is simply a restatement, or maybe an explicatio n, of (g); and (d) would
follow from (g), properly understood.
claiming that (d) is independent of (g) when he argues that it is only if o ne assumes the “strong equivalence
principle”, discussed below, that one can explain these behaviors; a nd likewise, when Read et al. (2018) use
the “two miracles”, also discussed below, as a litmus test for distingu ishing the dynamical view from the
geometric view. On this last point, what makes the “two miracles” mira culous is precisely that they do not
follow from any other principles of general relativity—or more speciﬁ cally, from (g)—and must be taken as
brute facts.
8That is: any other physical system aside from the ﬁelds associated with geometry, sin ce one might take
the ﬁeld gab as a physical system. Thanks to an anonymous referee for encou raging this clariﬁcation.
9This interpretation of (g) is not completely contrived: for instance , it is closely related to the under-
standing of “spacetime geometry” at issue when some philosophers and physicists entertain the possibility
that spacetime truly has a Galilean structure even though matter b ehaves “as if” spacetime is Minkowskian.
In such cases, one makes a claim about the “true” spacetime geome try and leaves open what bearing that has
for dynamics. See the discussion at the end of this section of what R ead calls the “unqualiﬁed geometrical
approach”.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
How might we understand (g) so that (d) follows from it? The key is to recognize the
often subtle ways in which our mathematical terms are chosen to re ﬂect intended interpre-
tations. We speak of the “length” of a vector and the “length” of a table; the second use of
“length” refers to a property of a physical object, whereas the ﬁrst refers to a property of a
mathematical one, where one borrows the term because it invokes the idea that the length
of a vector can represent physical lengths. But whatever the or iginal motivation for choos-
ing mathematical language may be, the meaning of such terms may sh ift as applications
do—and to understand them, we must attend carefully to the cont ext.10 To say spacetime
has a certain geometrical structure according to general relativ ity is, in the ﬁrst instance, to
assert that there are facts concerning space and time that are r epresented, mathematically,
by a structure we associate with “geometry”—viz. a pseudo-Lore ntzian metric. These facts
are given names such as “length”, “angle”, “duration”, “distance ”, etc. because those are
the words we use in the mathematical context for the correspond ing quantities determined
by a metric (borrowing, of course, from prior physical usage). We can summarize all of this
by saying (g) asserts that there are facts about length, angles, etc. that obtain between
events in space and time. 11
But what is the physical signiﬁcance of such assertions in the prese nt context? To
answer that, we observe that the properties of matter represe nted by matter ﬁelds in general
relativity evolve according to certain equations that also invoke precisely those mathematical
10Stein (1977), discussed in the ﬁnal section of this paper, oﬀers a m ore detailed historical analysis of how
geometrical language came to have its present signiﬁcance in relativ ity theory. Wilson (2006) provides a
more general discussion of how meaning shifts with new applications, particularly in the context of (applied)
mathematics.
11As I hope is clear in the main text, including the paragraph that follows , I am not advocating for, or
attributing to the “geometricist”, any particular view about, say, spacetime substantivalism; the signiﬁcance
I attribute to claims about “length”, “angle”, etc. are compatible w ith a broad range of positions in that
debate. (For more on my own view in that connection, see (Weather all, 2016, 2020).) On a related note,
Acu˜ na (2016) describes views along the lines of the one I describe in the text as “absolutist”. He may use
terms as he likes, but it is worth emphasizing that this use of “absolut ist” is importantly diﬀerent from
its usage in connection with, say, Newton’s views on absolute space a nd time. (See also Read (2019) for a
discussion of Acu˜ na in this regard.)
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
quantities that we call “lengths”, “angles”, etc., as determined by some metric. For instance,
the wave equation may be understood as asserting that “the integ rated length of the gradient
of ﬁeld strength is extremal in any compact region.” 12 Likewise, the source-free Maxwell
equations say “the integrated magnitude of ﬁeld strength is extre mal in any compact region”,
where “magnitude” here is an analogue of length applying to tensors at a point. (Or consider
an older example: “the acceleration of a body under the gravitation al inﬂuence of another
body is proportional to the square of the distance between them.” ) Asserting that space and
time have a certain geometry, then, is just to assert a link between these various appearances
of “lengths”, “angles”, etc. in diﬀerent parts of the theory: tha t is, it is to say that the
geometrical relations that matter dynamics advert to are precise ly the geometrical relations
one has postulated of the world and summarized with the metric. 13
To be sure, even if one takes general relativity to make certain claim s regarding “space-
time geometry” in this stronger sense, so that it implies that matter dynamics is adapted to
that geometry, one still has to, at some stage or other, address the issue of what dynamics are
“allowed”, in the sense of adverting to just the relevant geometry . But now one understands
those requirements to be a clariﬁcation of what one means by asser ting that spacetime has
some geometry in the ﬁrst place. The mere fact that someone has w ritten down a ﬁeld with
certain mathematical properties should not be taken to have any c onsequences for the dy-
namics of matter or “chronogeometry”, as the dynamicist sometim es claims the geometricist
believes. What matters is that it is the intended physical signiﬁcance of that ﬁeld that it
does have those consequences. Thus, on this view of spacetime ge ometry, matter that does
12Here I am invoking the fact that the wave equation is the Euler-Lagr ange equation extremizing a certain
action.
13There are other reasons, too, to think that “spacetime geometr y” should be interpreted in this stronger
way. Acu˜ na (2016) and Myrvold (2019), for instance, argue tha t the link between geometry and dynamics is
analytic, and thus that all one could mean by attributing a certain geometry to space and time is to say th at
matter behaves in particular ways adapted to that geometry. Ste in (1977, p. 377-8), meanwhile, emphasizes
the history of the development of geometrical ideas in physics, not ing that the idea that spacetime has a
geometry in the ﬁrst place, in the modern sense, arises from study ing the dynamics of matter understood
to “probe” that geometry.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
not have the right sort of dynamics is simply incompatible with general relativity.14
All that said, at this point the debate begins to seem terminological. O nce we agree that
(d) is necessary, and the issue becomes only whether (g) should be understood in such a
way as to subsume (d) or whether it is better to state (d) separat ely (just to be safe), it is
hard to see much of substance left to the disagreement. 15
This conclusion substantially recapitulates Read (20??). Still, he put s the point some-
what diﬀerently. As noted above, he suggests that there are two versions of the geometric
view. One of these, which he calls the “unqualiﬁed geometrical appro ach” (UGA), maintains
that (d) follows from (g), but apparently interprets (g) in a weak w ay, such that it is hard to
see how the defender of this view could possibly get from (g) to (d)— and Read (20??), fol-
lowing Brown (2005) and Read et al. (2018), oﬀer numerous example s of theories that seem
to show you cannot. The other geometrical view, which he calls the “ qualiﬁed geometrical
approach” (QGA), meanwhile, supplements (g), or understands it in a stronger way, such
14An anonymous referee raises the following worry: is it not the case t hat physicists often impose “extra”
constraints on matter ﬁelds, such as energy conditions, which migh t be understood as limiting attention to
just some of the many matter ﬁelds that are prima facie compatible w ith relativity theory (but which we
reject on other grounds)? The answer is complicated by the diﬀere nt energy conditions in the literature
and the various roles they play. But I would argue (a) at least in some cases, some energy conditions (such
as the dominant energy condition—see note 18) serve as a guide to w hether a proposed matter dynamics
is suitably compatible with general relativity (e.g., Maxwell’s equations a re compatible, in part because
solutions always satisfy the dominant energy condition relative to wh atever metric appears in the equations
and stress-energy tensor; but arguably tachyon ﬁelds are not, because this condition fails), so that they are
not “imposed” so much as “checked”; (b) in other cases, such as in proving singularity theorems, one uses
energy conditions as a stand-in assumption, capturing the idea tha t one is considering only “reasonable”
matter (which may be glossed as: matter compatible with the theory ), so that although one has to impose
a condition, doing so reﬂects precisely the relationship between mat ter and geometry described here; and
(c) in yet other cases, energy conditions are introduced for tech nical convenience but have obscure physical
motivation. This list may not be exhaustive, but I believe it covers the main cases.
15This is not to say that there have not been other disagreements of substance adjacent to the one
discussed here. For instance, there was a real disagreement, no w resolved, regarding whether in general
relativity, the geodesic principle (discussed in what follows) is a “cons equence of Einstein’s equation”; for
more on this, see Brown (2005), Malament (2012a), and Weathera ll (2011). There is also an unresolved (I
believe) disagreement about whether there is some salient diﬀerenc e between general relativity and other
theories, such as Newtonian gravitation, regarding the status of inertial motion (Weatherall, 2011; Sus,
2014; Weatherall, 2017). Finally, there have been disputes about w hether spacetime geometry can pro-
vide “constructive explanations” (Brown and Pooley, 1999, 2006; Janssen, 2009; Dorato, 2007; Frisch, 2011;
Acu˜ na, 2016; Read, 2019); and about whether one can even sta te matter dynamics without specifying some
geometrical background (Norton, 2008; Wallace, 2019).
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
that one assumes (for instance) that the metric and its associate d Levi-Civita derivative
enter into the matter dynamics in certain ways, so that matter dyn amics are assumed, or
required, to be adapted to the spacetime geometry. (It is the QGA that I have called the
geometric view above.) Here, Read argues, (d) does follow from (g) (or, trivially, from (g)
and (d) together); and in some cases one might even concede that (g) explains (d). It is the
QGA that Read suggests is indistinguishable from the dynamical view a s he understands it.
3. A Little Too Irenic
So much for (I)—and for agreement. I will now turn to (II). Let us stipulate that we require
both (g) and (d). Even so, it would be desirable to have some precisio n and clarity on what
(d) means. In particular, what sorts of matter dynamics are comp atible with (d)?
There are really two separate questions that one might like to answe r here. First, one
would like to know if we can identify:
(A) Features that “adapted” dynamics will (necessarily?) have.
Some generally accepted candidates for (A)—the hallmarks of adap ted dynamics—are often
thought of as “principles” of general relativity: the dynamics shou ld imply, or at least be
consistent with, the idea that small massive bodies follow timelike geod esics (the “geodesic
principle”); that certain kinds of matter, in an “optical” or “ray” limit , follow null geodesics;
that clocks record arclength (or “proper time”) along their traje ctories (the “clock hypothe-
sis”); that various energy conditions are satisﬁed; and so on. But it is often diﬃcult to even
state these conditions clearly and precisely, at least in a way that ma kes any direct connec-
tion to the sorts of systems of diﬀerential equations (e.g., Maxwell’s equations) that express
matter dynamics in general relativity. Thus it is not entirely clear how (A) is supposed to
be related to (d). To address this gap, one might also wish to identify :
(B) Necessary and/or suﬃcient conditions for a system of partial diﬀerential equations to
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
exhibit the features of “adapted dynamics”.
In other words, with (B) we are looking for conditions on matter dyn amics such that the
features identiﬁed in (A) obtain.
To this end, there are various heuristics available for constructing matter theories, in
the sense of systems of partial diﬀerential equations, that one e xpects to be adapted to a
given spacetime geometry. These heuristics go by names such as “m inimal coupling”, “the
comma to semicolon rule”, etc. But these heuristics are sometimes a mbiguous, and in any
case, it is not clear that they work, in the sense that it is not clear th at these heuristics
necessarily generate theories that exhibit the features (A) that we require for dynamics to
be “adapted to the geometry”. What one would really like, in my view, w ould be theorems
of the following form
Let ( M, gab) be a relativistic spacetime. Any system of partial diﬀerential equa -
tions on M, with such and such further properties [e.g., identiﬁed via one of the
heuristics just notes] will be adapted to the geometry of ( M, gab)”.
Of course, this is not a precise statement, both because the ante cedent has not been speciﬁed
and because the consequent is not precise. It is also not clear that one wants a single theorem,
here; more likely is that there will be a network of results, demonstr ating the ways in which
diﬀerent senses of “being adapted to the geometry” imply and cons train one another. 16
One route to making this sort of schematic statement more precise is to use small body
motion as a candidate for (A). The idea, here, is that the geodesic p rinciple, which states
that in the absence of external forces, free massive test bodies traverse timelike geodesics
of the spacetime metric, provides a link between “geometrically privile ged” curves—that
is, the geodesics, a class of curves picked out by the metric—and “p hysically privileged”
16I explore this idea, that the principles of a theory should be underst ood to form a network of logical
interdependencies, in (Weatherall, 2017), where I call it “the puz zleball conjecture”.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
curves—namely, the trajectories of small, force-free bodies. A s imilar link is provided by the
“light ray principle”, that light rays follow null geodesics. These links s uggest a candidate
interpretation for at least part of what it means for matter dynam ics to be “adapted to
the geometry”: namely, diﬀerential equations are “adapted to th e geometry” (only) if the
solutions of those equations, in some appropriate small-body limit, (o nly) follow (timelike
or null) geodesics. One might then try to identify generic conditions o n matter equations
(i.e., candidates for (B)) that allow one to conclude that matter is adapted to the geometry
in this way.
And of course, as has been widely discussed in the recent philosophic al literature, such
theorems exist. For instance, the main result of (Geroch and Weat herall, 2018) may be put
as follows. 17 Fix a spacetime ( M, gab), and let ∇ be the Levi-Civita derivative operator
associated with gab. Suppose that C is a collection of smooth, symmetric rank two tensor
ﬁelds—say, the stress-energy tensors associated with the solut ions to some matter ﬁeld
equations—and suppose that those ﬁelds are all divergence-free with respect to ∇ and that
they all satisfy a certain energy condition with respect to gab.18 Then the collection C tracks
(only) timelike or null geodesics. This, in turn, implies that these are t he only curves around
which “small-body-like” solutions can propagate. 19
Now, as I emphasize in (Weatherall, 20??), the stress-energy te nsors associated with so-
lutions to standard “relativistic” equations, such as the source-f ree Maxwell’s equations and
the Klein-Gordon equation (but not the Dirac equation), necessar ily satisfy the two condi-
tions stated. Moreover, as I note in (Weatherall, 2019), drawing on well-known arguments
17See (Weatherall, 20??) for a discussion of these results aimed at ph ilosophers.
18 Speciﬁcally, Geroch and Weatherall require the dominant energy condition , which holds of a tensor T ab
at a point if, for any pair ξa, ηa of timelike vectors there, T abξaηb ≥ 0.
19Note that although tracking has this consequence, one might also t ake tracking—for the details of
which I refer the reader to (Geroch and Weatherall, 2018)—to pr ovide a direct link between the solutions
of a system of partial diﬀerential equations and curves that does not need to go through small bodies. So
tracking could itself count as a partial explication of being “adapted to the geometry”. See (Weatherall,
20??) for more on this idea.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
(e.g. in Wald, 1984, appendix E), the stress-energy tensor assoc iated with any matter ﬁeld
will be divergence-free, thereby satisfying one of the two conditio ns, as long as its dynamics
are determined by a Lagrangian with certain properties—basically, o ne in which the space-
time metric and associated derivative operator play certain roles, in a sense I make precise
there.
One might ask for still more. For instance, it would be very nice to hav e a general
argument capturing necessary conditions for the dominant energ y condition, which is needed
for the Geroch-Weatherall theorem, to be satisﬁed by the stres s-energy tensors associated
with arbitrary solutions to a diﬀerential equation, analogous to the conditions under which
that tensor is guaranteed to be divergence-free. One imagines su ch results are possible,
though the details are not perfectly clear, in part because it is know n that solutions to
some “relativistic” equations, such as the Dirac equation and some s calar ﬁeld equations,
do not necessarily have this property. 20 Does this mean that they are not “adapted to the
geometry”? Or does it mean that we need a broader understanding of that expression?
One might also ask whether there are other results in this neighborh ood that would
capture a more expansive notion of what it means for matter to be a dapted to spacetime
geometry. For instance, could one capture something like the “cloc k hypothesis”, which
states that suitably ideal clocks measure arclength along their wor ldlines? Fletcher (2013)
makes some progress along these lines, but it relies on a particular co nstruction (that of
the “light clock”); 21 one might ask for something more general, such as a result to the
eﬀect that any “periodic” behavior, suitably deﬁned, associated w ith solutions to matter
ﬁeld equations satisfying certain conditions (candidates for (B)), measures arclength in a
suitable small body limit. I do not know if such results can be achieved, but they would be
a further elaboration of this research project. One could also try to show that such matter
20Curiel (2017) provides a general discussion of cases where variou s energy conditions are known to fail.
21To be clear, Fletcher is not committed to using his result for the purp oses I sketch here, and so what I
write in the main text should not be taken as a criticism of his result.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
does not propagate superluminally, for instance in the sense of “sig nal velocity” deﬁned by
Geroch (2011). 22
The line of research I have just described is one, still incomplete, ap proach to answering
(II). But it is apparently not the one favored by the Brown and colla borators. And here,
I think, is a point where there remains potentially signiﬁcant disagree ment between the
“dynamical school”—that is, the avowed defenders of the dynamic al view—and others. 23
In particular, Read et al. (2018, pp. 15-6), following Brown (2005, pp. 169-171; 176),
oﬀer a diﬀerent analysis of (d). Those authors apparently assert that the so-called “strong
equivalence principle” (SEP) is necessary (and also suﬃcient?) for ( d) to hold. 24
Here the strong equivalence principle is understood as the following s tatement:25
There exists in a neighborhood of each event preferred coordinat es, called locally
inertial at that event. For each fundamental non-gravitational interac tion, to
the extent that tidal gravitational forces can be ignored, the law s governing the
interaction ﬁnd their simplest form in these coordinates. This is their special
relativistic form , independent of spacetime location. (Brown, 2005, p. 169)
On Read’s presentation, at least, the idea is that we should underst and general relativity to
be a theory (and here I am switching to Read’s own way of presenting things) whose “dy-
namically possible” models consist of a Lorentzian manifold ( M, gab), along with other ﬁelds
representing matter, such that (i) the matter ﬁelds (and their int eractions) are associated
22Earman (2014) and Weatherall (2014) also discuss this deﬁnition, in cluding ways in which it does and
does not align with, for instance, the dominant energy condition and other senses in which matter might be
said to be “relativistic”.
23I say “dynamical school” because I do not believe that there is an es sential link between the program I
will presently describe and the dynamical view as I have presented it , viz., the idea that (d) is independent
of (g) on a weak reading of (g). And yet defenses of the dynamical view seem invariably to invoke the
“strong equivalence principle” or similar ideas in what I take to be a pro blematic way.
24Read (20??, p. 10-11) writes that the SEP is an “important conditio n for the chronogeometricity of the
metric ﬁeld” (p. 10), but hedges on whether it should be viewed as st rictly necessary, suﬃcient, or jointly
suﬃcient along with some other assumptions. In more recent corre spondence, Read has suggested his views
have shifted on this issue, and that he now sees the SEP primarily as e stablishing a link between general
relativity and special relativity.
25The status of the SEP is discussed in some detail in a very nice paper b y Brown and Read (2016); see
also Read et al. (2018) and Fletcher (20??).
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
with stress-energy tensors, and the metric gab satisﬁes Einstein’s equation with the sum of
these stress-energy tensors as its source; and (ii) the matter ﬁ elds satisfy certain diﬀerential
equations that are compatible with the SEP. In other words, the SE P is a constraint on
matter ﬁelds; and if it is not satisﬁed, then we do not have a truly “ge nerally relativistic”
theory. It is for this reason that I take satisfaction of the SEP to be a proposal concerning
precisely what is meant by (d).
I would like to raise two concerns about the proposal that the SEP, as just stated, is a
satisfactory way of making precise the idea that “matter dynamics are adapted to spacetime
geometry”.26 The ﬁrst concern is that it is not clear what the strong equivalence p rinciple
says.27 And the second concern is that it is not clear that the SEP is suﬃcient .
3.1. The SEP is Not Clear
What is unclear about the SEP? There are several issues. One, whic h Brown, Read, and
others acknowledge, is that it is not clear what it means to say “to th e extent that tidal
gravitational forces can be ignored”. Here is just one reason one might be worried about
this issue. The SEP, as a foundational principle, is supposed to hold in all regimes. But
then how are we to understand “strong ﬁeld” regimes, where curv ature, by various natural
measures, is large, or unbounded along a curve? To what extent ca n tidal forces, or curvature
26There is a long history of controversy over the equivalence principle in its various guises, where semi-
precise statements are oﬀered and then shown to be inadequate f or one reason or another. I do not mean to
engage in this debate here: my goal is not to argue that Brown or Re ad has failed to capture what Einstein
had in mind when he formulated his principle, nor do I wish to claim that th is or any other version of the
equivalence principle is trivial or false. I am speciﬁcally interested in th e question of whether the assertion
that I have called the strong equivalence principle, as elaborated an d elucidated by Read, adequately captures
the idea that matter dynamics are “adapted to spacetime geometr y”. Moreover, although I do mean to
criticize one aspect of how Brown and Read have used the SEP, it is ha rdly as if Brown, much less Read,
has invented this principle: it is common fare in textbooks on general relativity (e.g. Misner et al., 1973,
p. 386). The concerns I am raising are as much directed at these cla ssic textbook treatments as at the
contemporary philosophers who have invoked them.
27The ﬁrst concern is similar in several important respects to argume nts made by Fletcher (20??); I did
not see that manuscript until this one was drafted, but my perspe ctive was certainly shaped by conversations
with him.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
more generally, be ignored in these regimes—such as when the compo nents of the curvature
tensor, expressed in “locally inertial” coordinates, are larger than any other quantity under
consideration? One presumably would like to say that the SEP holds approximately in all
cases, but this notion of approximation is subtle, and it has not been clearly laid out. As
I say, however, this concern has been raised previously, so I will no t focus on it here; just
suﬃce it to say that until one is clear about what this proviso means, it is very diﬃcult to
establish what equations do in fact satisfy the SEP, or what the con sequences of the SEP
are.
There is another issue, however, which I do not think has received a dequate discus-
sion in the literature. 28 It concerns the role that the expression “simplest form” plays in
Brown’s version of the SEP. 29 As a ﬁrst pass at the worry, I claim that it is not clear how
to evaluate whether an equation is in its “simplest” form: it seems bac kground assump-
tions about simplicity and conventions about how to express equatio ns must go into such
judgments.30 For instance, it is not clear why one should expect the simplest form o f any
equation relating structures that can be characterized in a coord inate independent man-
ner to be a representation in certain coordinates; one might even t hink that insofar as any
28My framing of this issue is particularly indebted to conversations with Sam Fletcher; a number of closely
related issues are addressed in Fletcher (20??) and Fletcher and W eatherall (2020).
29There is a third issue here that I do not emphasize, which is that it is no t clear why special relativity is
given primacy of place a century after general relativity supersed ed it. In particular, when one introduces a
new matter theory—say, a theory of an inﬂaton ﬁeld in the early univ erse—why should one be obligated to
ﬁrst identify a “special relativistic” form for the dynamical equatio ns of that theory? One possible answer—
and I am grateful to an anonymous referee for raising this—is that the Brown-Pooley constructive/dynamical
relativity program was originally developed in the context of Minkowsk i spacetime, and that Brown then
aims to extend it to general relativity. (This observation is perhaps connected to Read’s position that
the dynamical and geometric approaches are distinct in the context of special relativity—but collapse once
one moves to general relativity.) From this perspective, it arguably does make sense to interpret general
relativity through the lens of an already-worked-out position on sp ecial relativity. But even so, I think it
would be preferable if one could do the work the SEP is meant to do, at least for establishing (d) in general
relativity, without using a diﬀerent theory as a crutch. Moreover, the approach to (d) that I defend above,
involving results such as those of (Geroch and Weatherall, 2018), works just as well for special relativity as
for general relativity, since any general result will hold in ﬂat space time as a special case.
30Read et al. (2018) suggest that the simplest form of an equation is o ne in which no terms vanish by
coordinate transformation, but I ﬁnd this account inadequate fo r reasons that I hope will be clear presently.
See note 34.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
coordinate representation of an equation invokes some further s tructure—namely, a choice
of coordinates—it is ipso facto less simple than a coordinate independent expression of the
same equation. (Of course, this is not what Brown has in mind; he mea ns something like the
“simplest form among all coordinate expressions”.) To be sure, the issue is not that Brown
requires that the form be simple, per se, or that he implicitly adopts a particular account of
simplicity that I reject. Rather, the issue is that Brown wishes to us e something about the
form of the equations—viz. the simplicity of that form—as a signal th at those equations
are appropriately adapted to certain coordinate systems or othe r structure. The trouble is
that the “simplicity” of the form of an equation is not a suﬃciently clea r or unambiguous
notion to play this role, at least without further work.
But there is a deeper worry lurking here. The thing whose simplicity is b eing evaluated,
on this approach, is the “form” of the equation, i.e., its syntactic ex pression, relative to
certain (unspeciﬁed) conventions concerning how to “express” a n equation in certain coordi-
nates. But one might have expected, from the very fact that equ ations can take more or less
simple forms, that “equations”, properly construed as mathemat ical objects, do not stand in
one-to-one correspondence with expressions or “forms” for th ose equations. 31 And indeed,
this is true. Even within a single coordinate system, there may be mult iple diﬀerent ways of
expressing the same “equation”, in the sense of expressing a relat ionship between variables
that is satisﬁed by the same valuations of those variables, some of w hich are simpler than
others even within a coordinate system; and some of these ways of expressing an equation
may take apparently simpler forms in diﬀerent coordinates.
These are abstract claims, so let me illustrate with an example. Fix a sp acetime (M, gab).
We will say (following Brown) that coordinates in a neighborhood of a p oint p ∈ M are
31This is just a reﬂection of the well-known fact that propositions can be given many diﬀerent provably
equivalent syntactic forms, e.g., p, p ∧ ⊤, p ∧ ⊥, etc., some of which are simpler than others (irrespective of
any choice of coordinates). Fletcher (20??) raises a similar concer n with minimal coupling, arguing that it
is “hyperintensional” in the sense that it distinguishes between case s that ought to be seen as equivalent.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
“locally inertial at p relative to gab”, or just “adapted to gab”, if gab, expressed in those
coordinates, is diagonal and normalized at p; and the Christoﬀel symbols for the Levi-Civita
derivative operator associated with gab vanish at p. Such coordinates can always be found
at any point, for any Lorentzian metric. Now consider, for instanc e, the following system of
equations in Minkowski spacetime, ( M, ηab):
˜∇aF ab = 0 (1a)
˜∇[aFbc] = 0, (1b)
where ˜∇ is the unique derivative operator such that ˜∇a(Ω2ηbc) = 0 for some (ﬁxed) non-
vanishing, non-constant smooth scalar ﬁeld Ω. 32
Do these equations satisfy the SEP? To answer this, we need to det ermine whether these
equations take their “simplest form” in locally inertial coordinate sys tems relative to ηab. I
believe, based on how Brown approaches similar examples, that the a nswer should be “no”.
These equations take their simplest form in coordinate systems tha t are locally inertial
relative to the metric Ω 2ηab, not ones that are locally inertial relative to ηab. As evidence
for this, observe that, expressed in coordinates adapted to ηab, the Christoﬀel symbols that
appear in the ﬁrst of these equations will not vanish, while they will va nish in coordinates
locally inertial relative to Ω 2ηab. It appears to follow that these equations do not satisfy the
SEP. But this would be a surprising conclusion, since after all these a re simply Maxwell’s
equations in Minkowski spacetime—that is, they determine the same solutions—where I
have written them in a form that exploits the well-known conformal in variance of those
equations.33
32Here [ ·] indicates antisymmetrization on indices; and I raise and lower indices using ηab, the Minkowski
metric.
33One might worry that Eqs. 1 are not, after all, equations “in” Minkow ski spacetime—say, because the
derivative operator and metric appearing in the equations are not t he Minkowski metric and derivative op-
erator, or because they do not take their “simplest form” in coord inates adapted to ηab—even though they
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
One might respond that Maxwell’s equations take “equally simple” form s not only in
the coordinates adapted to ηab, but in others as well; this is compatible with the SEP, since
after all, the SEP does not say that these equations take their simp lest forms only in locally
inertial frames. This is a fair observation, but it is not to the point, w hich is that it is not
clear how to tell which form is to count as the simplest, or what opera tions are allowed to
simplify them. 34 Put another way: defenders of the SEP have not provided a clear c riterion
of individuation for equations, such that one can say when two diﬀer ent strings correspond to
a single equation in diﬀerent forms, as opposed to diﬀerent equation s. In the present case, it
turned out that there were additional operations, beyond simply e xpressing the equations in
a particular coordinate system, that could be performed on the eq uations while preserving a
crucial feature of those equations—that is, their class of solution s—to simplify them further
within some coordinates. How were we to know these were available (e specially since they
are not available for all equations, such as the Klein-Gordon equatio n)? The answer is by
studying the transformations that preserve something other th an the form of the equation—
speciﬁcally, its solutions. I take this to mean that what is—or should b e—at issue in the
SEP is not really the “form” of an equation at all, but rather propert ies of the equation
that are intrinsic to the equation, i.e., that are invariant under diﬀer ent forms the equation
might take. That the equation takes a certain form, with certain co nventions, using certain
background knowledge about the equation, is at best an indirect gu ide to those properties
and at worst too ambiguous to be useable.
How might one get at these properties of equations? One strategy would be to look to
have precisely the same solutions. For my own part, I do not think th is is a compelling position, because I
think the most natural sense, mathematically, of “same (diﬀerent ial) equation” is “has the same solutions”.
But if one wishes to argue that the cogency of the SEP depends on a dopting a diﬀerent standard of equiva-
lence for equations, that route is certainly available—but the very f act that there could be disagreements on
this point shows that the SEP is unclear in just the way I am claiming, be cause the class of manipulations
that preserve an equation have not been speciﬁed.
34 This argument is why I do not take the claim that equations are in their simplest form if terms do not
drop out by changing coordinates to be satisfactory, because th ere may be other transformations available
that further simplify equations.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
symmetry properties of the equations as a way of identifying the re levant “intrinsic” struc-
ture of those equations, independent of particular representat ional choices. Read, following
(Read et al., 2018), proposes a further clariﬁcation of the SEP tha t appears to adopt this
strategy.35 He writes (after setting aside issues about “neglecting gravitation al forces”):
For today, the essential aspect of the SEP is the imposition that, in the neigh-
borhood of any p ∈ M in GR, laws of physics recover their ‘special relativis-
tic form’—where I shall understand this to mean: a Poincar´ e invariant form.
Clearly, this is a particular restriction on the matter sector in the th eory. (Read,
20??, p. 9)
Here having a “Poincar´ e invariant form” is replacing the idea of having a “special relativistic
form” (or a “simplest form”). The same concepts appear in Read an d collaborators’ discus-
sions of the “miracles” of relativity, which may similarly be read as an ela boration of the
SEP.
MR1: All non-gravitational interactions are locally governed by Poincar ´ e in-
variant dynamical laws. (Read, 20??, p. 14)
MR2: The Poincar´ e symmetries of the dynamical laws governing non-gravitational
ﬁelds in the neighbourhood of any point p ∈ M coincide (in the regime in which
‘gravitational forces’ can be ignored) with the symmetries of the m etric ﬁeld in
that neighborhood. (Read, 20??, pp. 14-5)
In other words, it is not merely that all of the laws are required to ha ve a certain symmetry
property; it is that those symmetry properties must be appropria tely coordinated, both
across diﬀerent matter ﬁelds and with the spacetime metric.
The invocation of the “symmetries of the metric in [a] neighborhood” (emphasis added)
in the statement of the second miracle suggests that Read might ha ve in mind a standard
35It is not clear that Read’s motivation for using a symmetry condition is to avoid possible ambiguities
arising from the notion of the “form” of an equation; the motivation oﬀered in (Read et al., 2018), for
instance, is the concern that curvature terms may appear in some equations that “should” satisfy the SEP.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
deﬁnition of the “local symmetries” of a metric, which associates su ch symmetries with the
existence of Killing ﬁelds in a neighborhood of a point; this notion of loca l symmetry might
then be extended to capture the idea of a “local symmetry” of an e quation.36 But this notion
of “local symmetry” cannot be quite what Read is looking for. 37 The diﬃculty concerns the
role that the proviso “in the regime in which ‘gravitational forces’ ca n be ignored” plays
in the second miracle, where these local symmetries are invoked. In a general spacetime
(M, gab), if the curvature tensor is non-vanishing at a point, or even if it va nishes at that
point but is non-vanishing in every neighborhood of that point, the m etric will in general have
no “local symmetries”, in the sense of having no Killing ﬁelds. (Converse ly, if the curvature
tensor does vanish in a neighborhood of a point, the metric does have Killing ﬁelds in that
neighborhood.) It is not clear how assuming that curvature is “suﬃc iently small” or “locally
negligible” avoids this issue; and it means that the second miracle beco mes trivial in the
context of curved spacetimes. 38
One might reply by saying “the second miracle has bite precisely in thos e cases where
the metric does have local symmetries; and the SEP rules out equations that, in high ly
symmetric cases (say, in ﬂat spacetime), have symmetries that do not coincide with the
metric symmetries”. But this does not seem like an option that is open to Read, because
the ﬁrst miracle explicitly states that the “local symmetries” of the dynamical laws are
supposed to (always) include the Poincar´ e group, while the second miracle states that these
36Recall that a Killing ﬁeld of a metric gab is a vector ﬁeld ξa satisfying Killing’s equation: ∇(aξb) = 0,
where ∇ is the Levi-Civita derivative operator associated with gab. Killing’s equation implies that the Lie
derivative of gab along ξa vanishes, which in turn means that there exists locally a one paramet er family of
isometries generated by ξa. These isometries are “local symmetries” in the straightforward s ense that they
are local maps that preserve the metric. See Malament (2012b, §1.9) for more details on Killing ﬁelds.
37Read (20??, §2.2) discusses the notion of symmetry that he does have in mind, and appears to identify
it with “isometries”, which would suggest that Killing ﬁelds are the generators of local symmetries in his
sense; he goes on to acknowledge that the “the metric ﬁeld gab in GR need not in general gave any non-trivial
symmetries” (p. 6). This shows, I think, that there are internal t ensions in his discussion of the miracles
that bear on the SEP, and which are worth discussing.
38There is another problem with this condition, which is that even if case s, with curvature, where one
does have a Killing ﬁeld, in general those ﬁelds will not correspond to “Poinc ar´ e symmetries”.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
are supposed to coincide with the local metric symmetries, and in gen eral the Killing ﬁelds
of a metric at a point do not include the (generators of the) Poincar´ e group.
Besides, even if one were to weaken the statement of the ﬁrst mira cle, focusing on cases
in which the local symmetries of the metric are the (generators of) the Poincar´ e group (i.e.,
focus on ﬂat spacetime), it would not help. Consider the equation ∇a∇aϕ + ξRϕ = 0 on
a spacetime ( M, gab), where R is the curvature scalar and ξ ⁄= 0 is some number. In any
neighborhood where curvature vanishes identically, this equation w ill reduce to the wave
equation, and presumably will satisfy the SEP (if we use the miracles a s a guide). 39 But this
is presumably the wrong verdict, since if one were to express this eq uation in coordinates
in which the metric is diagonal at a point and all Christoﬀel symbols van ish at that point,
a curvature term would still appear, which I would think means that t he equation is not in
a “special relativistic form”. (On the other hand, perhaps we are s upposed to ignore this
curvature term, since we are assumed to be operating in “in the reg ime in which ‘gravitational
forces’ can be ignored”.) 40
One might also reply by saying that I am placing too much emphasis on exact symme-
tries; really, what Read et al. need is a notion of “approximate” Poinc ar´ e symmetry, where
the degree of approximation improves as curvature approaches z ero. The idea of an “ap-
proximate symmetry” is notoriously diﬃcult to make precise, howeve r, and seems to require
reference to some background structure. For instance, Fletch er (20??) proposes a natu-
ral, but frame-dependent, deﬁnition of “approximate (Poincar´ e ) symmetries”, which may
be extended to a notion of “approximate Killing ﬁelds”. Here, the not ion of “approximate
39Likewise, if one has Killing ﬁelds in a neighborhood of a point, then the on e parameter families of
isometries generated by those Killing ﬁelds will be “symmetries” of this equation, in the natural sense that
for any solution ϕ in that neighborhood, the pullback of ϕ along each isometry in the family will also solve
the equation in an appropriate neighborhood.
40Given the analyses in Read et al. (2018) and Brown and Read (2016), one might think that curvature
terms are compatible with the SEP, properly construed, as long as t hey appear only in second order equa-
tions. One might take this to mean that various “non-minimally coupled ” scalar ﬁelds should count as
satisfying the SEP. But then consider the (ﬁrst-order) equation ∇aξa + Rξaξa = 0. The same argument
applies.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
symmetry” at issue is one in which the change in the spacetime metric a t a point as one
ﬂows along a vector ﬁeld, as determined by a positive deﬁnite metric ( given by a choice of
frame ﬁeld) is less than some choice of ǫ, for suﬃciently small values of the ﬂow parameter.
Could Fletcher’s proposal help Brown and Read? At ﬁrst glance the a nswer may seem
to be “yes”. In particular, Fletcher shows that every Lorentzian manifold has approximate
Poincar´ e symmetries, to any degree of approximation, in suﬃcient ly small neighborhoods
of every point. He also shows that the approximate local Poincar´ e symmetries of a met-
ric can come apart from the Poincar´ e symmetries of a system of eq uations, in the sense
that there exist examples of equations in a relativistic spacetime tha t do not exhibit local
Poincar´ e invariance (at least on one construal of what it means fo r equations to have such a
property)—even though all spacetimes have local approximate Po incar´ e symmetry.41 This
claim seems compatible with, and even supportive of, the idea that it is “miraculous” that
these symmetries might be said to coincide for the equations govern ing realistic matter. But
on further reﬂection, I do not think the approximate Poincar´ e symmetries Fletcher considers
could possibly play the requisite role in the SEP. The reason is that the notion of “approxi-
mate local symmetry” that Fletcher deﬁnes is far too permissive. I n particular, every vector
ﬁeld on a manifold M is an approximate local symmetry, in suﬃciently small neighborhoods
of any point p ∈ M, for any smooth metric on M at all—purely by continuity consider-
ations. Hence, although there is always some representation of th e Poincar´ e algebra (i.e.,
the generators of the Poincar´ e group) in the vector ﬁelds in a neig hborhood of any point
such that it is true that any Lorentzian metric has “local approxima te Poincar´ e invariance”,
that representation is not unique, and moreover, the same would h old for many other Lie
algebras as well. Thus, on this understanding of “local approximate symmetry”, there is a
41On the other hand, Fletcher’s example is that of a dust ﬁeld in Minkows ki spacetime, which is not
“locally Poincar´ e invariant” because its equations take an especially “simple form” in comoving coordinates.
That this example might fail to satisfy the SEP suggests that somet hing has gone badly wrong in the whole
program. But I set this issue aside, because I think it is ultimately a re d herring for present purposes.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
strong sense in which the second miracle would trivialize.
Having now considered what Read (and Brown) apparently do not me an by “local
(Poincar´ e) symmetry” (but which one might have thought they would mean), I will consider
what it seems they do have in mind. Here Appendix A to (Read et al., 201 8) is especially
helpful.42 There, the authors of that paper present an argument that “min imally coupled
dynamical equations in GR manifest local Poincar´ e invariance”. The y proceed by ﬁxing co-
ordinates in a neighborhood of a point p; expressing a given equation in that neighborhood
in those coordinates (including expressing derivatives and curvatu re tensors using partial
derivatives and Christoﬀel symbols); and then showing that the sy ntactic expression of each
term in this equation does not change under certain coordinate tra nsformations—namely,
those that are “relatively constant” (i.e., have the same domain and give rise to the same
partial derivative operator) and which do not change the express ion of the metric at p.
Terms (i.e., summands) in an equation whose expression is unchanged by this procedure are
said to be “locally Poincar´ e invariant”; an equation is “locally Poincar´e invariant” if each of
its terms is. 43
It is clear from this that, by construction, any Lorentzian metric is “locally Poincar´ e
invariant”; but it is equally clear, as has already been suggested, th at this notion of “local
symmetry” has nothing to do with Killing ﬁelds or local isometries, nor is it really a notion
of symmetry “in a neighborhood”, so much as “at a point”. Note, to o, that this notion
42I take the manipulations there to be consistent with the deﬁnitions g iven in (Read, 20??, §2.2): “A
coordinate transformation is a dynamical symmetry just in case the dynamical equations governing non-
gravitational ﬁelds take the same form in coordinate systems relat ed by that transformation” (pp.6-7).
Dewar (2020) also engages in detail with this appendix.
43 Here is a stab at a more precise, less “syntactic” statement. One c an always ﬁnd, in a suﬃciently small
neighborhood of p, a ﬂat metric ηab that agrees with gab at p, and whose Levi-Civita derivative operator ¯∇
agrees with that of gab at p. This metric is essentially unique, in the sense that any two such metr ics are
related, within a suﬃciently small neighborhood of p, by an isometry that leaves p ﬁxed. Rewrite derivatives
in your equation in terms of ¯∇ and a tensor ﬁeld Cabc. Say a geometrical object X (i.e., one for which a
pushforward is deﬁned) is “locally Poincar´ e invariant” (relative toηab) if for any smooth, smoothly invertible
map ϕ from a suﬃciently small neighborhood of p to itself, which acts as an isometry for ηab and leaves p
ﬁxed, is such that ϕ∗(X)|p = X|p. Note that on this recovery, “Poincar´ e” seems like a misnomer, sin ce we
do not consider translations.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
of symmetry is also not a candidate notion for “dynamical symmetry ” in anything like the
standard sense of that term, because it does not relate solutions of a diﬀerential equation
to other solutions of the equation; it just relates “expressions” t o “expressions”, and does
so only at a point. 44 Finally, on this interpretation of what Brown and Read have in mind,
it would appear that equations, including equations that are ﬁrst or der in a matter ﬁeld,
that include curvature terms, may satisfy the SEP. Indeed, the c onstruction is such that
any equation whose terms are (non-zero) vectors will fail to be Poinca r´ e invariant; whereas
any scalar term will automatically count as Poincar´ e invariant, even if that scalar results
as the inner product (say) of vectors or tensors. 45 But perhaps the most important point
is just this: although in moving from “simplest form” to “Poincar´ e inv ariant form”, Read
and collaborators invoke a symmetry principle in their new deﬁnitions, it still concerns
purely syntactic information, namely, how an expression looks when written according to a
particular convention. And so the worries expressed above contin ue to hold.
I have presented a number of arguments in this subsection, all to t he eﬀect that the SEP
is not suﬃciently clear, so that one cannot unambiguously determine whether it holds of a
given system of equations. In the next subsection, I will present a nother argument against
the SEP, as formulated above, which I take to be ultimately more impo rtant. But before
proceeding, it may be valuable to brieﬂy summarize what has gone so f ar. The concerns I
have raised may be condensed into four main points: First, as has be en noted by others, it
is not clear what it means to say “to the extent that tidal forces ca n be ignored”; second,
44Moreover, if one recovers the condition as in the previous footnot e, in general “local Poincar´ e transfor-
mations” will not take solutions to solutions for standard equations , including, e.g., Maxwell’s equations in
curved spacetime.
45Compare the claim here that any equation whose summands are vect ors cannot be Poincar´ e invariant,
which holds simply because the components of any non-zero vector will always change when one applies a
Lorentz boost or rotation, to the discussion surrounding (Read e t al., 2018, Eq. A.12), where the authors
apparently claim that an equation with terms of just this character is Poincar´ e invariant. I believe that
their claim is a slip, and that their argument turns on an ambiguity abou t whether the sense of “same form
in a coordinate system” is supposed to mean “same components” (w hich is how I have interpreted them
here) or “same symbolic representation”, which I fear is trivial, sinc e one is free to use whatever symbols
one likes.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
it is not clear how to make precise the notion of “simplest form” of a sy stem of equations,
and diﬀerent informal understandings of this notion seem to yield diﬀ erent conclusions;
third clear identity criteria for equations have not been given, so th at one cannot determine
when one has a single system of equations expressed in multiple forms (some of which may
be simpler than others) as opposed to distinct equations, and thus it is not clear what
manipulations of equations are permitted when trying to determine t heir simplest form; and
ﬁnally, fourth, a precise notion of “(approximate) local symmetry ” that captures a non-
trivial relationship between the symmetries of an equation and the s ymmetries of a metric
has not been given, at least in curved spacetime.
3.2. The SEP is not Suﬃcient
I will now turn to the second concern. Suppose the diﬃculties just n oted can be overcome and
we have a clear and precise formulation of the SEP, such that one ca n, without ambiguity,
determine whether a given system of diﬀerential equations satisﬁe s it; and it expresses
something about the “instrinsic” character of a system of equatio ns, and not their expression.
(I think this is very likely possible, though it would involve introducing diﬀ erent methods
from those usually employed in this literature.) Then as in the argumen ts oﬀered above,
one would presumably expect it to follow that such a system is, indeed , “adapted to the
spacetime geometry” in the sense that, for instance, solutions to equations satisfying the
SEP, in the small body limit, follow timelike or null geodesics or ideal clock s constructed
from such matter record arclength along their trajectories. Rea d appears to agree when he
writes,
Why should one restrict to those solutions of GR in which the SEP is sat isﬁed?
The reason is that this principle ... is typically regarded to constitute a nd impor-
tant condition for the chronogeometricity if the metric ﬁeld—that is, for intervals
as given by the metric ﬁeld to be read oﬀ by stable rods and clocks built from
matter ﬁelds. (Read, 20??, p. 10)
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
Similarly, Brown writes (and Read quotes approvingly):
That light rays trace out null geodesics of the ﬁeld is again a consequ ence of the
strong equivalence principle, which asserts that locally Maxwell’s equa tions of
electrodynamics are valid. (Brown, 2005, p. 176)
In other words, Read and Brown claim that a system of diﬀerential e quations satisfying the
SEP implies that (and explains why) (certain) solutions to that syste m will have certain
characteristic features that we associate with relativity.
Read and Brown both assert these claims without argument. 46 To substantiate them,
one would ideally like to formulate and prove a theorem of the form:
Fix a system of diﬀerential equations on a Lorentzian manifold and su ppose this
system satisﬁes the SEP with respect to that metric. Then the solu tions to those
equations will have the following properties: (a) in a small body limit, th ey will
follow only timelike or null geodesics; (b) they do not propagate supe rluminally;
(c) they have other properties characteristic of extended matt er, etc. etc.
Of course, to prove such a theorem, one needs to do a lot of work, ﬁrst and most importantly
to make the SEP into a precise assertion. But even heuristically, I am not aware of any
evidence that this proposition is true. One might reply that it, or som ething like it, must
be true. I agree—but this is hardly an argument. 47
46As do others: see, for instance, Knox (2019) or Myrvold (2019, p p. 18-9).
47One might worry that insofar as my main worry about the SEP, even a ppropriately clariﬁed, is the one
given in this section, that ultimately my diﬀerences with Brown and Rea d come down to purely technical
considerations, and not philosophical ones. But I do not think this is correct. Proving the relevant theorems
may well be a mathematical exercise, but identifying what they shou ld be, and even stating them precisely, is
a matter of deep interpretational importance with a long provenan ce (discussed, in part, in the ﬁnal section
of this paper). I take it that the SEP reﬂects a particular idea abou t what, fundamentally, makes general
relativity a theory about “spacetime geometry” (or, “chronogeo metry”). As such, whether it secures the
necessary results reﬂects on whether we truly understand what it means to attribute a certain geometry to
space and time, and ultimately what the physical (and even metaphy sical) signiﬁcance of general relativity
is.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
4. Functionalism Revisited, or, Some Good Advice that We Jus t Didn’t Take
Read writes that the focus of the dynamical/geometrical debate is the following question:
“Whence the metric ﬁeld’s chronogeometric signiﬁcance?” (Read, 2 0??, p. 11). In reaction
to this question—posed, not by Read, but by Adolf Gr¨ unbaum (197 7) some four decades
before—Howard Stein (1977) writes:
The question that seems to dominate your discussion ... is this: by virt ue of
what is the tensor-ﬁeld g to be regarded as representing the metrical structure
of space-time? Now that seems to me a legitimate question, but not a clear
and precise one: it seems to me (to use a distinction I appear to be gr owing
fond of) “presystematic” rather than “systematic,” and to pose a problem of
explication. I should be inclined to reformulate the question as: “Jus t what do
we mean when we say that this tensor-ﬁeld describes the metrical s tructure of
space-time?” (Stein, 1977, p. 375)
Stein goes on to oﬀer his own answer to this question.
[My answer] has a good deal to do with the theory of the behavior of such things
as measuring rods and clocks. But I would begin by making a preliminary ,
and in my opinion quite crucial, remark. This is that there is no “catego rical”
... no innate, a priori, or (in your language) “canonical” notion of the m etric
of space-time. Indeed, nobody before Minkowski employed such a notion at
all. And when Minkowski invented, or discovered, this concept, wha t exactly
did he do? He showed that the special-relativistic theory of space an d time
was tantamount to the statement that space-time has a particula r structure,
whose attributes are suggestively (although not perfectly) analo gous to those
of a Euclidean metric structure ... and from which ... the Eintein geometric,
chonometric, and kinematic relationships are determined . So we have two main
points: (1) a structure whose characteristics are, in a certain ge neralized sense,
of that mathematical species which is called “metrical”; (2) a theory according
to which the physical facts that belong, classically, to physical geo metry (and
chronometry and kinematics) are manifestations of that structu re. Geometry
having thus been “aufgehoben” into the Minkowski structure, on e quite naturally
refers to the latter as “the geometrical structure of space-tim e.”(Stein, 1977, p.
377-8)
I take Stein, here, to be defending precisely what I have described as the “geometric view”
above, including endorsing what I previously referred to as (g) and (d); and to be providing
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
an argument for why, on historical grounds, we should have under stood (g) in such a way
that it implies (d).
One might be tempted to despair by these passages. Has the literat ure on these matters
made no progress in four decades? But to the contrary, I think a g reat deal of progress
has been made, speciﬁcally in answering Stein’s preferred question: “Just what do we mean
when we say that this tensor-ﬁeld describes the metrical structu re of space-time?” Stein
was prepared to say that we mean that certain structures that “ measure” geometry—small
bodies, light rays, clocks—measure the properties described by th e spacetime metric, and
leave it at that. But it has turned out that one can say more. That is , we can now be
more explicit, following Brown (2005), that what we mean by when we s ay that a particular
tensor ﬁeld describes the metrical structure of spacetime is spec iﬁcally that the metric bears
a particular relationship to the dynamics of these structures, or r ather, the dynamics of
the matter that composes them. That relationship is manifest both in the role that the
metric plays in expressions of those dynamics and in features of the ir solutions. That such
a relationship exists is surely in the background of Stein’s remarks. B ut we have made
considerable progress in articulating just what it is.
So much the better for our understanding of space, time, and mat ter. But, as I have ar-
gued in the forgoing, there is still much more to say about Stein’s pre ferred question: what do
we mean when we say that a particular tensor ﬁeld describes the met rical structure of space-
time? On the one hand, neither the substance nor the signiﬁcance o f the SEP is suﬃciently
clear for it to explicate the idea that matter dynamics are adapted t o the spacetime metric
in general relativity. And on the other hand, although there are re sults in the literature that
establish the sorts of links between matter ﬁeld equations and our e xpectations about the
behavior of the structures that “measure” spacetime geometry , those results provide only a
partial picture of the complex network of relationships that one ex pects to hold. Thus, we
are closer to turning the “presystematic” questions discussed by Gr¨ unbaum and Stein into
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
systematic ones, and even ones that can be addressed by new wor k in mathematical physics;
but we are not there yet.
Despite this progress, there is a key point in Stein’s argument that h as perhaps been
overlooked in the subsequent literature, but which I think is reﬂect ed in some of the dif-
ﬁculties I have just highlighted. It is a problem not so much for the dy namic view, but
rather for the “extension” to that view noted in the introduction t o this paper: spacetime
functionalisnm.48 Of course, one worry for this view, at least as defended by Knox (2 019),
that immediately rises from the forgoing discussion, is that Knox also invokes the SEP as her
justiﬁcation that it is the metric in general relativity that does play the spacetime role; for
the reasons already noted, I think this is a problematic claim. But tha t is not my concern.
Rather, what I wish to emphasize is that even within general relativit y, a theory we have
been working with for a century, to clearly and precisely articulate w hat it means for some
structure to “play the spacetime role” or to have “chronogeomet ric signiﬁcance” is subtle
and diﬃcult, and it is not clear that we have control over it. As Stein p uts it, “there is
no ... ‘canonical’ notion of the metric of space-time.” In other words, the expectation that
a particular ﬁeld, gab, does play a certain “spatio-temporal” or “chronogeometric” role, or
has a certain signiﬁcance, arose only within the context of developin g this particular theory.
The very idea of spacetime having a geometry in the relevant sense— of their being a “space-
time role” to play here at all—did not make sense before special relativ ity came along, and
changed dramatically once general relativity was introduced.
Looking backward, one can ask various questions along the lines of t he ones discussed
48As noted above, Weatherall (2019, fn. 40) oﬀers some considera tions for why one should not be an inertial
frame functionalist; Read and Menon (2019) oﬀer other argument s for why inertial frame functionalism has
limitations. The concerns I raise here are not about inertial frame f unctionalism in particular, but rather
the idea that one can say in advance what we even mean by “spacetim e role” once and for all; identifying
that role with inertial frames is just one example. Baker (2019) arg ues that the spacetime concept is a “clus
ter concept”, in the sense that there are many diﬀerent, related conditions that one would associate with
it without any of them being jointly necessary or suﬃcient for it to ap ply. That argument is closer to the
one I raise here, except that my emphasis is on how diﬃcult and theor y-dependent it is to identify what we
mean by “the spacetime role”.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
here, and identify conditions, within general relativity and closely re lated theories, that
would be suﬃcient for a structure to “play the spacetime role”. But the history of how
these concepts came about, and the diﬃculties associated with mak ing them clear, make me
pessimistic that we can now say, once and for all, what it means to “pla y the spacetime role”
in a theory-independent way. Yet this is precisely what functionalism seeks to do: it is an
account of what spacetime is, and how we get to identify a structur e as spacetime given the
dynamics of matter, independent of any theory. 49 Indeed, as evidence for why one ought to
be pessimistic about this program, just observe how diﬃcult it is to go from considerations
that make sense in special relativity, concerning, say, the Poincar ´ e invariance of dynamical
equations (in the sense of solutions of equations being mapped to ot her solutions by auto-
morphisms of Minkowski spacetime), to analogous considerations in general relativity. Why
not expect that to articulate the “spacetime role” in a successful theory of quantum gravity
will require even more complexity, or else draw on completely diﬀerent concepts that we will
need to develop in the course of developing that theory?
Here, I think, we see an important distinction between two diﬀerent claims with a func-
tionalist ﬂavor. One is the claim that it is because the metric and its ass ociated derivative
operator play certain roles in the dynamics of matter that that mat ter has the dynamical
properties (say, in the small-body limit) that one expects in general relativity. This claim,
which amounts to a line on what I called (B) above, could be substantia ted in greater detail,
but seems almost certain to be true. But the second claim is that it is b y virtue of playing a
particular, pre-speciﬁed role in a theory, irrespective of what tha t theory is, that a structure
counts as spacetime. This is clearly a much stronger claim, and one th at I think should be
approached with caution.
49Some uses of functionalism in the recent literature, such as that of Knox (2013) and Lam and W¨ uthrich
(2018), have addressed a somewhat diﬀerent question, namely, w hat would need to be the case for spacetime,
in the sense of general relativity, to “emerge” from a diﬀerent the ory, such as a theory with diﬀerent
geometrical structure (Knox) or a quantum theory of gravity (W ¨ uthrich and Lam). In this case, since
general relativity is the target, the concern that I raise here doe s not get purchase.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Acknowledgments
This material is partially based upon work produced for the project “New Directions in
Philosophy of Cosmology”, funded by the John Templeton Foundatio n under grant number
61048. I am grateful to Sam Fletcher, David Malament, and James R ead for comments on
an earlier draft of this manuscript, to Chris W¨ uthrich for encoura ging me to produce it, to
two anonymous referees for helpful suggestions, and to Clara Br adley, Harvey Brown, John
Earman, Sam Fletcher, Eleanor Knox, Dennis Lehmkuhl, David Malame nt, Oliver Pooley,
and David Wallace for many conversations over the years related to this material.
References
Acu˜ na, P., 2016. Minkowski spacetime and lorentz invariance: The cart and the horse or two sides of a single
coin? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in His tory and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 55, 1–12.
Baker, D. J., 2019. On spacetime functionalism, . Unpublished manus cript. http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/15860/.
Brown, H. R., 2005. Physical Relativity. Oxford University Press, N ew York.
Brown, H. R., Pooley, O., 1999. The origins of the spacetime metric: B ell’s lorentzian pedagogy and its
signiﬁcance in general relativity. In: Callender, C., Huggett, N. (Ed s.), Physics Meets Philosophy at the
Planck Scale. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 256– 72.
Brown, H. R., Pooley, O., 2006. Minkowski space-time: A glorious non -entity. In: Dieks, D. (Ed.), The
Ontology of Spacetime. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 67–89.
Brown, H. R., Read, J., 20?? The dynamical approach to spacetime t heories. In: Knox, E., Wilson, A. (Eds.),
The Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Physics. Routledge, Lond on, . Forthcoming. http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/14592/.
Brown, H. R., Read, J., 2016. Clarifying possible misconceptions in the foundations of general relativity.
American Journal of Physics 84 (5), 327–334.
Curiel, E., 2017. A primer on energy conditions. In: Lehmkuhl, D., Sch iemann, G., Scholz, E. (Eds.),
Towards a Theory of Spacetime Theories. Birkh¨ auser, Boston, M A, pp. 43–104.
Dewar, N., 2020. General-relativistic covariance. Foundations of P hysics 50, 294–318.
Dorato, M., 2007. Relativity theory between structural and dyna mical explanations. International Studies
in the Philosophy of Science 21 (1), 95–102.
Earman, J., 2014. No superluminal propagation for classical relativ istic and relativistic quantum ﬁelds.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 48, 102–108.
Fletcher, S. C., 20?? Approximate local poincar´ e spacetime symme try in general relativity. In: Beisbart, C.,
Sauer, T., W¨ uthrich, C. (Eds.), Thinking About Space and Time: 100 Years of Applying and Interpreting
General Relativity. Birkh¨ auser, Boston, MA, . Forthcoming.
Fletcher, S. C., 2013. Light clocks and the clock hypothesis. Found ations of Physics 43 (11), 1369–1383.
Fletcher, S. C., Weatherall, J. O., 2020. Is spacetime approximately locally ﬂat?, unpublished manuscript.
Friedman, M., 1983. Foundations of Space-Time Theories: Relativist ic Physics and Philosophy of Science.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Frisch, M., 2011. Principle or constructive relativity. Studies in Histo ry and Philosophy of Modern Physics
42 (3), 176–183.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
Geroch, R., 2011. Faster than light? In: Plaue, M., Rendall, A., Scher fner, M. (Eds.), Advances in Lorentzian
Geometry. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, pp. 5 9–80.
Geroch, R., Weatherall, J. O., 2018. The motion of small bodies in spac e-time. Communications in Mathe-
matical Physics 364, 607–634, dOI:10.1007/s00220-018-3268-8 .
Gr¨ unbaum, A., 1977. Absolute and relational theories of space an d space-time. In: Earman, J., Glymour,
C., Stachel, J. (Eds.), Foundations of Space-Time Theories. Univer sity of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis,
MN, pp. 303–373.
Hawking, S. W., Ellis, G. F. R., 1973. The Large Scale Structure of Spa ce-time. Cambridge University Press,
New York.
Janssen, M., 2009. Drawing the line between kinematics and dynamics in special relativity. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 40 (1), 26–52.
Knox, E., 2013. Eﬀective spacetime geometry. Studies in History an d Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 44 (3), 346–356.
Knox, E., 2019. Physical relativity from a functionalist perspective . Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics 67, 118–124.
Lam, V., W¨ uthrich, C., 2018. Spacetime is as spacetime does. Studie s in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 64, 39–51.
Malament, D., 2012a. A remark about the “geodesic principle” in gene ral relativity. In: Frappier, M., Brown,
D. H., DiSalle, R. (Eds.), Analysis and Interpretation in the Exact Scie nces: Essays in Honour of William
Demopoulos. Springer, New York, pp. 245–252.
Malament, D. B., 2012b. Topics in the Foundations of General Relativ ity and Newtonian Gravitation Theory.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Maudlin, T., 2012. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time. Princeton U niversity Press, Princeton, NJ.
Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S., Wheeler, J. A., 1973. Gravitation. W. H. Freeman.
Myrvold, W. C., 2019. How could relativity be anything other than phy sical? Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Mod ern Physics 67, 137–143.
Norton, J. D., 2008. Why constructive relativity fails. The British Jo urnal for the Philosophy of Science 59,
821–834.
Read, J., 20?? Explanation, geometry, and conspiracy in relativity t heory. In: Beisbart, C., Sauer, T.,
W¨ uthrich, C. (Eds.), Thinking About Space and Time: 100 Years of A pplying and Interpreting General
Relativity. Birkh¨ auser, Boston, MA, . Forthcoming.
Read, J., 2019. Geomertrical constructivism and modal relationism : Further aspects of the dynami-
cal/geometrical debate, unpublished ms.
Read, J., Brown, H. R., Lehmkuhl, D., 2018. Two miracles of general r elativity. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Mod ern Physics 64, 14–25.
Read, J., Menon, T., 2019. The limitations of inertial frame spacetime functionalism. Synthese. DOI:
10.1007/s11229-019-02299-2.
Stein, H., 1977. On space-time and ontology: Extract from a letter to adolf gr¨ unbaum. In: Earman, J.,
Glymour, C., Stachel, J. (Eds.), Foundations of Space-Time Theorie s. University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis, MN, pp. 374–402.
Sus, A., 2014. On the explanation of inertia. Journal for General P hilosophy of Science 45 (2), 293–315.
Torretti, R., 1983. Relativity and Geometry. Pergamon Press, Oxf ord, UK.
Wald, R. M., 1984. General Relativity. University of Chicago Press, C hicago.
Wallace, D., 2019. Who’s afraid of coordinate systems? an essay on r epresentation of spacetime structure.
Studies in history and philosophy of modern physics 67, 125–136.
Weatherall, J. O., 20?? Geometry and motion in general relativity. In : Beisbart, C., Sauer, T., W¨ uthrich,
C. (Eds.), Thinking About Space and Time: 100 Years of Applying and I nterpreting General Relativity.
Birkh¨ auser, Boston, MA, . Forthcoming.
Weatherall, J. O., 2011. On the status of the geodesic principle in New tonian and relativistic physics. Studies
in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 42 (4), 276–281.
Weatherall, J. O., 2014. Against dogma: On superluminal propagatio n in classical electromagnetism. Studies
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philo sophy of Modern Physics 48,
109–123.
Weatherall, J. O., 2016. Regarding the hole argument. The British Jo urnal for the Philosophy of Science
69 (2), 329–350.
Weatherall, J. O., 2017. Inertial motion, explanation, and the foun dations of classical space-time theories. In:
Lehmkuhl, D., Schiemann, G., Scholz, E. (Eds.), Towards a Theory of Spacetime Theories. Birkh¨ auser,
Boston, MA, pp. 13–42.
Weatherall, J. O., 2019. Conservation, inertia, and spacetime geom etry. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physic s 67, 144–159.
Weatherall, J. O., 2020. Some philosophical prehistory of the (Earm an-Norton) hole argument. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 70, 79–87.
Weyl, H., 1952 [1918]. Space Time Matter. Dover Publications, Mineola, NY.
Wilson, M., 2006. Wandering Signiﬁcance: An Essay on Conceptual Be havior. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
33
