===== PAGE 1 =====
Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology, 2025, 11(3), 889-913 
https://www.scirp.org/journal/jhepgc 
ISSN Online: 2380-4335 
ISSN Print: 2380-4327 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057  Jul.  16, 2025 889 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
 
 
 
Bell’s Inequality and Quantum Gravity: On the 
Incompleteness of Quantum Mechanics and 
General Relativity 
Xinzhong Wu  
School of History and Culture of Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China  
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper examines the history of Bell’s inequality from EPR argument to 
Bell’s papers, and the influence of Bell’s inequality on the frontier exploration 
of quantum mechanics. It is found that Bell’s inequality has some hidden as-
sumptions that are differ ent from EPR argument. Along Schrodinger’s idea 
that the measurement process of the EPR experiment requires time, Karl Hess 
and his follows treat time as a time order parameter, by extending the method 
of space-time geometry analysis of relativity to the localized geometry analysis 
of quantum states, it is believed that the reasoning of Bell’s inequality does not 
meet the requirements of the completeness of EPR argument. Analyzing the 
non locality of gravitational energy in general relativity makes it necessary for 
us to seek a more localized expression of relativistic gravitational theory. Based 
on local realism, exploring new interpretations and expressions of quantum 
mechanics may open up new avenues for studying quantum gravity. We found 
that Lorentz almost discovered the incompleteness of general relativity but er-
roneously insisted on the concepts of ether and absolute space, just as Einstein 
correctly discovered the flaws in the non local representation of quantum me-
chanics based on outdated determinism. 
 
Keywords 
EPR Argument, Bell’s Inequality, Quantum Gravity 
 
1. From EPR Paradox to Bell’s Inequality 
In 1935, Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen published a paper in the 47th issue of the 
Physical Review, proposing the principle of local realism and attempting to prove 
that quantum mechanics is incomplete to describe microscopic systems. The 
“physical reality standard” of the “complete physical theory” proposed in the EPR 
How to cite this paper : Wu, X.Z.  (2025) 
Bell’s Inequality and Quantum Gravity: On 
the Incompleteness of Quantum Mechanics 
and General Relativity. Journal of High En-
ergy Physics , Gravitation and Cosmology , 
11, 889-913. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 
 
Received:  March 31, 2025 
Accepted: July 13, 2025 
Published: July 16, 2025 
 
Copyright © 2025 by author(s) and  
Scientific Research Publishing Inc. 
This work is licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution International  
License (CC BY 4.0). 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/   
  
Open Access

===== PAGE 2 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 890 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
paper is that any observable quantity of a system should have an objectively de-
termined value without interference. The “locality criterion” is that if the 4 -di-
mensional spacetime interval between two measurements is space-like, then there 
will be no causal relationship between the two measurement events [1] . Based on 
these two principles, we can conclude that if the two measurements of the observ-
ables of A and B are separated by a space -like interval, then the measurement of 
A must not affect the measurement of B, and vice versa, the measurement of B 
will not affect the measurement of A (under a space-like interval separation) [1]. 
Niels Bohr soon published a paper of the same name in the 48th issue of the 
Physical Review, refuting the EPR argument. Bohr rejected the epistemological 
criteria proposed by three scholars on the basis that the observed microscopic sys-
tem, together with the observation instrument, constitutes a single, indivisible sys-
tem at the level of quantum mechanics. Bohr believed that in EPR experiments, 
determining the position of one system can infer the position of the other system. 
But when determining the position of the previous system, there is uncontrollable 
uncertainty in the momentum of this system, and we cannot infer the exact mo-
mentum of the next system based on the law of conservation of momentum like 
Einstein did ([2], pp. 270-272). 
On August 14, 1935, Schrödinger submitted a paper to the Cambridge Philo-
sophical Society that was contrary in many ways to Bohr’s discussion of the EPR 
thesis, involving the famous “Schrödinger Cat” experiment and the so -called 
“quantum entanglement”. He r econfirmed and extended the results of the EPR 
paper as a sign of serious flaws in quantum mechanics ([2], pp. 293-294). In Schrö-
dinger’s view, quantum measurements require time rather than instantaneous ac-
tion, which makes the assumption of simultaneity of measurement results implicit 
in EPR arguments problematic ([2], p. 299). 
David Bohm proposed the experiment of positive and negative electron pairs 
with a total spin of ћ/2 as a replica of the EPR experiment in 1951. When a pair of 
electrons fly in opposite directions, constantly increasing their spatial distance 
from each othe r, and the moments when they are independently measured are 
close enough, then these two measurement events are in a quasi spatial separation. 
According to the local causality law, measuring electron A will not have any im-
pact on positron B ([3], p. 255). 
John Bell derived the famous Bell inequality from Einstein’s theory of local re-
ality and the existence of hidden variables in 1964, stating that all the local hidden 
variable theory’s predictions conform to this inequality, while some quantum me-
chanics” predictions may violate this inequality. The Bohm theory, which is equiv-
alent to quantum mechanics in empirical prediction, belongs to the theory of non 
local hidden variables and can also break Bell’s inequality. 
Bell uses λ to define an implicit variable. The symbol λ represents Einstein’s real 
elements, leading to controversial measurement output issues. The random varia-
bles A, B, and C in the Bohm electron spin experiment are represented by Bell’s 
labeling functions A(a, λ), A(b, λ), and A(c, λ), which can be assumed to have values 
of +1 or − 1. For any implicit local variable theory, the following Bell inequality

===== PAGE 3 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 891 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
should be satisfied between the three sets of experimental statistical averages:  
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ),, ,, ,, 1Aa Ab Aa Ac Ab Acλλ λλ λλ+ − ≤+  (1) 
Based on a series of experimental results, Zhang Yongde points out that: 1) the 
completeness of quantum mechanics and the existence of hidden variables are still 
uncertain; 2) All experiments clearly support the quantum superposition states, 
the randomness and non locality caused by entanglement and measurement ([3], 
pp. 259-260). In Zhang Yongde’s view, “both non relativistic quantum mechanics 
and relativistic quantum field theory are spatial non local theories under the guise 
of local descriptions” ([3], p. 265). 
After a plenty of falsified experiments on Bell’s inequality, various hypotheses, 
theories, and models of quantum gravity were mostly forced to accept the non 
locality of quantum mechanics that conflict with the spirit of relativity. Roger Pen-
rose described the EPR type spin photon experiment as follows: “The part of ‘in-
formation’ (i.e. different polarization directions) reaches faster than light (‘in-
stant’), and the knowledge of which of these two directions is actually polarized 
will arrive slower by transmitting the usual signal of the first polarization meas-
urement. In the usual sense of sending information, although the EPR type exper-
iment does not conflict with the causality of relativity, it certainly contradicts the 
relativistic spirit of our physical reality ‘image’.” [4] Penrose linked quantum non 
locality with the spatial dispersion of individual particles, the superposition of 
quantum states, wave packet collapse, and the non locality of gravitational self 
energy, the superposition of quantum states is related to the superposition of dif-
ferent spacetime metrics. The vacuum fluctuations of the quantum field show EPR 
correlations in the region of space-like separation [5]. 
2. Why Is Bell’s Inequality Wrong? 
When most scholars like H When Fritsch announced in his popular science dia-
logue, “ You’re wrong, Mr. Einstein!” [6], there were still a few physicists who 
bravely followed Einstein’s explanation of quantum mechanics, exposing various 
errors in Bell’s inequality argument. Famous physicists who issued statements op-
posing instantaneous effects include Murry Gell-Mann and M O. Scully, Y. Ahar-
onov, B. G. Englert et al. [7]. Gell Mann pointed out in “ Quarks and Puma” that 
“the false reports of one photon immediately affecting another have led to all kinds 
of regrettable conclusions. Firstly, the assertion that the effect is instantaneous vi-
olates the requirements of relativity… Secondly, some authors claim that the phe-
nomenon of ‘superluminal’ can be accepted in quantum mechanics, such as pre-
cognition, that some ‘psychics’ can know in advance the results of some accidental 
processes. Needless to say, these effects will disrupt quantum mechanics, just as it 
has disrupted classical physics... The third form of foolishness is to succumb to 
certain suggestions, such as the US Department of Defense’s proposal to use quan-
tum mechanics to achieve military communication at superluminal speeds.” [8]. 
In 1988, when discussing the test of Bell’s inequality in “ Human Philosophy”,

===== PAGE 4 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 892 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
Jin Guantao mentioned that the Copenhagen interpretation excludes telepathic 
superluminal signals by sacrificing the objectivity of microscopic objects, and 
some even extended the conclusion that the moon does not exist when no one is 
watching, materialism has been proven false today. But if we acknowledge signals 
that exceed the speed of light, it is equivalent to believing in telepathy, shaking the 
foundation of the entire science, especially the theory of relativity, which will be 
overturned ([9], pp. 14-15). Jin Guantao attempted to revise the traditional concept 
of objective reality by introducing constructivism, and proposed that a set of ex-
perimental instruments based on natural law constraints have artificially set over-
all correlations, which can be used to understand the seemingly existing quantum 
non locality in Bell type experiments as shown in Figure 1 . He believes that in a 
series of spin correlation experiments, “ there is no such thing as superluminal 
transmission of signals. Due to the isomorphism between natural laws and instru-
ment relationships, when one observer can foresee the observation of another ob-
server based on a certain natural law, it actually means that the other observer can 
only measure the corresponding observable quantity by adjusting the instrument 
in a specific way. The correlation between the instrument states chosen by the two 
observers is determined by the instrument construction” ([9], p. 102). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Bell’s type experiments. 
 
Karl Hess proposed that the derivation of Bell’s inequality ignored the mechanism 
of light signal timing in special relativity in his book “Einstein was Right”. He be-
lieved that the EPR experiment involves correlation, which always implies some im-
portant relativity concepts such as “simultaneity”: we must measure correlation 
pairs simultaneously or at a highly correlated time at two different positions, which 
is exactly one form of instrument correlation mentioned by Jin Guantao. 
Karl Hess believed that “The EPR experiment was dealing with correlations im-
plied always some “simultaneity”, a concept that had played a major role in Ein-
stein’s relativity theory.” ([10], p. 47). Therefore, we must measure that correlation 
pairs in EPR experiments at two different locations at the same time, or at least at a 
time of high correlation. Everyone knows that time is not a random variable and 
has a past-present-future time series, but we assume that Bell’s λ is a random var-

===== PAGE 5 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 893 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
iable; therefore, λ and time or space -time must be identifiable in mathematics. 
Time variables should also be regarded as real elements and entered into Bell’s 
inequalities—the Formula (1), but there are not time variables in the Formula (1). 
As Karl Hess said, “If all the equipment stands still in a laboratory, as it usually 
does, we may replace space-time just by the number i of the actual experiment. 
Then, time is just regarded as an order parameter, which provides order as we are 
counting.” ([10], p. 52) . Thus, Karl Hess got an inequality different from Bell’s 
inequality: 
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
11 2 2
11 2 2 3ii i i i i
ai b i a i c i b i c iAA A A A Aλλ λ λ λ λ
′′ ′ ++ + +
++ + ++ − ≤+ . (2) 
This inequality is opposite to the popular Bell inequality and it is always correct 
and does not provide a decisive difference between local hidden variable theory 
and quantum mechanics. Therefore, experimental verification of Bell’s inequality 
is not sufficient to exclude local realism. This type of experiment involves two 
experiments in a quasi empty region that perform optical signal timing operations 
during their respective measurement time periods, which does not meet the re-
quirements of EPR verification. Hess pointed out that a large number of scholars 
have been involved in the discussions on Bell’s inequality ( [11], pp. 1574-1575). 
He believes that when EPR type experiments are explained according to the Bell 
model, they do not consider all hidden variables and introduce some counterfac-
tual reasoning. The Bell’s type’s experimental verification always have loopholes, 
so it can not deny local realism ([12], pp. 713-733). 
3. How Does Quantum Gravity Get Involved in Non Locality? 
Kip S. Thorne talked about John Wheeler’s hope for unification of future physics, 
and pointed out: “For general relativity and quantum mechanics, in order to logi-
cally integrate the two, it is obvious that one or both of them should be modified. If 
this fusion is achieved, the ultimate unification of general relativity and quantum 
mechanics will produce a new set of powerful laws, which physicists call it as quan-
tum gravity.” [13] In 1916, Einstein found that there are gravitational waves which 
carry energy and gravity energy should be quantize in order to be compatible with 
atomic physics. It was Einstein who first proposed the quantum gravity issue: “ It 
seems that quantum theory will not only correct Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory, 
but will also modify new theories of gravity.” [14] Moreover, Einstein first suggested 
that the desirable path for quantum gravity is to correct general relativity to be fit 
for quantum rules. This has affected most quantum gravity research in the future. 
In 1928, Dirac combined the special theory of relativity with quantum mechan-
ics, formed quantum electrodynamics. Not long after, Heisenberg and Pauli claimed 
in 1929 that “the quantization of the gravitational field—which is necessary from 
a physical perspective—can be achieved in a form completely similar to this one 
without encountering any new difficulties”. ([15], p. 3) However, the recent de-
velopments over the past 100 years have surprised us by the difficulty of some 
great physicists underestimating the problem of quantum gravity. In 1971, shortly

===== PAGE 6 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 894 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
after Dutch physicist t’Hooft proved that we can renormalize the Yang -Mills 
gauge field theory, but the quantum general relativity is non renormalizable, 
which means that a quantum gravity theory that preserves both quantum rules 
and general relativity principles may not exist. 
Superstring theory originated in the late 1960s from the understanding of the 
Regge phenomenon of strong interactions. In the mid -1970s, Schwarz et al. ex-
plained the massless spin 2 particles in closed string theory as gravitons, and since 
then, string theory has been studied as a unified theory for various interactions. 
The development of string theory roughly follows the following clues: strong in-
teraction → open string theory → closed string theory  → IIA theory, IIB theory, 
hybrid string theory → M theory → first principles. The basic idea of string theory 
is that the most fundamental component of the material world is not in the form 
of particles, known as point like objects, but rather in the form of an oscillating 
one-dimensional extension with supersymmet ry, called a string. Despite achiev-
ing some encouraging results, the renormalization problem in quantum field the-
ory has not been completely solved, and the background spacetime of string the-
ory itself and the dynamic mechanism of quantum fields cannot est ablish a con-
nection similar to the spacetime background of gravitational field generation in 
general relativity. More seriously, there are too many vacuum solutions for string 
theory, and there is currently no experimental evidence of supersymmetry and 
extra dimensions. The enlightening significance of string theory for the study of 
cosmological problems is very limited. 
In the second string revolution, observation had almost no effect. The most 
perplexing observation in the past 30 years has been the discovery of dark energy. It 
is like a gravitational source evenly distributed throughout the entire space. Because 
it is evenly distributed and equal everywhere, nothing falls towards it. Its only effect 
is on the average velocity of galaxy separation. In 1998, observations of supernovae 
in distant galaxies showed that the expansion of the universe is accelerating, and the 
acceleration is best explained by the presence of dark energy. String theory does not 
predict dark energy and it is difficult to reconcile the detected values. So, the discov-
ery of dark energy heralds a crisis in the field of string theory. 
One of the few conclusions we can draw from string theory is that the cosmo-
logical constant can only be zero or negative, but the supernova observations in 
1998 showed that the universe was expanding and accelerating, meaning that the 
cosmological constant must be a very small positive number. This is a real crisis 
because there is clearly a contradiction between the predictions and observations 
of string theory.  
The key breakthrough was in 2003, when scientists at Stanford University fi-
nally achieved string theory with a positive cosmological constant. Their starting 
point is a carefully studied string theory—a flat four-dimensional spacetime with 
6-dimensional small geometry at every point. The 6-dimensional curled geometry 
they chose is the Calabi-Yao space. It was found that if we want a negative or zero 
cosmological constant, there are infinite different string theories. If we want a the-

===== PAGE 7 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 895 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
ory to have a positive cosmological constant to satisfy observational results, then 
the number of theories is finite; Current evidence suggests that there are approx-
imately 10500. This means that both observation and experimentation are extremely 
difficult to confirm or falsify string theory. For explorers who advocate quantum 
discrete spacetime, another question facing string theory is why flat spacetime does 
not require quantization, while the bending parts that deviate from flat spacetime 
must be quantized? In general relativity, flat spacetime and curved spacetime can 
be transformed through coordinate transformation. We can even argue that chang-
ing the definition of geodesics will change the criteria for dividing flat spacetime 
and curved spacetime. 
The starting point of loop quantum gravity is Ashtekar’s revolutionary recon-
struction of Einstein’s theory of general relativity in 1986, which initially assumed 
that spacetime is composed of discrete elements, and the discreteness of spacetime 
is the result of combining quantum theory with relativity. Loop quantum gravity 
originates from the idea of directly describing fields (such as electromagnetic 
fields) using field lines. The reason why it is called a “loop” is that in the absence 
of matter, field lines can self close to form a circle. This is the viewpoint of Nielsen, 
Wilson and Polyakov, and it is precisely this idea that led to string theory in a 
fixed spacetime background. Loop quantum gravity is the same idea, but devel-
oped in a background independent theory as shown in Figure 2 . 
 
 
Figure 2.  String theory vs loop quantum gravity. 
 
Ashtekar expressed general relativity in the language of gauge fields. In this way, 
the metric of spacetime becomes something similar to an electromagnetic field. 
The gravitational field has three sets of field lines, and a correlation network is 
defined to handle how these three sets of field lines are connected. The two sets of 
force lines connected and knotted in the same way define the same association, 
more precisely, the same physical state. This is why we refer to general relativity 
as correlation theory. The spatial point itself does not exist —the meaning of the 
point can only be the name we give to the detailed features in the correlation net-
work between the three sets of field force lines. When we process the correspond-
ing field lines using quantum mechanics methods, we must reconstruct quantu m 
field theory and finally obtain loop quantum gravity.

===== PAGE 8 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 896 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
Encouraged by numerous experimental verifications of Bell’s inequality, theo-
retical exploration of loop quantum gravity (LQG) introduced the concepts of 
quantum non locality, quantum entanglement information, which conflict with 
the spirit of relativity. The unit of quantum information is the smallest area quan-
tum as quantum bit: “an area quantum will be a state carrying two equally important 
bases at the same time. This fundamental characteristic gives the area quantum the 
property of a superposition state” ([16], pp. 344-345). The area quantum follows 
quantum Boolean logic. As Shao Liang, Shao Dan, and Shao Changgui pointed 
out that “the possible entanglement between area quanta in quantized space-time, 
as well as the ‘teleportation’ of quantum states caused by entanglement associa-
tions at a certain moment in the quantized time process (i.e. teleportation without 
time), indicate that there may be some kind of entanglement association hidden 
in the quantum space-time described by the loop quantum force in the sense of 
quantum mechanics. This entanglement association is very similar to the spin en-
tanglement exhibited by EPR pairs that are already known in quantum mechan-
ics.” ([16], p. 348). 
Along the background independent method of loop quantum gravity, L. Crane 
put forward relational quantum theory, proposed that “ the right way to apply 
quantum theory to the universe is not to put the whole universe into one quantum 
system” ([17], p. 314), but to regard quantum mechanics as “the description of the 
boundary relationship between the two subsystems of the universe. Carlo Rovelli 
further developed this idea. F. Markopoulou and Seth Lloyd attempted to describe 
the universe as “a quantum computer with a dynamically generating logic” ([17], 
p. 314), they have been leading a movement “That uses idea from quantum infor-
mation theory to reconceptualize the universe, leading us to understanding of how 
basic particles can emerge from quantum space-time.” ([17], p. 315). 
Alan Aspect believed that “ although quantum mechanics can calculate the 
probabilities of various possible outcomes in experiments with extreme precision, 
these probabilities only have statistical significance when the same experiment is 
repeated multiple times. It is this fundamental quantum randomness that prohib-
its the superluminal propagation of information.” ([18], p. 3) In Nicolas Gisin’s 
view, “spooky interactions” as Einstein said are the remote coordination made by 
nature but not quantum communication according to quantum rules ([18], p. 44), 
and there are still detection and locality loopholes in the experimental verification 
of Bell’s inequality ([18], pp. 110-111). 
More than 20 years ago, Lee Smolin noticed that some calculations of loop 
quantum gravity actually contradicted Einstein’s special relativity, which led him 
to abandon loop quantum gravity and reconsider the string theory with many de-
fects. Lee Smolin and others form a variable light velocity cosmology (VSL) thought 
consistent with the special and general relativity, which is called “gravitational 
rainbow”: “In the very early universe, when the temperature was very high, the 
speed of light was, on average, faster than it is now. As you go further back in time 
and the temperature approaches Planck energy, the speed of light becomes infi-

===== PAGE 9 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 897 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
nite. It took somewhat longer to show that this led to a version of variable light 
speed theory that was also in harmony with the principles of general relativity, but 
we eventually got it, too.” ([17], p. 227). 
However, in 2022, Hao Li and Bo -Qiong Ma published a paper in Physics Let-
ters B, which calculated the amplitude of the frequency dependent velocity of pho-
tons and neutrinos in the universe from the loop quantum gravity model [19] . In 
2024, through the exploration and research of astronomers, the variable speed of 
light model proposed by linearized loop quantum gravity was falsified, and the 
principle of constant speed of light was once again tested. The various discoveries 
in cosmology strongly suggest that quantum rules may need to be adjusted or re-
vised at the different levels of material structure. Since the introduction of new 
quantum rules is required to transition from the daily level spacetime scale to the 
atomic level spacetime scale, why not consider the transition from the atomic scale 
to the Planck scale without adjusting the current quantum rules? 
4. Has Penrose Solved the Mystery of Quantum  
Measurements? 
Regarding the issue of quantum gravity, Stephen Hawking hoped that the quanti-
zation of the gravitational field would help eliminate the singularity problem in 
general relativity, just as Bohr’s stationary orbital model solved the stability prob-
lem of atomic structure. However, this idea has been stagnant for a long time due 
to the difficulty of renormalization in quantized general relativity. Roger Penrose 
believed that we replace quantization of the gravitational field with gravitation  of 
quantum mechanics, which helps to explain non local phenomena in quantum 
measurements though the non local energy distribution of the gravitational field. 
The difference in Weyl curvature between spacetime singularities provides sym-
metry breaking for all physical processes in the universe in terms of past and fu-
ture evolutionary directions [20]. However, if there is indeed a disturbance caused 
by unknown factors that trigger quantum collapse (whether gravitational effects 
or other factors), then all particles will continuously interact with this disturbance 
(regardless of whether they are in a superposition state). In theory, we should may 
detect these interactions like Brownian motions. In 2020, a team in Italy tested a 
collapse model (Diós-Penrose model) using this germanium detector. After noise 
reduction, physicists did not see any radiation.  In a paper published in August 
2022, the results from 2020 were confirmed and strengthened [21]. 
Most scholars believe that quantum non locality phenomena are unrelated to 
the non locality of gravitational energy in general relativity. We believe that gen-
eral relativity involves a global acceleration transformation, which, according to 
the principle of equivalence, results in a non local energy distribution of the iner-
tial gravitational field. We discuss typically quantum non local phenomena in in-
ertial frames, and the gravitational collapse model of quantum waves involves ra-
diation caused by particle acceleration. However, there is still no experimental ev-
idence to prove the radiation effect of this wave function’s gravitational collapse.

===== PAGE 10 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 898 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
There is more than one method to derive Hawking radiation in the classical 
black hole background by utilizing the renormalization energy momentum tensor 
Tμν of the quantum field. It is evident that in the calculation of conformal fields in 
2D spacetime [22], it has been found that there are both energy momentum con-
tributions along local vacuum polarization and non local contributions from 
Hawking thermal radiation flow, which can be seen as residual particle flow es-
caping the event horizon before the formati on of the black hole [23] . According 
to the widely discussed Aharonov-Bohm effect, various physical fields exhibit sim-
ilar quantum global correlations by affecting quantum phase, whether it is mag-
netic AB effect, electrical AB effect, or gravitational phase shift effect measured 
using neutron interferometers [24] . Quantum non locality does not necessarily 
have a special connection with universal gravity or quantum gravity, such as Pen-
rose’s spacetime metric superposition, but rather comes from the overall distribu-
tion of any physical field. According to Jin Guantao’s analysis of spin electron pair 
correlations, this type of EPR quantum correlation originates from experimental 
arrangements that ensure the conservation of momentum and angular momen-
tum. According to Noether’s theorem, this ultimately stems from the sp acetime 
symmetry of momentum and angular momentum conservation, that is, the uni-
formity and isotropy of space. In the discussion of the black hole information par-
adox, many scholars have not noticed that the spacetime near the black hole does 
not satisfy the experimental conditions of spatial uniformity and isotropy, that is, 
it cannot satisfy the EPR correlation. The argument based on some unitary evolu-
tion of quantum mechanics to infer the Hawking radiation of quantum bits re-
tained at the black hole’s event horizon is incorrect. In the entanglement of parti-
cle pairs inside and outside the event horizon of a black hole, quantum infor-
mation irreversibly disappears, as Hawking pointed out, especially since the black 
hole is not a closed system as a thermodyna mic system, but an open system as 
described by Prigogine, and the system described based on quantum mechanics 
unitary evolution is a closed system. 
The twistor theory developed rapidly in the first 20 years proposed by Penrose. 
Many fundamental equations in physics can be rewritten in the form of twistor 
spaces in surprising and wonderful ways. The twistor theory partially realizes the 
idea that spacetime can emerge from other structures. The events in our spacetime 
are just some special surfaces suspended in the twistor space; The geometry of our 
spacetime can also emerge from the structure of the twistor space. The basic phil-
osophical requirement of the theory of twistor is to transform ordinary physical 
concepts described by ordinary spacetime concepts into corresponding equivalent 
(but non local related) descriptions under the twistor theory as shown in Figure 
3 ([17], p. 239). 
Lee Smolin believes that there are issues with this scene. The main problem is 
that the twistor space can only be understood without quantum theory. Although 
there are significant differences between twistor space and spacetime, it is still a 
smooth geometric structure. No one knows what twistor space looks like yet. It

===== PAGE 11 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 899 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
 
Figure 3.  Twistor theory. 
 
is still unknown whether quantum twistor theory is meaningful and whether 
spacetime can emerge from it. However, the theory of twistor has not yet become 
a feasible method for quantum gravity, mainly because it cannot accommodate 
general relativity, and torsion models for nonlinear gravitons are still being at-
tempted. But since 2004, Edward Witten has led a group of physicists to use 
twistor string frameworks to study gauge and gravitational scattering amplitudes. 
After the spin enters the twistor form system, a new quantum gravity model 
emerged that unifies the gauge gravity field and quantum into the twistor geome-
try framework. Spin provides a quantum physical explanation, achieving the com-
bination of the basic framework of general relativity and the basic framework of 
the particle standard model. However, Tian -Yu Cao noticed that the general rel-
ativity framework with nonlinear gravitational self interactions is based on real 
spacetime manifolds, while the twistor space is a complex manifold based on 
spinor analysis and has a richer mathematical structure. The twistor theory re-
gards both gravity and quantum as non fundamental emergent phenomena, and 
the fundamental position of quantum field theory has also been changed. Alt-
hough the twistor form system introduced with spin is intrinsic quantum, the 
twistor operator rooted in the prime agent is still a non local cohomology element 
[25]. 
5. Discussion 
5.1. Problems in General Relativity  
During his lifetime, Lorentz constantly reminded Einstein to redefine the distinc-
tion between inertial forces and universal gravitation in general relativity, similar 
to Newtonian mechanics. The velocity of gravitational waves has been proven 
through astronomical observations to be the speed of light predicted by general 
relativity, indicating that the original Newtonian gravity has been localized, simi-
lar to an electromagnetic field, with at least two sets of field lines: the Newtonian

===== PAGE 12 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 900 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
gravity line equivalent to Coulomb’s electric force and the magnetic gravity line 
equivalent to Ampere’s magnetic force line. This is the weak field linear approxi-
mation of relativistic gravitational field theory. Its earliest form was obtained by 
Heaviside in 1893 by imitating Maxwell’s equations. In 1905, it was used by Poin-
caré to calculate that the speed of gravitational waves is the same as light speed. 
Some scholars published papers questioning how far linear gravity theory can go. 
From 1966 to 1969, L. Brillouin, J. Carstoiu, and others contributed to the mass of 
the field source based on the energy of the gravitational field and provided its 
nonlinear correction as follows [26]. 
Carstoiu got a set of Maxwell type’s gravitation equations:  
 rotF t
∂Ω=− ∂ , 22
1
g
FGrot Jtcc
∂Ω= − ∂ , gF GQ∇= − , 0∇Ω=  (3) 
In the formula, Qg is mass density, Jg is gravity flow, Ω is gravity vortex. The 
mass density Qg of matter requires an additional correction corresponding to the  
gravitational energy density : 
222
2
1
8
extra
Fc
Q Gc
+Ω
= π , F is common gravity  
field, Ω is gravitational magnetic field. This non- linear mass correction of Max-
well type’s gravitational field results in a gravity energy density formula that is 
different from electromagnetic field energy density, equivalent to the mass renor-
malization program in quantum field theory. Due to the absence of the principle 
of equivalence, there has been no in-depth research on how to handle the energy 
generated by inertial forces in acceleration systems and how to generate gravita-
tional effects by inertial forces. The most important thing is that Carstoiu’s gravity 
equation uses a geodesic definition different from general relativity, where light 
and gravitational waves propagate along a straight line at the speed of light in an 
inertial frame and bend in the same way in an acceleration frame. How light and 
gravitational waves deflect in a gravitational field and how it differs from the pre-
dictions of general relativity need to be studied. 
The inertial force field in Newtonian mechanics, should be extended to the third 
set of force lines of the relativistic gravitational field. In loop quantum gravity, the 
valence of the spatial quantum is determined by the number of vertices of the spin 
network, which is exactly 3 ( [16], p. 9). We must recognize that the equivalence 
principle of general relativity strictly holds in a local inertial frame approaching 
infinitesimal, ignoring the gravitational effects of the experimental object. This 
makes it almost impossible to handle gravitational two body problems described 
using a center of mass system, let alone gravitational many body problems. Gen-
eral relativity can currently only handle uniformly rotating single body problems 
similar to the Kerr metric, as well as ideal fluid proble ms with uniformity and 
isotropy as a cosmological model. In general relativity, the approximation of 
curved spacetime is established by ignoring the gravitational effects of the test ob-
ject, which assumes the asymmetry between the active gravitational mass (gravi-
tational source) and the passive gravitational mass (test object) from the begin-
ning. This leads to the need to introduce the difference between active gravita-

===== PAGE 13 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 901 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
tional mass, passive gravitational mass, and inertial mass in the approximation of 
the two body gravity problem. 
The energy momentum tensor involves the distribution of force lines in matter 
density and inertial -gravitational fields. The difference between a single mass 
gravitational field line and a single charge electric field line is that the gravitational 
flux must consider the self gravitational effect of gravitational potential energy. 
The force lines of a two body gravitational field with equal mass are different from 
the distribution of electric force lines of double equal charges of the like and op-
posite. 
Newton’s law of universal gravitation or Poisson’s equation presupposes as-
ymptotically flat boundaries, and Newton’s acceleration system inevitably changes 
distant boundaries. The Einstein gravitational field equation includes the Poisson 
equation, but doe s not presuppose distant asymptotic flat boundaries. Relativity 
cosmology defines the boundaries of the universe through cosmological princi-
ples, which are not necessarily asymptotically flat, but rather determined by the 
symmetry of the density of matter in the universe through cosmological princi-
ples. The key to distinguishing between inertial force and gravity is the distant 
asymptotic flat boundary, as well as the difference between gravitational field flux 
and inertial force flux. General relativity and many double metric theories do not 
provide a strict distinction between inertial forces and gravity. 
Inertial force is equivalent to the overall spacetime deformation after the accel-
eration transformation of the global spacetime coordinates. It is non local, that is, 
“the curved spacetime can theoretically have no Killing vector field” [27], in which 
the conservation of momentum and energy cannot be defined, nor can the energy 
(momentum) density of the inertia-gravity field be defined. Moreover, the contri-
bution of the gravity field to energy is global, requiring integration of the entire 
space. When we locally equate the gravitational field with the inertial force field 
as spacetime curvature, the non locality of the energy of the inertial gravitational 
field is inevitable, just like a circle on a plane and a circle of the same size on a 
sphere, despite having the same circumference, have different half diameters re-
lated to the internal tension (energy distribution). The energy momentum tensor 
of general relativity requires the exclusion of the contributions of universal gravi-
tation and inertial forces in the Newtonian sense, but must include the contribu-
tions of various pressures experienced by objects. In the force analysis of Newto-
nian systems, pressure often balances gravity and inertial forces. 
The equivalence principle includes a constraint condition that introduces the 
gravitational source as an organizational center of curved spacetime morphology 
like Aristotle’s absolute position (it is not a true absolute position, its space -time 
position corresponds one-to-one in all coordinate systems through general covar-
iant transformations, this is differential homeomorphism invariance), where the 
gravitational source that forms a curved spacetime appears to be confined to a 
certain region of the universe’s spacetime, and all test objects of different masses 
move along the geodesic in this gravitational field. However, when the apple and

===== PAGE 14 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 902 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
the moon are located at the same position above the Earth, the acceleration of the 
Earth-apple system and the acceleration of Earth -moon system relative to their 
respective centroids are different due to the different gravitational reaction forces 
acting on the Earth. It is precisely because the equivalence principle is overly ide-
alized in the handling of two body problems that we are forced to introduce con-
troversial conceptual differences such as active mass and passive mass in our cal-
culations. The princ iple of equivalence eliminates the differential gravity of the 
Ricci tensor, but cannot eliminate the differential gravity of the Weyl tensor. For 
various reasons, general relativity spacetime have both significant relative prop-
erties and inevitably concealed absoluteness. The relativity and absoluteness of 
relativistic spacetime are based on local spacetime ranges, while Mach’s principle 
criticizes Newton’s view of spacetime by using the action at a distance to discuss 
the relativity and absoluteness of the entire universe spacetime. If the argument of 
Newton-Leibniz’s spacetime views in relativity philosophy deviates from the prin-
ciple of contact action among electromagnetic field theory and relativity, it will 
cause conceptual confusion in the philosophical discussion of spacetime in rela-
tivity. 
Returning to Lorentz’s understanding of general relativity, inertial force is a 
global effect that occurs instantaneously in an acceleration frame, similar to the 
space-time structure of various images (composed of past light -cone events) that 
change instantly upon putting on glasses. Gravity acts through the medium and 
propagates at the speed of light, similar to the deformation of objects under pres-
sure. According to the mass energy relationship of special relativity, the distribu-
tion of gravitational pot ential energy is similar to that of a thin medium. Thus, 
gravity has a transmission effect on light. But in general relativity, the gravitational 
effect is locally equivalent to the spacetime deformation caused by accelerated mo-
tion. 
Einstein’s field equations are equivalent to solving equations to obtain spacetime 
metric. General covariance is a mathematical transformation of differential ho-
meomorphism, far more than coordinate transformation of reference frames (the 
transformation of initial boundary conditions restricts the gauge conditions of co-
ordinate transformation). This makes it possible for many solutions of the gravi-
tational field equation to deviate from the boundary constraints of real time and 
space, becoming a mathematical fiction. 
According to the time required for light propagation, it is easy to observe that 
when Einstein rotates a disk from rest to rotation, an observer at the center of the 
disk cannot see every position of the rotating disk entering rotation at the same 
time. Instead, positions closer to the center of the disk enter rotation earlier, and 
as the distance increases, the circles on the disk from small to large enter rotation 
in sequence. Many scholars, including Einstein, did not realize that Mach’s expla-
nation of N ewton’s bucket experiment was misleading. The reverse rotation of 
distant objects seen by observers rotating together at the center of the bucket is 
just a visual illusion. If distant objects start to rotate simultaneously at a moment,

===== PAGE 15 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 903 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
it means that distant objects at different distances should start rotating around a 
stationary bucket at different past times. The light emitted by distant objects prop-
agates along different distances and reaches the center of the bucket at the same 
time, and the light from distant objects should exhibit significantly different trans-
verse Doppler effects. 
The locality of the equivalence principle not only brings about the non locality 
of gravitational energy, but also makes it difficult to understand the concepts of 
gravitational frequency shift and Doppler frequency shift. If there were no cosmic 
background radiation, a stationary observer at a distance in asymptotic flat spacetime 
could see the Hawking radiation of the black hole’s horizon. When he falls freely 
towards the black hole without spin approaching the black hole horizon, accord-
ing to the equivalence principle, the black hole’s horizon does not show gravity, 
and therefore no radiation is observed. In other words, not only is there no Hawk-
ing radiation, but there is also no Doppler effect of Hawking radiation near the 
event horizon of a black hole. But the observer falling freely towards the black hole 
can observe the Unruh radiation effect in distant vacuum in other directions, es-
pecially in the opposite direction of free fall. 
In fact, gravity in general relativity not only includes the extension of relativity 
that combines Newton’s gravity and inertial forces through the principle of equiv-
alence, but also includes the gravitational effect caused by the energy variation of 
pressure and shear force on the work done by an object. The energy momentum 
tensor of the electromagnetic field inside matter can also have pressure and shear 
forces, thereby generating gravity [28]. According to Lorentz’s suggestion, the var-
ious energy -momentum distributions fused by Einstein using the principle of 
equivalence should be given corresponding relativistic distinctions based on their 
distinctions in Newtonian mechanics. This is a great mission that Einstein over-
looked and did not accomplish. We should not overly rely on the mathematical 
structure of general relativity and ignore Lorentz’s conceptual analysis, but we 
should also not return to Lorentz’s naive concept of a stationary ether ocean to 
replace Newton’s absolute spacetime. Lorentz’s stationary ether ocean should in-
deed be replaced by the overall inertial frame described by Minkowski spacetime, 
and the apparent inertial force generated in the acceleration frame comes from 
the overall deformation of Minkowski spacetime, just like a plane curled into a 
cylinder, cone, and helix, etc., all of which maintain a flat zero curvature. The cur-
vature of spacetime caused by real gravity is always localized near the mass source 
and decays with distance.  
Once we open the closed windows of Einstein’s defined local inertial frame, we 
find that gravity and acceleration produce different frequency shifts for the same 
radiation. In order to eliminate the apparent non local gravitational energy caused 
by the global inertial force of the acceleration system, general relativity should be 
reconstructed with new concepts, mathematical reconstruction, and physical in-
terpretation based on Lorentz’s suggestion. That is to say, there is a difference in 
the initial bounda ry conditions of the system between the spacetime transfor-

===== PAGE 16 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 904 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
mation caused by true gravity and the spacetime transformation caused by accel-
erated motion. In general relativity, there are four extra degrees of freedom in 
determining the spacetime coordinate conditions, which precisely arise from the 
arbitrary combination of inertial forces and true gravity through the principle of 
equivalence. 
Why does Einstein’s field equation have four coordinate degrees of freedom 
related to four Bianchi identities, one being the free choice of the zero point of 
gravitational potential energy, and the other three being the three spatial degrees 
of freedom of accelerated motion. Coordinate specifications correspond to the 
distribution of background inertial gravitational fields or material motion. 
In the real world, coordinate transformation is constrained by the same back-
ground inertial gravitational field for reference frame transformation. The coor-
dinate transformation of general covariance goes beyond the constraints of the 
real background space time and requires the selection of coordinate conditions 
that are compatible with the background spacetime in order to obtain the real 
solution. Although coordinate conditions and boundary conditions are not covar-
iant, the combination of coordinate conditi ons and boundary conditions for the 
same system is likely to be generalized covariant. Why are there four Bianchi iden-
tities? One answer is that the spacetime coordinates have exactly 4 degrees of free-
dom in each dimension; Another answer is that each local inertial frame appears 
to have 6 degrees of freedom in phase space, but the internal boundaries (where 
inertial forces and gravity cancel each other out) and external boundaries (used to 
determine that the local inertial frame has no rotation) are predetermined, which 
reduces 2 degrees of freedom. 
Gordon Liu successfully used the de Donder condition to express the real grav-
itational field as the general gravitational tensor potential in the deformed flat 
spacetime of the acceleration system, eliminating the arbitrary selection of the 
four spacetime coordinates in general relativity [29]. But as Fock pointed out: “In 
the case of an isolated system of masses there exists a coordinate system, namely 
the harmonic system, which is determined uniquely apart from a Lorentz trans-
formation if suitable supplementary conditions are imposed.” [30] And how to 
express the center of mass system and gravitational potential energy for two body 
and many body problems are still in the dark chaos. In Gordon Liu’s gravity the-
ory of flat spacetime, a flat spacetime absorbing with tensor gravitational potential 
becomes a curved spacetime, and a curved spacetime desorbing with tensor grav-
itational potential becomes a flat spacetime. The definitions of gravitational po-
tential energy and experimental particle kinetic energy, including the Lagrangian 
and Hamiltonian, depend on the metric of spacetime. Einstein’s theory treats both 
inertial and gravitational fields as curved spacetime, while some bi-metric gravity 
theories treat background natural geometry as inertial forces. The definition of 
gravitational potential energy should be relative to the asymptotic flat boundary 
of the field source, while inertial forces in acceleration systems cannot have as-
ymptotic flat boundaries.

===== PAGE 17 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 905 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
The development process of Newton’s theory of gravity is: Kepler’s Law  → in-
verse square law →  gravitational potential → Poisson equation. In the process of 
exploring the gravitational force of relativity, Einstein once considered using Kep-
ler’s third law T 2/R3 = k to define time and space, but this idea is difficult to coor-
dinate with the idea of defining the length and time of special relativity through 
the constant speed of light. Reversing the development process of Newtonian grav-
ity in relativity can help us rationally reconstruct general relativity. The derivation 
of the relativistic gravitational field equation starts from seeking the tensor form 
of the general covariant Poisson equation. Gordon Liu’s research provided a rela-
tivistic expression for the gravitational potential energy of a single body. This makes 
it possible for us to derive a relativistic gravity expression in the deform ation flat 
spacetime of the acceleration system like the inverse square law of universal grav-
itation in the Newton inertial system. The transformation and synthesis formulas 
of velocity, acceleration, and force in special relativity urgently require an ext en-
sion from the inertial frame of Minkowski spacetime to the acceleration frame of 
deformed flat spacetime as shown in Figure 4 . In general relativity, we use the 
principle of equivalence to fuse the global spacetime deformation caused by accel-
erated motions and the spacetime curvature caused by local gravitational fields 
into the same spacetime metric representation without distinction. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Curled deformation plane. 
 
Discussing gravity in the deformation flat spacetime of an acceleration system 
means that the definition of geodesics is different from the one in general relativ-
ity: light propagates along the shortest line of the deformation flat spacetime in an 
acceleration system, gravity acts like a medium by changing the speed of light, 
causing various transmitted light rays to deflect, and light rays in the gravitational 
field do not propagate along geodesics. In general relativity, the local equivalence 
of inertial force and gravity automatically satisfies the geodesic equation for the 
free motion of galaxies in the overall gravitational field of the universe in cosmol-
ogy. In Newton’s approximate cosmological description, the external gravity felt 
by each galaxy is precisely balanced by the inertial force caused by its own accel-
erated motion as the universe expands or contracts.

===== PAGE 18 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 906 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
Mach’s understanding of inertial mass takes into account the energy momen-
tum distribution of distant objects, thus it is the mechanism of action at a distance 
generation, which can be seen as the influence of past light cone events on the 
generation of ine rtia in general relativity. Lorentz and Poincaré’s explanation of 
electromagnetic mass provides a localized understanding of the origin of inertia. 
The electromagnetic origin of inertia is endogenous, while the Mach origin of in-
ertia is the contribution of exogenous inertia gravitational potential to inertia. 
The general covariation obtained from the principle of equivalence only has 
local significance, corresponding to local differential homeomorphism pseudo 
groups, and does not involve transformations of distant boundaries. The global 
differential homeomorphi sm group involves the transformation of spacetime 
boundaries, and the use of the equivalence principle not only means the mixing 
and exchange of local inertial forces and gravity, but also involves improper mix-
ing and transformation of distant spacetime boundaries. The local equivalence of 
inertial force and gravity involves the boundary of a closed, non rotating free fall-
ing system, but the transformation of distant boundaries is not completely deter-
mined by local metric transformations. The spacetime tran sformation in relativ-
istic cosmology is mixed with local differential homeomorphism pseudo groups 
and global differential homeomorphism true groups, so spacetime topology can 
be changed. 
There are two physical processes corresponding to general covariation: 1) The 
reference frame moves arbitrarily relative to the cosmic background radiation, 
and the background radiation changes due to the motion of the reference frame; 
2) The background gravitational fluctuations caused by the motion of binary or 
multiple stars at the distant boundaries of the universe. General covariation, as a 
differential homeomorphism transformation, has much greater mathematical 
possibilities than its corresponding physical processes. General covariation in-
volves the equivalent transformation between the inertial force (with an intrinsic 
zero curvature) associated with accelerated motion caused by pressure and uni-
versal gravitation, and the intrinsic curvature of non- zero gravity caused by geo-
desic deviation. However, the frequency shifts of background light caused by in-
ertial and gravitational forces are different, manifested in the degrees of freedom 
of the reference frame coordinates and the degrees of freedom of the background 
boundary conditions. 
René Thom believed that according to Mach’s viewpoint, “the overall structure 
of space is generated by invariant aggregation regions generated by local events.” 
([31], p. 165) According to Einstein’s viewpoint, “Spacetime itself is a fundamen-
tal substance, a neutral ether” ([31], p. 159), and “ a local tension of the neutral 
ether as the basis of various things is manifested” ([31], p. 165). In Thom’s view, 
quantum mechanics adopted both Mach and Einstein’s views on spacetime, but 
from a philosophical perspective, “Einstein’s argument is clearly superior to Mach’s 
argument” ([31], p. 160): Because Mach’s viewpoint “ emphasizes the formal and 
qualitative aspects of local events, which is not conducive to separating such local

===== PAGE 19 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 907 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
events in space”, it has the magical property of action- at-a-distance effects; Ein-
stein’s viewpoint “ put forward precise requirements for locality, and therefore 
seems to be a typical ‘scientific’ attitude” ([31], p. 165). Although major practical 
achievements in science are inseparable from the use of obvious non local effects, 
“Einstein used his general theory of relativity to localize gravity; Maxwell used his 
equations to localize electromagnetic forces”, “Catastrophe theory is a typical anti 
magic theory that pushes the principle of locality to its extreme” ([31], p. 170), 
and quantum transitions may be the catastrophe and bifurcation mechanisms of 
unknown harmonic oscillator eigenstates, although they are different from the 
seven basic mutations of point attractors. If we independently analyze the physical 
mechanisms and spacetime geometry of gravity theories such as general relativity 
and non local phenomena, and explore more localized relativistic gravity models 
and new spacetime geometric models of quantum mechanics as much as possible 
according to the principl e of action through medium in Faraday -Maxwell field 
theory, we will be closer to Einstein’s great goal. 
5.2. The Meaning of Quantum Gravity 
According to our discussion, among the three sets of force lines in general relativ-
ity, the Newtonian effect of universal gravity is equivalent to the electric force line, 
the special relativistic effect of gravity is equivalent to the magnetic field line, and 
the general relativistic effect of equivalent gravity in the acceleration system is 
equivalent to the inertial force line. Most of the flat spacetime gravity theories 
based on the bi -metric do not follow Lorentz’s approach to distinguishing be-
tween inertial forces and gravity, but simply treat universal gravity as a deviation 
from the global Minkowski spacetime metric but not a deformed flat spacetime 
metric. Therefor the inertial force of deformed spacetime still mixes into the grav-
itational field, be cause they believe that Lorentz electrodynamics, which retains 
the concept of ether, has little value, and Lorentz’s criticism of general relativity is 
a stale concept [32] . However, as proposed by scholars such as Popper [33]  and 
Lee Smolin [34], the cosmic microwave background radiation plays a role similar 
to that of the ether ocean. For a limited system, distant celestial bodies can be 
ignored, and microwave background radiation can serve as a boundary condition 
to distinguish between inertial and acceleration frames. The uniform and isotropic 
cosmic microwave background is equivalent to the approximate boundary of a 
finite absolute space. The variation of the microwave background gives the motion 
state of the observer’s reference frame. Based on the Doppler effect of the back-
ground radiation, it can be determined whether the observer is in a state of uni-
form or accelerated motion. The different changes in microwave background ra-
diation can provide an empirical criterion for distinguishing between local inertial 
frames and local acceleration frames in the Newtonian sense, which is not based 
on the definition of geodesics in general relativity. 
Atoms played a crucial role in the discovery of quantum mechanics. Quantum 
mechanics is a response to certain properties of atoms that cannot be explained

===== PAGE 20 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 908 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
by classical mechanics. The role played by black holes in the search for quantum 
gravity is very similar to that of atoms in the discovery of quantum mechanics. 
From the perspective of classical general relativity, black holes possess properties 
such as singularities, which pose challenges to classical theory and, according to 
many researchers, signify the collapse of classical general relativity. In addition, 
black holes are one of the simplest objects that may exist in the universe. The 
property of black holes raises great expectations for finding a theoretical frame-
work that can accurately describe the quantum mechanical properties of black 
holes. 
When a black hole stabilizes, it only has three independent classical degrees of 
freedom left: mass, charge, and angular momentum. This has striking similarities 
with hydrogen atoms: hydrogen atoms also have only three classical degrees of 
freedom, which are the x, y, and z coordinates of electrons rotating around pro-
tons. Of course, quantum field theory studies have shown that in addition to these 
three classical degrees of freedom, hydrogen atoms also have a large number of 
quantum mechanical degrees of freedom corresponding to virtual electron posi-
tron pairs and photons. However, despite this, the quantum mechanical proper-
ties of hydrogen atoms can still be described very accurately by considering only 
their three classical degrees of freedom in the non r elativistic Schrödinger equa-
tion. Perhaps black holes have a similar situation: the number of quantum me-
chanical degrees of freedom in black holes may be enormous, but if we only quan-
tify these three classical degrees of freedom, we may obtain a fairly acc urate de-
scription of black holes. 
Like atoms, black holes also emit so-called black hole radiation or Hawking ra-
diation. For macroscopic black holes, this is mainly composed of neutrinos and 
photons. One of the main goals of quantum black hole theory is to predict its ra-
diation spectrum. T he radiation spectrum also depends on the spectrum of the 
classical observation of the black hole: when a black hole emits a black hole radi-
ation quantum, it transitions from one eigenstate of the classical observation to 
another eigenstate [35] . The work of pioneers such as Bekenstein and Hawking 
suggests that black holes share similarities with atoms in quantum mechanics in 
certain aspects. This analogy suggests that black hole energy may have a discrete 
spectrum. Therefore, the quantization of black holes may be the key to quantum 
gravity theory and has been an important research area in theoretical physics for 
the past 50 years [36].  
The classical collapse model suggests that a self gravity system with sufficient 
mass will continue to collapse until a singularity is formed. Hawking pointed out 
that if an event horizon is formed and effective field theory is effective beyond the 
stretching horizon, black hole radiation is a mixed state for external observers, 
and free fall observers will not encounter any abnormal situations when crossing 
the horizon. This leads to the problem of information loss, violating the unitary 
nature of quantum mechanics. To maintain singularity, two possibilities have 
been proposed: Hawking radiation is in a pure state or leaves a long-term residual

===== PAGE 21 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 909 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
after evaporation. However, if quantum gravity is CPT invariant, the remnants 
are excluded, leaving only the first possibility. Susskind et al. proposed the prin-
ciple of black hole complementarity, which states that information is emitted both 
at and through the event horizon, allowing both external and internal observers 
to see the information, but a single observer cannot confirm both situation s sim-
ultaneously. 
Almheiri et al. (AMPS) pointed out that the three hypotheses of black hole com-
plementarity are contradictory. They considered a very large black hole that allows 
free fall observers to see effectively flat spacetime when crossing the event horizon. 
From the perspective of an external observer, the pure state of Hawking radiation 
implies maximum entanglement between late photons and a subset of early radi-
ation. However, when these late photons propagate back to the near horizon re-
gion under effective field theory, they mus t be maximally entangled with the 
modes within the horizon from the perspective of a free fall observer, which con-
tradicts the strong additivity of entanglement entropy. To avoid paradoxes, AMPS 
proposes that free fall observers will be burned before cross ing the field of view, 
creating a “firewal” [37]. Various arguments indicate that the unitary evolution of 
quantum mechanics equations is an overly idealized assumption that does not ap-
ply to spacetime and open thermodynamic processes near black holes. 
The main points of “The Meaning of Quantum Gravity” regarding the prospects 
of quantum gravity still have enlightening significance. The book argued that Ein-
stein’s strong equivalence principle requires the dynamic coupling of spacetime 
and matter, while traditional quantum field theory relies on a fixed spacetime 
background for perturbation expansion, and the methodological frameworks of 
the two are irreconcilable opposites. Directly quantizing general relativity will lead 
to infinite curvature divergence and black hole singularity problems. The author 
supports Einstein’s argument that the geometric essence of spacetime (defined by 
the strong equivalen ce principle) cannot be transformed into discrete quantum 
objects through traditional quantization methods, and therefore proposes that 
general relativity may be essentially a “non quantized” theory. 
The local observational definition of classical general relativity, such as geodes-
ics, needs to be replaced by algebraic relationships of quantum reference frames 
to reconcile the differences between microscopic quantum effects and macro-
scopic gravitational phenomena. The introduction of the “graviton” as a quantum 
gravitational carrier has been criticized as failing to address the core contradic-
tion—the essential conflict between space-time discretization and dynamic geom-
etry, and is only a quantized simulation of classical gravitational waves [38]. 
String theorists who advocate background dependent paths argue that the 
book’s rejection of the feasibility of quantization in general relativity is too radical. 
String theory has made progress in mathematical unity based on a fixed spatio-
temporal background framework (such as the theoretical construction of super-
symmetry and extra dimensions), while the background independent path pro-
posed in the book may overlook the potential advantages of string theory.

===== PAGE 22 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 910 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
6. Conclusions 
Our new approach to exploring quantum gravity is: 1) Introducing correlated pa-
rameters of quantum measurement instruments related to the timing of light sig-
nals, and expressing quantum mechanics as locally as possible. Zhao Zheng dis-
covered through his research on the thermodynamics of black holes that the cali-
bration time of optical signals can only satisfy the transitivity of simultaneity in a 
coordinate system where the time axis is orthogonal to the three spatial axes. This 
requires a special coordinate  requirement for defining temperature, greatly in-
creasing the difficulty of developing thermodynamics and statistical mechanics in 
general relativity, and making the combination of general relativity and quantum 
mechanics almost impossible [39] . 2) Clearly define the geodesic in an accelera-
tion system without gravity and provide the deformation flatness spacetime met-
ric for the acceleration system. We define the path that light takes in a vacuum 
that ignores the gravitational force of an object as a geodesic. Gravitational poten-
tial energy in a vacuum is equivalent to a medium with a dielectric constant and 
magnetic permeability different from that of a vacuum [40] . The bending of light 
in a gravitational field is no longer seen as a geodesic effect in curved spacetime, 
but as a refraction effect caused by changes in the distribution of energy density 
in the gravitational field. This deviates from the geodesic defined in the inertial or 
acceleration frame according to the requirement of the disappearance of the grav-
itational field. 3) Without introducing Einstein’s geodesic definition, seek a rela-
tivistic gravitational potential energy expression for multi-body gravitational sources 
in a global inertial frame, and attempt to express the quantum mechanical opera-
tor corresponding to this gravitational potential energy. 4) By using the transfor-
mation relationship between the geodesic of the inertial frame and the geodesic of 
the acceleration frame without universal gravitation, the relativistic gravitational 
potential energy expression of the multi-body gravitational source in the acceler-
ation frame is given. At present, Liu Gordon has provided a generalized tensor 
potential for the single body gravitational field, but it requires arduous exploration 
to provide the relativistic gravitational potential energy for two or even many bod-
ies. 5) Seeking the asymptotic correspondence mapping between the deformation 
flat spacetime of the acceleration system in this new gravity theory and the curved 
spacetime of general relativity, it is shown that general relativity is just a reasona-
ble approximation of the new gravity theory that ignores the gravitational reaction 
force of the experimental  object. When constructing curved spacetime based on 
the principle of equivalence in GR, we neglected the gravitational reaction of the 
experimental object on the gravitational source, which may be one of the reasons 
for the non conservation of energy in relativistic cosmology, and also a root cause 
of the forced introduction of active gravitational mass and passive gravitational 
mass when approximating the gravitational two body problem. 6) The space-time 
mapping between the new theory of gravity and gener al relativity is similar to a 
stereographic projection, and may not necessarily be a one -to-one correspond-
ence of space-time point mapping as shown in Figure 5 . The general covariance

===== PAGE 23 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 911 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
of general relativity is not a transformation between the new theory of gravity and 
general relativity, because the spacetime transformation of the new theory of grav-
ity is a metric transformation between the Minkowski spacetime of the inertial 
frame and the deformed flat spacetime of the acceleration frame, but not a space 
time transformation between any two reference frames located in the same gravi-
tational source as in GR. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Stereographic projection. 
 
At present, this is a theoretical framework based on conceptual analysis, and a 
mathematical model has not yet been established. The description of curved 
spacetime in general relativity is incomplete in terms of ignoring the gravitational 
reactions of experimental objects, as it does not fully incorporate the reasonable 
connotations of Newton’s theory of gravity. In terms of its deviation from the de-
scription of Faraday force lines in electromagnetic fields, GR is also incomplete in 
implementing the electromagnetic program of physics. Lorenz’s criticism of gen-
eral relativity, like Einstein’s criticism of quantum mechanics, although contro-
versial, guides the future path of physics because their physical intuitions are par-
tially correct. However, due to devia ting from mainstream trends and the lack of 
rigorous mathematical expressions in the conceptual analysis used, it is difficult 
for observations and experiments to support their criticism. Einstein criticized 
quantum mechanics by mistakenly adhering to dete rministic descriptions, but it 
is precisely because of quantum randomness that the possibility of microscopic 
non local effects being used to transmit information faster than light is ruled out. 
Lorentz mistakenly insisted on defining absolute space using the concept of sta-
tionary ether as the standard for distinguishing between the global inertial frame 
and the global acceleration frame, without realizing that his introduction of the 
concept of local time made the distinction between inertial and accelerat ion 
frames in relativity localized and dynamic. Einstein’s special definition of light

===== PAGE 24 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 912 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
propagating along geodesics in a vacuum of any reference frame allowed general 
relativity to simply describe the free motion of celestial bodies in a gravitational 
field as geodesic motion in cosmology. However, it also made it particularly diffi-
cult to use general relativity to deal with two body and many body gravity prob-
lems, as the initial boundary conditions of many body gravity problems do not 
have the boundary of exact symmetry given by cosmological principles.  
Conflicts of Interest 
The author declares no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this paper. 
References 
[1] Einstein, A., Podolsky, B. and Rosen, N. (1935) Can Quantum -Mechanical Descrip-
tion of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete? Physical Review, 47, 777-780.  
https://doi.org/10.1103/physrev.47.777 
[2] Jammer, M. (2014) Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. Business Press. 
[3] Zhang, Y.D. (2012) Roots of Quantum Wisdom. Tsinghua University Press. 
[4] Penrose, R. (1994) Emperor’s New Brain. Hunan Science and Technology Publishing 
House. 
[5] Penrose, R. and Ishanm, C.J. (1986) Quantum Concepts in Space and Time . Oxford 
University Press, 293-301. 
[6] Fritzsch, H. (2008) Sir Irren, Einstein! Piper Verlag. 
[7] Scully, M.O., Aharonov, Y. and Englert, B. (1999) On the Locality and Reality of Ein-
stein-Podolsky-Rosen Correlations. Mysteries, Puzzles, and Paradoxes in Quantum 
Mechanics, 461, 47-68. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.57850 
[8] Gell-Mann, M. (1997) Quark and Puma. Hunan Science and Technology Press. 
[9] Jin, G.T. (2005) My Philosophy Study. New Star Publisher.  
[10] Hess, K. (2015) Einstein Was Right! Pan Stanford Publishing. 
[11] Hess, K. (2018) Bell’s Theorem and Instantaneous Influences at a Distance.  Journal 
of Modern Physics, 9, 1573-1590. https://doi.org/10.4236/jmp.2018.98099  
[12] De Raedt, H., Michielsen, K. and Hess, K. (2017) The Photon Identification Loophole 
in EPRB Experiments: Computer Models with Single-Wing Selection. Open Physics, 
15, 713-733. https://doi.org/10.1515/phys-2017-0085  
[13] Thorne, K.S. (2000) Black Hole and Time Curve. Hunan Science and Technology 
Publishing House. 
[14] Albert, E. (1916) Approximate Integration of the Field Equation of Gravitation.  In: 
Sitzungsberichte der Preussische Akadamie der Wissenchaften, Nabu Press, 688-696.  
[15] Heisenberg, W. and Pauli, W.  (2019) Zur Quantemdynamik der Wellenfelder. 
Zeitschrift für Physik, 56, 1-61. 
[16] Shao, L., Shao, D. and Shao, C.G. (2011) Quantum Theory of Space and Time. Science 
Press. 
[17] Smolin, L. (2007) The Trouble with Physics. Houghton Mifflin Company.  
[18] Gisin, N. (2016) L’Impensable Hasard. Shanghai Science and Technology Press. 
[19] Li, H. and Ma, B. (2023) Speed Variations of Cosmic Photons and Neutrinos from 
Loop Quantum Gravity. Physics Letters B, 836, Article 137613.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2022.137613

===== PAGE 25 =====
X. Z. Wu 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/jhepgc.2025.113057 913 Journal of High Energy Physics, Gravitation and Cosmology 
 
[20] Hawking, S.W. and Penrose, R. (1996) The Nature of Space and Time. Scientific 
American, 275, 60-65. https://doi.org/10.1038/scientificamerican0796-60  
[21] Donadi, S., Piscicchia, K., Curceanu, C., Diósi, L., Laubenstein, M. and Bassi, A. 
(2020) Underground Test of Gravity-Related Wave Function Collapse. Nature Phys-
ics, 17, 74-78. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-020-1008-4  
[22] Frolov, V.P. and Vilkovisky, G.A. (1979) Quantization of Fields and Gravitational 
Condensates. Proceeding of 2nd Marcel Grossmann Meeting, Trieste, 5-11 July 1979, 
5-11. 
[23] Mukhanov, V.F. and Winitzki, S. (2010) Introduction to Quantum Effects in Gravity. 
Cambridge University Press & Beijing World Publishing Corporation. 
[24] Zeng, J.Y. (2000) Quantum Mechanics: Volume II. 3rd Edition, Science Press. 
[25] Tian, Y.C. (2025) Twistor, Cohomology, Foundation of Physics . International Jour-
nal of Modern Physics A, 2025, Article 2530002. 
[26] Brillouin, L. (1970) Relativity Reexamined. Academic Press. 
[27] Liang, C.B. (2001) Introduction to Differential Geometry and General Relativity 
(Volume 2). Beijing Normal University Press, 383-385. 
[28] Shen, X.Y. (2022) Decoding Gravity. Chemical Industry Press, 279-283. 
[29] Liu, G. (2013) Riemannian Space- Time, De Donder Conditions and Gravitational 
Field in Flat Space-Time. International Journal of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 3, 8-
19. https://doi.org/10.4236/ijaa.2013.31002 
[30] Fock, V. (1959) The Theory of Space-Time and Gravitation. Pergamon Press, 350. 
[31] Thom, R. (1989) Mathematical Models of Morphogenesis. Shanghai Translation Pub-
lishing House. 
[32] Rosen, N. (1973) A Bi-Metric Theory of Gravitation. General Relativity and Gravita-
tion, 4, 435-447. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01215403 
[33] Popper, K. (1982) Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics, Introductory Com-
ments. Unwin Hyman, 24-26. 
[34] Smolin, L. (2013) Time Reborn. Spin Networks Ltd. 
[35] Mäkelä, J. (2002) Black Holes as Atoms. Foundations of Physics, 32, 1809-1849.  
https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1022362515809  
[36] Corda, C. (2023) Schrödinger and Klein -Gordon Theories of Black Holes from the 
Quantization of the Oppenheimer and Snyder Gravitational Collapse. Communica-
tions in Theoretical Physics, 75, Article 095405.  
https://doi.org/10.1088/1572-9494/ace4b2  
[37] Vaz, C. (2014) Blackholes as Gravitational Atom . International Journal of Modern 
Physics D: Gravitation, Astrophysics and Cosmology, 23, Article 1441002. 
[38] von Borzeszkowski, H.H. and Treder, H. (1988) The Meaning of Quantum Gravity . 
D. Reidel. 
[39] Zhao, Z. (1991) The Transitivity of Thermal Equilibrium Is Equivalent to the Tran-
sitivity of Clock Speed Synchronization. Science in China (Series A), 3, 285-289. 
[40] Jia, S.Q. (2018) Electromagnetic Waves in Curved Spacetime. Northeastern Univer-
sity Press, 186-189.
