===== PAGE 1 =====
New studies suggest unique state of matter
gives rise to living organisms
Organisms are processes, not things
21st September 2026
 cite
Addy Pross | Emeritus Professor of Chemistry at Ben Gurion University of the Negev. 1,437 words
Read time: approx. 7 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
How can inert, passive matter give rise to life, with all its agency and purpose?
Chemist Addy Pross has spent 25 years on this mystery, culminating in a landmark
book, Life’s Chemical Secret: The Origin of Purpose and Mind. Now, he says, fresh
evidence backs up his theory of how matter comes to life. We know matter can be
stable when collected into an object which settles into a low-energy, resting state, like
a rock at the bottom of a hill. But matter can also have a different sort of stability, as
part of a process which persists through constant exchanges of material with its
surroundings, like a flowing river. Life, Pross thinks, emerges from such states of
constant interaction. Indeed, he argues here, new experiments suggest that as these
interactions grow more complex, matter behaves in ways that look increasingly
purposeful.
 
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
Mars could hold
the secrets to the
origins of life
From Darwin to
Derrida: evolution
as interpretation
Organisms are
musicians not
machines
Artificial birth will
change what it
means to be
human
Related Videos:
The goodness
paradox
For four centuries, science has been based on the fundamental assumption that
nature is, at its core, indifferent. Rocks, rivers, stars—they are all without desires and
intentions. From atoms and molecules up, matter is nothing more than physical
systems obeying physical laws. As French biologist Jacques Monod famously put it in
his classic 1970 work Chance and Necessity: nature is objective. That idea
encapsulated the essence of the modern scientific revolution, as forged by the
landmark thinking of Galileo, Descartes, Newton and others. And thanks to Darwin’s
theory of evolution, biology seemed to also fit into that physicalist framework, at least
at first.
Yet, with regard to life, one difficulty has refused to go away. Living things express
characteristics that are inconsistent with that physical/mechanistic view: purpose,
desire, intentionality, subjectivity are all undeniable aspects of reality. But how can
such characteristics fit in with that mechanistic view? The riddle of how subjective
systems were able to emerge from an objective universe remained troublingly
unresolved.
But, as I will now describe, an answer may be within reach, and it lies in the recent
discovery that a certain category of matter can be actively creative in ways that the
classical picture overlooked.
 
The overlooked state of matter
We are all familiar with the three classical states of matter—solid, liquid, gas—with
their distinctly different physical properties. A crystal of ice, a drop of water, and a puff
of steam are all composed of the same H2O molecules, but their different
arrangements give rise to those different properties.
But what has not been appreciated till recently is that there exists a fundamentally
different material arrangement of matter, one defined not by equilibrium structures, but
by non-equilibrium dynamic processes, one that was only identified relatively recently.
It is within that dynamic domain that matter’s subjective and creative potential can be
unearthed.
SUGGESTED VIEWING
The origin of life
With Güneş Taylor, Addy Pross, Kate Adamala, Chrisantha
Fernando

Want to continue

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Dawkins re-
examined
Sex, science, and
stereotypes
Organisms are
processes, not
things, with
Wahida Khandker
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
