===== PAGE 1 =====
Lecture #14: Background 
 
 Lecture 14 deals with acoustical measurement techniques.  As with all technology, things 
change quickly – some technologies endure and get expanded on (e.g., telephones, TV) and some 
get superseded and fade away (e.g. horse transportation, printed newspapers and books).  In this 
lecture, we will look at both some older and newer (workable) acoustic technologies, and see 
visibly how things change. 
 
 The first topic is “Ocean Acoustic Tomography,” following a chapter in Medwin (Editor) 
written by Bob Spindel.  This is a very clear and simple paper, and also has good basic technical 
detail.  Note in particular Eq. (18.17) and the development leading up to it – this is a very clear 
example of doing the ocean inverse problem with acoustics!  By and large, tomography finds its 
best usage in ocean thermometry these days – global warming is an ever more serious issue, and 
tom
ography has some good advantages for temperature measurement.   
 
 A very successful ocean technology is “float technology” in which a neutrally buoyant 
drifter is dragged along with the ocean currents.  If one can track where the drifters are over time, 
one then can map the currents that produced the drift.  This has been accomplished by having 
three or more large, lower frequency acoustic sources transmit to small drifting floats with 
(cheap enough) acoustic receivers in them.  By measuring travel times of pulses from three or 
more sources, the floats can be triangulated.  This is called RAFOS float system, and is described 
in basics in a small Wikipedia article (why not?).  In a newer development, a global system of 
profiling floats (which bob up and down doing T, S, etc. profiling, rather than staying at a 
constant pressure surface) called ARGOS has been implemented, and there are many thousand of 
these floats deployed worldwide.  Also, since there is now global GPS, the “acoustic position 
fix” for these profilers becomes less critical – the floats can get a GPS fix each time they surface.  
J
ust as GPS superseded coastal (radar based) LORAN-C fixes for navigation, it is displacing 
acoustics for fixes for floats and gliders if they can access the surface (winter in the Arctic, 
anyone? But summer might be ice free soon, alas.) 
 
 An interesting historical variant on the RAFOS float, used to track vertical current 
prof
iles (not horizontal) was the PEGASUS instrument, in which one dropped a free falling 
hydrophone package into the water, and then did a fix on it using a (three or more instrument) 
bottom acoustic transponder web.  This is a cute concept, it worked – and now has been 
completely superseded by the Doppler Current Profiler technology!  But please browse the 
article – it is a very interesting look at acoustic tracking, for one thing! 
 
 
The next three instruments to be discussed are all based on acoustic backscatter – and all 
do very different things! 
  
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
The inverted echo sounder (IES) is simply a bottom mounted pinger that looks at the 
travel time of pulse reflections from the ocean surface (which you can assume flat, to start).  If 
the ocean is a 2-layer fluid (warm over cold) in which the top layer moves up and down (thickens 
and thins), then the travel time of the pulse changes with the movement.  This type of ocean layer 
movement is called “First mode” movement, and the IES tracks it nicely!  The article by Watts 
and Rossby is a classic PO article (at research level in JPO), but is easy enough to read.  I would 
note that the IES technology is still very useful today – it just added a pressure sensor and is 
called PIES.  It is cheap, easy, and efficient. 
 
 The next technology, the acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP), is an insanely 
successful one.  It simple uses the Doppler shift one gets in backscattered returns from “neutrally 
drifting” particulates carried by ocean currents to measure those currents.  There are four 
“JANUS faced” transducers looking out in different directions in a typical ADCP, and the 
difference between the dopplers in the different directions gives u, v, and w – the ocean current 
components.  The devil is in the details, but for the basics of these instruments, the manuals on 
the vendor websites (a typical one is shown for the course) are plenty good.  ADCP’s are being 
routinely attached to every mooring, AUV, and other platform in the ocean, as they provide 
beautiful vertical (or even horizontal) current profiles. 
 
 The final contestant in the backscatter device beauty contest is the simple backscatter 
imaging sonar.  A nice article in Medwin (Editor) written by Dave Palmer about hydrothermal 
vent imaging is assigned as a reading in the course, as it is a “typical” usage.  However, sidescan 
and multi-beam sonars for imaging the bottom, multi-frequency backscatter sonars for 
zooplankton quantification, and higher frequency imaging sonars for fish schools are just a few 
more examples of the many, many uses of backscatter sonars to measure the ocean, its biology, 
and the seabed.  Numerous books exist on backscatter sonars, sonar imaging and its applications. 
 
 To conclude, we’ve just looked at a “taster’s sample” of acoustical oceanography 
devices.  As mentioned before, a good scientist/engineer will be aware of all of these, as well as 
their non-acoustic competitors!! 
  
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
2.682 Acoustical Oceanography
Spring 2012
 
 
 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
