===== PAGE 1 =====
Schrödinger’s blunder created the quantum
measurement problem
Quantum reality has both waves and particles
16th September 2026
 cite
Antony Valentini | Academic Visitor at Imperial College London, and author of Beyond the Quantum: A
Quest for the Origin and Hidden Meaning of Quantum Mechanics (Oxford University Press, 2025).
2,732 words
Read time: approx. 14 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
Quantum mechanics is seen as challenging the idea that science provides objective
descriptions of reality outside of our minds. The “measurement problem” seems to
suggest that the act of observation creates the outcome that is observed. But physicist
Antony Valentini, whose Beyond the Quantum was hailed by Lee Smolin as “the
best book written this century” on quantum mechanics, argues that this picture rests
on an enormous blunder by Erwin Schrödinger. After Louis de Broglie predicted the
wave-like trajectories of particles, Schrödinger found the equation describing this. But
whereas de Broglie envisaged particles riding on waves, Schrödinger kept the waves
and threw away the particles. That single decision birthed the measurement problem
—and it was completely unnecessary. Resurrect de Broglie’s original particle-based
theory, Valentini argues, and we can dispel quantum mystery.
 
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
The musical
structure behind
quantum physics
Chemistry is not
explained by
quantum
mechanics
The quantum
world reveals
reality is made of
relations, not
objects
The universe is
fine-tuned for
technology, not
just life
Related Videos:
Time's great
mystery
 
Reality and the quantum
Across the sciences, realism reigns. Astrophysicists observe galaxies that are billions
of years old; geologists study the Earth’s deep history; evolutionary biologists
sequence ancient DNA from fossils. It is understood that galaxies and the Earth
formed long before the rise of humans, and that now-extinct species lived and died
millions of years ago. Only in the peculiar context of quantum physics do we find
claims that physical reality somehow depends on the presence of human observers,
even though humans did not evolve until long after the formation of galaxies, stars,
and planets, and arrived quite late on the scene of life on Earth. Are such claims
grounded in special evidence? Is there perhaps some remarkable laboratory
phenomenon that demonstrates the power of human observers to “create reality”?
According to many physics textbooks, as well as popular accounts, the iconic two-slit
experiment (Figure 1) demonstrates that there is no objective reality of moving
particles. It is often argued that the appearance of a localised particle at the backstop
is a random event triggered by the conscious intervention of “the observer” (causing
the wave-like state to “collapse” to a particle-like state). God plays dice. Particles do
not exist until they are measured. And similarly for cats, the Moon, and the wider
universe.
 
Figure 1. The two-slit experiment.
 
Such claims are belied by “pilot-wave theory,” first developed by French physicist
Louis de Broglie in the 1920s, then revived by American physicist David Bohm in the
1950s. This is a theory of particles in motion, guided by waves, as illustrated in Figure
2. As a crude analogy, think of a floating bottle carried along by an ocean wave. The
wave hits the barrier and passes through the slits, so two waves emerge on the far
side. A single particle carried by the wave moves from source to backstop, along a
definite path or trajectory, and through one hole only. Over many repetitions, the
particle trajectories bunch into the supposedly inexplicable “interference pattern”
predicted by quantum mechanics (Figure 3)—provided the positions of the incoming
particles are distributed in a way that matches the incoming wave (technically, its
squared-magnitude, the famous “Born probability rule”). In similar fashion, the theory
gives the same predictions as quantum mechanics for other experiments too. Even
so, the theory has been mostly swept under the rug by physicists and historians.

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Our future
theories of the
universe
Physics has
misunderstood
time
The trouble with
string theory
 
Figure 2. Pilot-wave theory for one particle.
 
Figure 3. Pilot-wave theory for many particles (with the Born rule).
 
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in

===== PAGE 4 =====
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
