===== PAGE 1 =====
Context
String	theory
Physics
Gravity
Quantum	field	theory
string theory FAQ
This page is to provide a non-technical or maybe semi-technical
discussion of the nature and role of the theory of fundamental physics
known as string	theory. For more technical details and further pointers
see at string	theory.
Contents
1. FAQ
What is string theory?
Then why not consider perturbative 𝑝-brane scattering for any 𝑝?
What are the equations of string theory?
Why is string theory controversial?
Does string theory make predictions? How?
Aside: How do physical theories generally make predictions, anyway?
Is string theory testable?
Is string theory causal, given that it is not local on the string scale?
Does string theory predict supersymmetry?
What is a string vacuum?
How/why does string theory depend on “backgrounds”?
Did string theory provide any insight relevant in experimental particle physics?
Does string theory tell us anything about cosmology, such as the Big bang or cosmic
inflation?
What is the relationship between string theory and quantum field theory?
Isn’t it fatal that the string perturbation series does not converge?
How do strings model massive particles?
How is string theory related to the theory of gravity?
Do the extra dimensions lead to instability of 4 dimensional spacetime?
What does it mean to say that string theory has a “landscape of solutions”?
Is string theory mathematically rigorous?
nLab Home Page All Pages Latest Revisions Discuss this page Search
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 1/27

===== PAGE 2 =====
What does it mean to say that string theory depends on ‘miracles’, such as anomaly
cancellation and avoidance of divergences?
How does string theory involve homotopy theory, higher geometry and higher
category theory?
2. References
1. FAQ
What	is	string	theory?
What is called perturbative	string	theory is a variant of perturbation	theory in quantum	field	theory
(QFT). It is a definition of an “S-matrix” of all scattering amplitudes of quantum objects which is
similar to the Feynman perturbation series obtained in perturbative quantum field theory, but
crucially different.
One way that the S-matrix in quantum field theory is defined in perturbative field theory is – in
worldline	 formalism – as a formal power series summing over labelled graphs (called Feynman
diagrams) of the correlators/n-point functions of a 1-dimensional QFT defined on these graphs (the
worldline	theory of the particles/virtual particles whose scattering amplitude are to be computed).
As a (natural) variant of this, the string	 perturbation	 series is defined to be a similar series, but
instead of over 1-dimensional graphs now over 2-dimensional surfaces (“worldsheets”) and instead
of summing correlators of a 1d QFT, summing correlators of a 2-dimensional QFT, specifically a 2d
CFT.
The premise of perturbative	 string	 theory as a theory about the observable world is that
fundamental scattering processes such as observed in particle accelerator experiments and which
are to good approximation described by the Feynman perturbation series (the S-matrix) of the
standard model of particle physics are more accurately described by such a string perturbation
series.
More conceptually, the premise is that
1. the standard model of particle physics and gravity is just an effective field theory (this is
generally expected, independently of string theory)
2. that a string perturbation series can provide its UV-completion – the string scattering
amplitudes/S-matrix are finite at each loop, hence are already renormalizations of the
underlying effective field theory amplitudes (the higher massive string oscillations serve as
natural counterterms to the massless interactions of the effective low energy theory).
While the string perturbation series is a well-defined expression analogous to the Feynman
perturbation series, by itself, it lacks a conceptual property of the latter: the Feynman perturbation
series is known, in principle, to be the approximation to something, namely to the corresponding
complete hence non-perturbative quantum field theory. The idea is that the string perturbation
series is similarly the approximation to something, to something which would then be called non-
perturbative	string	theory, but that something has not been identified.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 2/27

===== PAGE 3 =====
This situation is analogous to the following simple setup: the theory of smooth functions on the real
line can be approximated by the theory of Taylor series. Now the notion of the Taylor series has
some variants, say to the theory of species. But then the question arises: what is to species as
smooth functions were to Taylor series?
There are a host of educated guesses of what non-perturbative string theory might be if anything,
but it remains unknown. At some point, the term M-theory had been established for whatever that
non-perturbative theory is, but even though it already has a name, it still remains unknown. (Or
rather: its full incarnation remains unknown. What is well defined is 11-dimensional supergravity
with some M-brane effects and gauge enhancement included, and that is what is presently being
studied under the name “M-theory”, see for instance at M-theory	on	G₂-manifolds; and see also at F-
theory.)
Therefore if the qualification “perturbative”/“non-perturbative” is suppressed, then the term “string
theory” is quite ambiguous and has frequently led to misunderstanding. Perturbative string theory
is a well-defined and formally suggestive variant of established perturbation theory in QFT. Non-
perturbative string theory on the other hand is a hypothetical refinement of this perturbative theory
of which there are maybe some hints, but which by and large remains mysterious, if it exists at all.
Then	why	not	consider	perturbative	𝑝-brane	scattering	for	any	𝑝?
The above motivation of perturbative string theory as the evident result of replacing the definition
of an S-matrix perturbation theory, via 1-dimensional Feynman diagrams encoding worldlines of
particles, by 2-dimensional diagrams (Riemann surfaces) encoding worldsheets of strings raises the
evident question: why stop at strings? Why not consider an S-matrix built as the sum of the
correlators of a worldvolume field theory for each 𝑝 + 1-dimensional manifold, encoding the
propagation of a membrane for 𝑝 = 2, and generally of (what is called) a p-brane?
To answer this, it is again crucial to distinguish between the perturbation theory and the non-
perturbative theory. On the one hand, the study of the string perturbation theory shows that indeed
strings interact with and give rise to 𝑝-branes for many different values of 𝑝. But the dynamics of all
these higher dimensional branes itself seem to be intrinsically non-perturbative. What does not
seem to exist is a sensible perturbation series for 𝑝-brane scattering with 𝑝 > 1.
The reason is that it is hard and seems impossible to make sense of this. There are two technical
problems:
1. for 𝑝 > 1 then the standard worldvolume action functionals (Nambu-Goto action), are not
renormalizable;
2. for 𝑝 > 1 the moduli spaces of p+1-manifolds are not controllable.
So for 𝑝 > 1 one a) does not know how to define the “Feynman amplitudes” and b) even if one did,
one does not know how against what to integrate them.
Each of these two problems in itself makes a 𝑝-brane perturbation theory for 𝑝 > 1 be hard to come
by.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 3/27

===== PAGE 4 =====
That is, incidentally, the very reason for the term “M-theory”. First, there had been the observation
that the super 1-brane in 10d target spacetimes is accompanied by a 2-brane in 11d target
spacetime, now called the M2-brane (for the history see Mike Duff, The	World	in	Eleven	Dimensions).
This suggested the evident idea that there ought to be perturbation theory for 2-branes – called
membranes, hence that there ought to be “membrane theory” in direct analogy with “string theory”.
But the above two problems make a direct such analogy unlikely. Nevertheless, since there might be
a less obvious, more sophisticated kind of analogy, Edward Witten proposed to say “M-theory” as an
abbreviation, not to commit himself to what exactly might be really going on, and leaving open for
the future if “M” is for “membrane” or for something else:
As it has been proposed that the eleven-dimensional theory is a supermembrane theory
but there are some reasons to doubt that interpretation, we will non-committally call it the
M-theory, leaving to the future the relation of M to membranes. (Hořava-Witten 95)
M stands for magic, mystery, or membrane, according to taste (Witten 95)
What	are	the	equations	of	string	theory?
All local field theories in physics are prominently embodied by key equations, their equations	 of
motion. For instance classical gravity (general relativity) is essentially the theory of Einstein's
equations, quantum mechanics is governed by the Schrödinger equation, and so forth.
But perturbative string theory is not a local field theory. Instead it is an S-matrix theory (see What	is
string	 theory?). Therefore instead of being given by an equation that picks out the physical
trajectories, it is given by a formula for how to compute scattering amplitudes. That formula is the
string perturbation series: it says that the probability amplitude for 𝑛in asymptotic states of strings
coming in (into a particle collider experiment, say), scattering, and 𝑛out other asymptotic string
states emerging (and hitting a detector, say) is a sum over all Riemann surfaces with (𝑛in, 𝑛out)-
punctures of the n-point functions of the given 2d CFT that defines the string vacuum (see at What	is
a	string	vacuum?).
More in detail, a string background is equivalently a choice of 2d SCFT of central charge 15 (a “2-
spectral triple”), and in terms of this the formula for the S-matrix element/scattering amplitude for a
bunch of asymptotic string states 𝜓in
1 , ⋯, 𝜓in
𝑛in coming in, and a bunch of states 𝜓out
1 , ⋯, 𝜓out
𝑛out coming
out is schematically of the form
𝑆𝜓in
1 , ⋯, 𝜓in
𝑛in, 𝜓out
1 , ⋯, 𝜓out
𝑛out = ∑
𝑔 ∈ ℕ
𝜆𝑔 ∫
modulispaceof
(𝑛in, 𝑛out)punctured
superRiemannsurfaces
𝛴𝑔
𝑛in, 𝑛out
ofgenus𝑔
( SCFTCorrelatorover𝛴ofstates𝜓in
1 , ⋯, 𝜓in
𝑛in, 𝜓out
1 , ⋯, 𝜓out
𝑛out )
expressing the S-matrix element (scattering amplitude) shown on the left as a formal power series
in the string coupling constant with coefficients the integrals over moduli space of super Riemann
surfaces of the worldsheet correlators (𝑛-point functions) for the given incoming and outgoing
string states.
With more technical details filled in, this formula reads as follows: for the bosonic string, as found in
Polchinski 01, volume 1, equation (5.3.9)
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 4/27

===== PAGE 5 =====
and for the superstring, as found in Polchinski 01, volume 2, equation (12.5.24)
This is the equation that defines perturbative string theory.
And this is of just the same form (cf. at worldline	formalism) as the Feynman perturbation series of
perturbative quantum field theory, the only difference being that the latter is more	 complicated:
there one has to sum over Feynman diagrams with labeling for all intermediate particles (virtual
particles) and with some choice of renormalization to make the integrals well defined, whereas here
we simply sum over all super Riemann surfaces and that’s it. The different intermediate virtual
particles as well as the renormalization counterterms are all taken care of by the higher string
modes, encoded in the worldsheet CFT correlators.
There was a time in the 1960s, when quantum field theorists around Geoffrey Chew proposed that
precisely such formulas for S-matrix elements should be exactly what defines a quantum field
theory, this and nothing else. The idea was to do away with an explicit concept of spacetime and
local interactions, and instead declare that all there is to be said about physics is what is seen by
particles that probe the physics by scattering through it. This is an intrinsically quantum approach,
where there need not be any classical action functional defined in terms of spacetime geometry.
Instead, all there is a formula for the outcome of scattering experiments.
Historically, this radical perspective fell out of fashion for a while with the success of QCD and the
quark model in its formulation as as local field theory coming from an action functional: Yang-Mills
theory.
But fashions come and go, and the original idea of Geoffrey Chew and the S-matrix approach
continues to make sense in itself, and it is this form of a physical theory that perturbative string
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 5/27

===== PAGE 6 =====
theory is an example of.
More recently, the S-matrix perspective becomes fashionable also in Yang-Mills theory, with people
noticing that super Yang-Mills theory and Tr(ϕ³) enjoy good structures in its scattering amplitudes
which are essentially invisible in the vast summation of Feynman diagrams that extract the S-matrix
from the action functional. Instead there are entirely different mathematical structures that encode
at least some sub-class of scattering amplitudes (see at amplituhedron and associahedron). This has
lead to increasingly close ties between the S-matrix program and the mathematical fields of
geometry and combinatorics, allowing for the development of various other structures in quantum
field theory that encode, for instance, the Wheeler-wavefunction of the universe (see at
cosmohedron) and the UV/IR divergence of Feynman integrals (see at Feynman	polytope).
On the other hand, there is also an analog of the second quantized field-theory-with-equations for
string scattering: this is called string field theory, and this again is given by equations of motion. For
instance the equations of motion of closed string field theory are of the form
𝑄𝜓 + 1
2𝜓 ⋆ 𝜓 + 1
6𝜓 ⋆ 𝜓 ⋆ 𝜓 + ⋯ = 0,
where 𝛹 is the string field, 𝑄 is the BRST operator and ⋆  is the string field star product.
(For the bosonic string this is due to Zwiebach 92, equation (4.46), for the superstring this is in Sen
15 equation (2.22)).
The string field 𝛹 has infinitely many components, one for each excitation mode of the string. Its
lowest excitations are the modes that correspond to massless fundamental particles, such as the
graviton. Expanding the equations of motion of string field theory in mode expansions (“level
expansion”) does reproduce the equations of motions of these fields as a perturbation series around
a background solution and together with higher curvature corrections.
Why	is	string	theory	controversial?
As a theory of the observable universe that is supposed to checked by experiment and which
predicts that all fundamental particles of the standard model of particle physics are secretly, if one
probes at high enough energy, excitations of superstrings, string theory is an unproven hypothesis.
Current particle accelerator technology (notably the LHC) are about 15 orders of magnitude (hence
far, far) away from the energy scale at which these strings would manifest themselves directly (at
least for many models in string phenomenology).
However, in	principle and possibly there are indirect effects of string theory that would be probe-able
with current experiment. Notably one standard scenario is that string theory is realized in a Kaluza-
Klein compactification model and if so, then the properties of the fiber space (traditionally but not
necessarily taken to be a Calabi-Yau manifold) on which the KK-reduction takes place determines the
species and masses and interactions of the fundamental particles that we do see in experiments.
Since the standard model of particle physics is pretty baroque in its field content, the hope here
would be that a choice of fiber space could explain for instance that there are three generations of
particles, if not even explain their couplings and masses.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 6/27

===== PAGE 7 =====
For decades there has been the more or less implicit idea that the number of choices of the fiber
spaces is small. That would mean – or would have meant – that string theory can make predictions
not just as quantum field theory does, namely about particle scattering given the nature of the
particles, but even about that nature itself, hence that it could, in the extreme case, for instance
predict	the	mass of the elementary particles.
Notice that if so, this would be quite remarkable. For all we know, the interaction terms and masses
of the fundamental particles could be just as coincidental as the number of planets in our solar
system, and their distance from the sun (both of which were once speculated to follow from first
principles of mathematics, which of course they do not).
While there was never any real indication that such a prediction would be possible, later the idea
became widespread that it seems indeed rather unlikely. If so, then we are back to the first point,
namely 15 orders of magnitude and hence impractically far away from testing string theory directly.
Then there are two possible standpoints, and they account for the controversy:
1. If you want to learn right now about the fine detail of the standard model of particle physics
and just that, for instance if you are a genuine particle physicist, then string theory may give
you exactly no useful information whatsoever and all time spent on it is plain wasted. The
frustration over the fact that there has been the claim that string theory may directly help with
GUT building and other standard model physics and that none of this turns to work out is
responsible for much of the criticism. And, by all accounts, rightly so.
2. If however you feel more generally theoretically inclined, say because you are a theoretical
physicist wondering about the possibilities of quantum field theory in general, or if you are
even a mathematician, happy to handle theories that are not supposed have direct relation to
experiment, then the situation may be very different.
String theory might be right as an assumption about the fundamental nature of the observable
universe, and might at the same time still be entirely useless for experimentally based particle
physics in the present age. In that case, if you are interested in experimental particle physics you
should not expect much help in your lifetime. But if you are a theoretical physicist or a
mathematician interested in broader conceptual questions, then it may be unwise to ignore the
theory.
Does	string	theory	make	predictions?	How?
String theory makes predictions much as quantum field theory does, too: the theory predicts
observables once a model in the theory has been chosen.
Most every theory and model in physics has parameters and makes predictions only after
sufficiently many parameters have been fixed (i.e., specified) by measuring them in experiment.
For instance Newton‘s theory of gravity says that the gravitational force of a pointlike mass is
proportional to the inverse square of the distance from that mass. This is the theory, the
proportionality factor (now called Newton's constant) is the free parameter that has to be fixed by
experiment.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 7/27

===== PAGE 8 =====
In string theory as in any other theory of physics, it is the same general principle, only that the
theory is much richer. There are lots of models in string theory that make very detailed statements
about the resulting physics. Moreover, many of these have good general agreement with presently
observed data. One speaks of “semi-realistic models”, see at string	phenomenology the discussion at
Semi-realistic	models	in	string	theory. (The division line between “semi-realistic” and “realistic” here
runs through very technical territory involving the fine details of string mathematics and standard
model physics, and hence becomes a bit subtle. This is the reason why one sees some authors
worrying about not finding a single “realistic” model while others are worried about already having
found too many of them to feel comfortable with…)
The remaining problem is the following, and this is not specific to string theory but faced by any
theory that provides a UV-completion of the standard model plus gravity (quantum gravity): the
problem is that after parameters have been fixed this way by finding a model that reproduces the
standard model reasonably accurately, all the remaining properties of the model, hence the
predictions of the model, tend to be at high energies (“Planck scale”) and hence not within reach of
present experiments such as the LHC.
This is a very general aspect of present particle physics: while theoretically it is fairly clear that the
standard model plus gravity must have a UV-completion by something, at presently available
experimental energies that standard model works rather perfectly. While this is a general fact of
particle physics and model building, not special to string theory, a sociological aspect of string
theory is that in the 1980s many theoreticians started to believe and claim that string theory would
be better than ordinary model building in that when fully understood it would admit only very few
models, such that even the parameters measured in the standard model would be predicted by the
theory and some more basic parameters. More recently this hope has vanished, and much of what
should be an absolute estimate of string theory is more a perception in the negative gradient of this
hope curve.
But one technical speciality of string theory over QFT model building exists in either case: what in
the standard model are external parameters put into a QFT Lagrangian, in string theory models are
all dynamical fields of the theory instead, called moduli.
The simple familiar example to compare this to is the cosmological constant in Einstein gravity: one
can either consider it as an external parameter, a constant real number coefficient in front of the
volume form summand of the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian, or else one can consider Einstein gravity
coupled to a scalar field with some potential and consider those solutions to the equations of motion
where this field is almost constant to good approximation. In such a case the field itself serves as an
effective cosmological constant. (This is the mechanism behind the theory of cosmic	 inflation, see
there for more details.) Hence the theory has one less external parameter (the “cosmological
constant” is not fundamentally really a constant), which has instead been replaced by a field.
In string theory this happens with all the parameters. (Except for one single constant: the string
coupling constant. From the perspective of “M-theory” even that disappears. See at string theory –
scales.) There is no external choice of parameter, but there remains the choice of studying “solutions
to the equations of motion” (which in string theory means: choices of 2d CFTs) which might model
observed physics.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 8/27

===== PAGE 9 =====
That is why in string theory instead of adjusting parameters one searches solutions. Since these are
also called “string vacua” (see at What	is	a	string	vacuum?), one searches vacua. The infamous term
“landscape of string theory vacua” refers to attempts to understand the space of possibilities here
more globally. But very little is actually known to date.
In summary: models built in string theory make predictions just as any other model in theoretical
physics does. The situation is actually better in that in principle the choice of model in string theory
is constrained by the theory. While the standard model of particle physics is just written to paper,
when one reproduces approximations to it in string theory one has to check that various consistency
conditions are satisfied which guarantee that the parameters assumed indeed do arise as
configurations of the fields in the theory.
Notice that there is no a priori reason in quantum field theory that of all of the huge space of
possible field theories (all local Lagrangians) the one that describes our world is a Yang-Mills gauge
theory coupled to gravity – an “Einstein-Yang-Mills-Dirac-Higgs theory”. This is not a prediction of
QFT but a theoretical assumption based on experimental observation, and only after this
assumption is made, and only after a few dozen further parameters are fixed by hand, does the
standard model of particle physics start to make any predictions at all. On the other hand, string
theory does predict this general form of action functionals: the effective field theories obtained in
string theory are generally gauge theories coupled to gravity. This fact is what originally led to the
strong interest in string theory.
Nevertheless, in spite of this higher predictivity of string theory in principle, in practice it has not yet
led to much insight that would actually affect particle physics models in practice.
Aside:	How	do	physical	theories	generally	make	predictions,	anyway?
It may be good to compare to established and (essentially) uncontroversial theories.
A good example to think of, in particular in comparison to string theory, is the theory of Einstein-
gravity, also known as the theory of general	relativity.
Today there is a standard model of cosmology which is a model built in the theory of general
relativity, that has been experimentally tested to high accuracy (see also at cosmic	 inflation	 -
Experimental	evidence).
This model cannot be predicted by the theory of Einstein-gravity. It is one of many possible
solutions, one point in a vastly infinitely dimensional space of solutions of general relativity. It is in
turn based on the class of models known as FRW models, which enforces strong constraints on the
parameters of models in general relativity. In fact in its plain vanilla version, the FRW model
describes the whole universe by just three numbers, the density and pressure of homogenous
matter filling the universe, and the value of the cosmological constant. This model with this choice of
constrained parameters is entirely a man-made assumption, not predicted in any way from theory.
But the point is that once this model has been postulated, then one can use the theory to see what it
predicts about the remaining parameters, such as here the fluctuations of the cosmic microwave
background radiation in a universe described by this model.
This is the general pattern of how	predictions	are	made	in	physical	theories:
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 9/27

===== PAGE 10 =====
1. posit a theory;
2. specify some of the parameters of the theory – “build a model”
3. check what the theory demands for the remaining parameters – these are the predictions of
that model in that theory;
4. if experiment disagrees with the predictions then
1. see if this can be repaired by modifying the model a little, hence by varying some of the
originally fixed parameters;
2. if this is impossible or gets to be too complicated to the degree of feeling “unnatural”, then
either look for an entirely different model or, if all fails, modify or eventually abandon the
theory and find a new one. Then repeat.
That this model building process is a matter of trial and error is well witnessed for instance by the
early history of cosmology. Right after Einstein had found general relativity and the Einstein
equations, he tried the cosmological model with non-vanishing cosmological constant, because back
then he thought that would fit observation. Some later observations suggested that there is no
cosmological constant, and the constant was set to zero again. Einstein, referring to his original
cosmological model, spoke of his “biggest blunder”. But a few decades later, new observations show
that the cosmological constant is small but non-vanishing after all, and these days we put it back into
our “standard model”.
Clearly the theory does not help us predict this, otherwise there would be no reason for this
repeated process of trial and error. On the other hand, once we do fix these global parameters, the
theory does predict plenty of further observations in the model, which can and have been checked.
But curiously, the modern version of the standard model of cosmology with its cosmological
constant (“dark energy”) and dark matter component, asserts that the vast majority of all
constituents of the observable universe are in fact unobservable, except for their gravitational effect.
This means: the parameters of the model can be made to fit observation, but only with the rather
noteworthy consequence that the model now models something which to a large extent is not what
it set out to model.
At this point there are two options: either one can take it that the standard model of cosmology
predicts the existence of vast amounts of dark matter and dark energy, because only with this
assumption is the model consistent with observations (but with this assumption it is very well
consistent with observation). On the other hand, one might feel that with all this dark matter
assumed, the model has become too contrived to be “natural”, and that instead this is a hint that the
theory of Einstein gravity is not quite right. This is sociologically currently a minority position, but it
is certainly intellectually a possible standpoint; it goes by the name MOND, see there for more
discussion.
Similar descriptions can be given of the standard model of particle physics. This, too, makes
predictions that have been tested to fantastic accuracy. But it does so only after lots and lots of
parameters have been chosen. To start with, there is nothing in quantum field theory that demands
that the theory of fundamental particle physics has to be a Yang-Mills gauge theory coupled to
Einstein-gravity, an Einstein-Yang-Mills theory. Then there is no specific reason why the gauge group
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 10/27

===== PAGE 11 =====
of that theory is what is observed (though there are constraints on the possible gauge groups, from
quantum anomaly cancellation). There is no reason in general QFT that matter appears in the
fundamental particle representations that it does (electrons, quarks, neutrinos), that it appears in
three “generations” of similar structure but different mass, and no reason for all of the coupling
constants in the model such as the Yukawa couplings. All these parameters have been and are being
adjusted by hand, whenever observations suggest so. The latest change was the introduction of mass
terms (Higgs coupling) for neutrinos and then the confirmation that there is indeed a Higgs boson
sector. None of this could be derived from first principles of quantum field theory. Even for the Higgs
mechanism there are plenty of potential theoretical alternatives (e.g. technicolor). All of this is part
of the model building and not predicted by quantum field theory.
This is why one speaks of the standard	 model	 of	 particle	 physics and of the standard	 model	 of
cosmology and not of the “standard theory”. Because the theory is fixed in both cases, Yang-Mills
gauge theory and Einstein gravity. What one needs however in order to make any predictions in
these theories is a choice of model.
In string theory it is just like this. One can write down models that look like the standard model of
particle physics coupled to gravity at low energy, and then see what the theory predicts as further
observations. The difference here is that there are many more constraints on models in string theory
(string theory vacua) than there are on models in quantum field theory (for which one can write
down essentially any old local Lagrangian). On the other hand, a model of string theory that fits
reasonably well the standard model of particle physics (such as for instance the G₂-MSSM) typically
predicts new phenomena only at energy scales not testable by present experiment. This is however
necessarily so for any theory of quantum gravity, and hence a fact that one has to live with if one is
going to be interested in “beyond the standard model” model building in the first place. All other
proposals for “beyond the standard model” physics share this problem. Necessarily.
However, what has often been considered attractive in string theory is that despite this, string
theory does reasonably constrain the vast possibility space of models in quantum field theory. While
there is no reason in QFT that our world is described by Yang-Mills gauge theory and Einstein-
gravity, this is precisely what models in string theory generically predict. This may not seem like a
practically useful prediction given that we already assumed this since the 1915s and 1960s,
respectively, by building it into our “standard models”, but from the standpoint of conceptual
understanding over pure empirical measurement it might be regarded as a suggestive aspect that in
string theory the existence of Einstein-Yang-Mills theory can be derived from a more fundamental
theory, in the vast space of other possible local Lagrangians. Of course the latter can also be said for
other proposals, such as the spectral action principle. What string theory offers on top of such other
proposals is that it derives Einstein-Yang-Mills theory and provides a UV-completion for it. The
trouble is just that, by the nature of UV completions, these concern the behaviour at higher energy
scales, and in this case at higher energy scales than can conceivably be measured in the near future.
This is a general problem of quantum gravity phenomenology and as such not specific to string
theory.
However, string theory has potential effects on at least the conceptual understanding of quantum
field theory beyond direct measurement of high energy effects. See at string	 theory	 results	 applied
elsewhere for more on this.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 11/27

===== PAGE 12 =====
Is	string	theory	testable?
This question overlaps with the question How	 does	 string	 theory	 make	 predictions?, but it maybe
deserves its own answer.
In both QFT as well as string theory one “builds models” within the general theory and tests these,
as far as their predictions are about available experiments. Loads of string theoretic models and non
string-theoretic models have been excluded by LHC data in 2012, when the experiment ruled out
more and more of the possible parameter space for one global spacetime supersymmetry
somewhere at the electroweak symmetry breaking scale (see also Does	 string	 theory	 predict
supersymmetry below). So all this was testable, has been tested and turned out to be wrong.
So model building in string theory is much as in QFT. When a model is ruled out, it does not
necessarily mean that string theory is ruled out or that QFT is ruled out, but it means that the
possibilities for adjusting the free parameters in the theory are being reduced.
To see that this is a common scientific process, it may help to look at some important historical
examples. For instance shortly after Einstein proposed the theory of gravity now named after him,
he proposed a cosmological model within that theory. Since he thought back then that the
observable universe was static, he chose a free parameter of his theory, the cosmological constant, to
take just such a value that the resulting equations of motion fitted his expectations. But just shortly
afterwards it became clear that this is wrong, that instead the observable universe is expanding. Was
Einstein’s theory wrong? No, his model within the theory was wrong. (He famously called it his
“biggest blunder”, but it’s common for models to be ruled out. It’s fundamentally a trial and error
process, after all. ) The model was discarded and quickly a new model was “built”, the now standard
FRW model, still within Einstein’s theory. That has nicely fitted all data since, with slight
adjustments, and so we are fond of it and call it the standard model of cosmology.
This kind of model-building process happens within string theory, too: by iteration the models are
being tested, discarded or adjusted, tested again, etc.
Actually, string theory model building is more constrained than plain QFT model building, due to the
fact that at the heart of it there are no free parameters, since all parameters are instead fields of the
theory, as mentioned before in How	does	string	theory	make	predictions?. So ultimately it gives more,
not fewer, reasons to discard a model already on theoretical grounds. There are QFT models which
cannot be realized in string theory, because the constraints on the parameters are stronger in string
theory, because string theory is not just any old effective field theory that can be further adjusted as
the energy scale is increased, but is already a UV-completion. It either makes sense at all energies, or
not at all. (A practical problem here is that in computations usually lots of approximations are
introduced which are not always guaranteed to be viable. For instance nobody really has a good
theoretical handle if all the points in the alleged landscape of string theory vacua really are solutions
to the theory. They have all been checked to be so only in some approximation.)
An example of how string theory is more constrained in its model building than effective QFT keeps
the community busy since 1998: then it was observed experimentally that the cosmological constant
of the observable universe these days is small but positive. But accommodating a positive
cosmological constant into string theoretic models is harder than negative cosmological constant. So
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 12/27

===== PAGE 13 =====
this observation tested a large region of string model building and found it to be wrong. But as for
the example of Einstein’s “biggest blunder” above, even with all these models ruled out, the theory is
still not ruled out (maybe one day with more observations it will!) Instead, as in the historical
example, the failure of the favorite models lead to new theoretical activity in understanding the
theory and its remaining possible models. All this talk about “metastable vacua”, etc since in string
theory originates in this experimental observation in 1998.
On the other hand, no other theoretical framework was equally tested by this astronomical
observation. In all other existing theoretical frameworks you simply take a pen and change the sign
of the cosmological constant by hand. The theory does not control it, it’s a free parameter. So it
seems justifiable to say that string theory is actually more	 testable than other existing theoretical
frameworks. Of course to appreciate what this means one has to pay attention to what it means to
test a theory by testing all its parameter space of models, as illustrated by the Einstein “biggest
blunder”-example.
Is	string	theory	causal,	given	that	it	is	not	local	on	the	string	scale?
In an S-matrix theory such as perturbative string theory (see above at What	 is	 string	 theory) the
property of causality is embodied by the fact that the S-matrix shows certain analyticity features.
(Therefore the S-matrix approach to quantum field theory is often referred to as “the analytic S-
matrix”).
Since, as opposed to a fundamental particle, the string is extended, at the string scale string theory is
not given by a local field theory. This superficially seems to suggest that at such scales also causality
might be violated in string theory. However, computation shows that the string scattering S-matrix
comes out suitably analytic and causal (e.g. Martinec 95).
A detailed analysis for how this comes about has been given in (Erler-Gross 04). They write:
Perhaps then it comes as a surprise that critical string theory produces an analytic S-
matrix consistent with macroscopic causality. In absence of any other known theoretical
mechanism which might explain this, despite appearances one is lead to believe that string
interactions must be, in some sense, local.
and
We find that string theory avoids problems with nonlocality in a surprising way. In
particular, we find that the Witten vertex is “local enough” to allow for a nonsingular
description of the theory which is completely local along a single null direction.
and
unlike lightcone string field theory, it is clear that cubic string field theory at least has a
local limit where all spacetime coordinates are taken to the midpoint. We investigate this
limit with a careful choice of regulator and show that at any stage the theory is
nonsingular but arbitrarily close to being local and manifestly causal. We believe that the
existence of this limit, though singular, must account for the macroscopic causality of the
string S-matrix. Thus, string theory is local enough to avoid the inconsistencies of a theory
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 13/27

===== PAGE 14 =====
which is acausal and nonlocal in time, but is nonlocal enough to make string theory
different from quantum field theory
Does	string	theory	predict	supersymmetry?
To understand this question and its answer, it is important to know that in general symmetries in
physics (and in mathematics) come in a local and in a global flavor. For instance the theory of gravity
is a theory which has as a local	symmetry the Poincaré group, including the Lorentz group. But any
model of the theory – a spacetime – may or may not have global Lorentz symmetry (“Killing vector
fields”). In fact, the generic solution to the Einstein equations has no global Lorentz symmetry left.
Indeed, global Lorentz symmetry of spacetime with all matter and force fields in it would mean that
the world looks the same if we arbitrarily translate in some direction, or arbitrarily rotate in some
plane. It would be rather bizarre to live in a spacetime with such a property!
(Mathematically the distinction is this: given a coset space 𝐺 / 𝐻, then the corresponding Klein
geometry has global 𝐺-symmetry, while the corresponding Cartan	 geometries have local 𝐺-
symmetry.)
Now supersymmetry refers to a super Lie group extension of the Lorentz group. Here the theory of
supergravity has local supersymmetry just as Einstein gravity has local Lorentz symmetry, but the
general model in supergravity has no global supersymmetry left. This is just as unlikely as, and
directly analous to, a spacetime having a global translation symmetry.
(Mathematically this is now the situation of super	Cartan	geometry.)
Contrary to that, local supersymmetry is rather generic in low dimensions. For instance the
worldline theory of any spinning particle – such as an electron – is locally supersymmetric. (See the
references here.) So local supersymmetry has been experimentally verified for the observable
universe when fermions were first observed to exist, which is since the Stern-Gerlach experiment.
Similarly, if one proceeds from the worldline formalism for spinning particles to the worldsheet
theory of spinning strings, the most natural choice of Lagrangian for fermions on the worldsheet
automatically satifies local supersymmetry. This is how supersymmetry was found historically:
people wrote down the obvious action functional for spinning strings which was just intended to
produce fermions and then it was noticed that this exhibits a curious extra “super”-symmetry. Ever
since the spinning	string is called the superstring.
The miracle that then happens is that while the second quantization of spinning particles (which is
fermionic quantum field theory) does not necessarily itself exhibit local supersymmetry, the second
quantization of spinning strings (which is string theory with fermions) does itself also exhibit local
supersymmetry: the effective field theory induced by spinning strings is not just Einstein-Yang-Mills-
Dirac theory, but is locally supersymmetric in that it is higher dimensional supergravity.
(This result is known as the Goddard-Thorn	no-ghost	theorem	with	GSO	projection.)
So: string theory implies that if there are fermions at all, then there is local supersymmetry, hence
supergravity.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 14/27

===== PAGE 15 =====
strings&fermions ⇒ supergravity
On the other hand, any model in string theory may or may not retain global supersymmetry at some
energy scale, after spontaneous symmetry breaking.
In fact the generic model has a priori no reason to preserve any low energy global supersymmetry
below the Planck scale at all (see e.g. Giudice-Strumia 11, p. 1-2), just as the generic solution of
Einstein's equations does not preserve any Lorentz group symmetry. The condition that a Kaluza-
Klein compactification of 10-dimensional supergravity to 4d exhibits precisely one global
supersymmetry is equivalent to the compactification space being a Calabi-Yau manifold. While this is
a famous condition that has been extensively studied (see at supersymmetry	 and	 Calabi-Yau
manifolds), nothing in the theory seemed to require KK-compactification on Calabi-Yau manifolds.
These were originally considered because for phenomenological reasons it is (or was) expected that
our observed world exhibits global low-energy supersymmetry.
However, recently arguments for a theoretical preference for 𝑁 = 1 supersymmetric
compactifications have been advanced after all (FSS19, Sec. 3.4, Acharya 19).
The role of local supersymmetry (supergravity) which superstring theory does predict is quite
different from that of low energy global supersymmetry. Notice that as soon as there is a fermion in
the world it follows that spacetime is described by supergeometry, since fermion field are
necessarily formalized by anticommuting functions in the Lagrangian defining any prequantum field
theory containing them. Now supergeometry alone does not mean that there is an action of the
super Poincaré Lie algebra on anything, which is what is called supersymmetry.
On the other hand, in low worldvolume dimension this tends to be inevitable. For instance the
worldline theory of any spinning particle (such as electrons) necessarily has worldline
supersymmetry, see at spinning	 particle	 -	 Worldline	 supersymmetry and at spinning	 particle	 -
Worldline	supersymmetry	-	References.
Similarly, the standard sigma-model worldsheet action functional of the spinning string was not
originally intended to be supersymmetric, but just so happens to come out this way. The special
phenomenon as opposed to the superparticle is that the worldsheet supersymmetry of the string
implies that its second quantization effective field theory is also locally supersymmetric, hence is a
theory of supergravity.
What	is	a	string	vacuum?
In perturbative quantum field theory a vacuum	state is the information needed to turn a product of
field observables such as 𝛷𝑎(𝑥)𝛷𝑏(𝑦) into a function (or rather: generalized function/distribution)
of the insertion points 𝑥 any 𝑦, namely the n-point function (here 2-point function, also called the
Hadamard	propagator)
⟨𝛷𝑎(𝑥)𝛷𝑏(𝑦)⟩
which may be regarded as the probability amplitude for a quantum in state 𝑏 at spacetime point 𝑦 to
turn into a quantum in state 𝑎 at spacetime point 𝑥, in	the	given	state that the fields are in, which is
defined thereby (see at state	in	AQFT).
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 15/27

===== PAGE 16 =====
In the worldline formalism of field theories these propagators arise from a 1-dimensional field
theory on the “worldline” of (virtual) particles running from 𝑦 to 𝑥.
Now by the very definition of perturbative string theory, these particles are replaced by strings
whose dynamics is now encoded in a 2d field theory on the worldsheet of strings, specifically a 2d
superconformal field theory (2d SCFT) of central charge 15. Hence now it is the 2d	 SCFT which
defines the vacuum	state that the perturbative string theory is in. This is then called a perturbative
string	theory	vacuum.
In practice full 2d SCFTs are hard to construct, and often one considers them by perturbation theory
of a “sigma-model” which is defined by a spacetime manifold equipped with extra fields (e.g. the B-
field etc.). It turns out that to low order these background field configurations that define sigma-
model 2d SCFTs are given by solutions to equations of motion of supergravity theories (e.g. type II
supergravity for type II string theory, etc.)
Therefore often such supergravity solutions equipped with some extra data that makes them
consistent CFT backgrounds at higher order are referred to as vacua for string theory. But this is in
general a coarse approximation. The full vacua are the full 2d SCFTs that define the worldsheet
theory of the string.
The collection of all string vacua, possibly subject to some assumptions, has come to be called the
landscape	of	string	theory	vacua. See at What	does	it	mean	to	say	that	string	theory	has	a	landscape	of
vacua?
How/why	does	string	theory	depend	on	“backgrounds”?
To answer this question one needs – as discussed at What	is	string	theory? – to distinguish between
perturbative	string	theory and non-perturbative	string	theory.
Perturbative string theory, being a variant of traditional perturbation theory in quantum field
theory, is by construction a perturbation about	a	background, just as any perturbation series is.
To stick with the (close) analogy to Taylor series mentioned before in What	is	string	theory?: if the
full object of study is a smooth function on the real line, then a “perturbative” approximation to this
by a Taylor series involves a choice of point on the real line around which the Taylor series is
developed. The series itself represents the original function restricted to the formal neighbourhood
of that point.
This example also serves to illustrate in which sense a perturbation series “depends” on a choice of
background: for a given smooth function and for two points on the real line that lie within the
convergence radius of the Taylor series of that function around the respective other point, the
expansion does not depend on the “choice of background” in the sense that the value of one series
evaluated at a given point equals the value of the other series evaluated at the same point. The only
restriction to this statement is that some points may lie outside of the convergence radius.
For QFT perturbation series we have essentially the same situation: the correlators of the theory are
expressed as formal power series in the coupling constants of the theory and in Planck's constant,
which are the formal approximations to the true non-perturbative correlators expanded about zero
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 16/27

===== PAGE 17 =====
coupling and vanishing Planck’s constant. At that 0-point the theory is non-interacting and
“classical”, meaning that this is the point of a solution to the classical equations of motion of the non-
interacting theory. Such a solution is also called a vacuum or a background of the quantum theory.
Notably in theories containing gravity (such as string theory), such a background involves a
solutions to Einstein's equations, hence involves fixing a spacetime manifold on which all further
perturbative quantum fields propagate.
By the above logic, while the specific perturbation series depends on the choice of this classical
solution, hence the choice of “background” or of vacuum, this dependency is not a property of the
underlying non-perturbative theory but is a defining property of what it means to consider a
perturbative approximation. (The subtlety being that for all QFTs of interest the radius of
convergence of that formal series is necessarily 0, see the discussion at Isn’t	it	fatal	that	the	string
perturbation	series	does	not	converge? )
By design, all this applies also to perturbative string theory.
As mentioned before, there is the idea that perturbative string theory is indeed the perturbative
approximation to an as-yet unknown non-perturbative string theory. To the extent that this is true,
the dependence of the string perturbation series on the choice of “background” should be of the
same superficial nature as it is for traditional perturbative QFT. But this remains a conjecture.
Consistency arguments for this speculation have been given in (Witten xy). A theoretical framework
for formalizing these questions is string	field	theory, in the context of which much of this has been
formalized (…).
For more on what perturbative string theory around a given such background looks like, see also the
question How	is	string	theory	related	to	the	theory	of	gravity?
Did	 string	 theory	 provide	 any	 insight	 relevant	 in	 experimental	 particle
physics?
Yes. One curious aspect of string theory is that independently of its role as a source for models in
particle physics, it provides connections in the space of all possible quantum field theories: lots of
different quantum field theories (many of them highly unrealistic as phenomenology goes, but
interesting for theoretical investigations) appear as different limits and special cases inside string
theory, and their embedding into a single framework this way explains many unexpected relations
between them. One of this has led to recent progress simply in computational tools of perturbation
series. LHC physicists claimed that without the insight from string theory, the evaluation software
used at the LHC could not have been precise enough to see the Higgs in the data.
Details on this are linked to at
string	theory	results	applied	elsewhere.
This is maybe the example most directly related to experimental physics, but there are various other
relations (“dualities”) between QFTs learned from or better understood with string theory. (Seiberg
duality for instance, long list will go here…)
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 17/27

===== PAGE 18 =====
Does	string	theory	tell	us	anything	about	cosmology,	such	as	the	Big	bang	or
cosmic	inflation?
No. Looking back at the answer to What	is	string	theory? we have that the only thing really defined is
perturbative string theory – and quantum perturbation theory is clearly insufficient for discussion
of strongly coupled phenomena such as cosmological phenomena (as opposed to those tiny
excitations studied in particle accelerators).
More precisely: given that perturbative string theory does describe classical gravitational
backgrounds with small quantum fluctuations about them, and given that this is already all that
traditional cosmology considers, certainly all of traditional cosmology can sensibly be modeled in
string theory. But perturbative string theory cannot say much about the long-expected strong
quantum corrections to gravitational effects in quantum gravity.
This hasn’t stopped people from making lots of speculations, and there is something like a “field”
called “string cosmology” in that you find authors writing about this, giving talks and lectures about
it. But this is a bit like a soccer match with a ping-pong ball.
What would be needed here is an understanding of non-perturbative string theory.
On the other hand, in theories of supergravity such as string theory, there are some observables that
are independent of the coupling constant (called “protected”): the BPS states. If one can compute
such observables in perturbation theory and then has an idea of what these correspond to as the
coupling constant is set to a finite value, then one can know the value of the corresponding
observable in the non-perturbative theory without even knowing that non-perturbative theory
itself. This is the mechanism by which perturbative string theory does make statements about black
hole entropy, where black holes by their very nature are strongly coupled gravitational
configurations. More on how this works is at black	holes	in	string	theory.
Since the singularity involved in back holes is a similar kind of singularity as that involved in the big
bang one might think that some analogous method is useful in the latter case. But if so, it has not
surfaced so far.
What	is	the	relationship	between	string	theory	and	quantum	field	theory?
Recall from some of the previous answers:
1. Perturbative string theory is defined to be the asymptotic perturbation series which are
obtained by summing correlators/n-point functions of a 2d superconformal field theory of
central charge -15 over all genera and moduli of (punctured) super Riemann surfaces.
2. Perturbative quantum field theory is defined to be the asymptotic perturbation series which
are obtained by applying the Feynman rules to a local Lagrangian – which equivalently, by
worldline	 formalism, means: obtained by summing the correlators/n-point functions of 1d
field theories (of particles) over all loop orders of Feynman graphs.
So the two are different. But for any perturbation series one can ask if there is a non-renormalizable
local Lagrangian such that its Feynman rules reproduce the given perturbation series at sufficiently
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 18/27

===== PAGE 19 =====
low energy. If so, one says this Lagrangian is the effective	 field	 theory of the theory defined by the
original perturbation series (which, if renormalized, is conversely then a “UV-completion” of the
given effective field theory).
Now one can ask which effective quantum field theories arise this way as approximations to string
perturbation series. It turns out that only rather special ones do. For instance those that arise all
look like quantum anomaly-free Einstein-Yang-Mills-Dirac theory (consistent quantum gravity plus
Yang-Mills gauge fields plus minimally-coupled fermions). Not like phi^4 theory, not like the Ising
model, etc.
(Sometimes these days it is forgotten that QFT is much more general than the gauge theory plus
gravity plus fermions that is seen in what is just the standard model of particle physics. QFT alone
has no reason to single out gauge theories coupled to gravity and spinors in the vast space of all
possible anomaly-free local Lagrangians.)
On the other hand now, within the restricted area of Einstein-Yang-Mills-Dirac theories, it currently
seems that by choosing suitable worldsheet 2d CFTs one can obtain a large portion of the possible
flavors of these theories in the low energy effective approximation. Lots of kinds of gauge groups,
lots of kinds of particle content, lots of kinds of coupling constants. There are still constraints as to
which such QFTs are effective QFTs of a string perturbation series, but they are not well understood.
(Sometimes people forget what it takes to defined a full 2d CFT. It’s more than just conformal
invariance and modular invariance, and even that is often just checked in low order in those
“landscape” surveys.) In any case, one can come up with heuristic arguments that exclude some
Einstein-Yang-Mills-Dirac theories as possible candidates for low energy effective quantum field
theories approximating a string perturbation series. The space of them has been given a name
(before really being understood, in good tradition…) and that name is, for better or worse, the
“Swampland”.
Isn’t	it	fatal	that	the	string	perturbation	series	does	not	converge?
The string scattering amplitudes computed in string perturbation theory are thought to be term-
wise (loop-wise, hence for each genus of the Riemann surface worldsheets) finite. Nevertheless, the
sum over all these contributions diverges. Does this mean that perturbative string theory is
unrealistic from the get go?
No. On the contrary, the Feynman perturbation series of every QFT of interest is supposed to have
vanishing radius of convergence (Dyson 52) and be just an asymptotic series. Because the expansion
parameter is the coupling constant and if the series had a finite radius of convergence, there would
be also negative values of the coupling for which the correlators are convergent. See at non-
perturbative	effect for more.
So the non-convergence of the string perturbation series is just as it should be in QFT: a
perturbation series in quantum field theory is generally an asymptotic	 series, meaning that it
diverges but every finite truncation of it produces a sum that approximates the “actual” value (the
actual correlation functions) in a controlled way (as explained at asymptotic	expansion).
The important property of the string scattering amplitudes is rather that they (plausibly) come out
termwise finite (proven so for bosonic string theory and the first orders of superstring theory),
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 19/27

===== PAGE 20 =====
which means that it is already renormalized: the higher string modes provide the natural
counterterms for the renormalization (see also at How	do	strings	model	massive	particles?).
So the convergence/divergence of the string perturbation theory is of the same kind as for instance
in the QCD that appears in the standard model of particle physics. For more on this phenomenon see
at perturbation theory – divergence/convergence and especially see also the references there and
see at non-perturbative	effect.
How	do	strings	model	massive	particles?
In string phenomenology, each fundamental particle species corresponds to a different excitation
mode of one single species of fundamental string. However, a subtle aspect to keep in mind here is
that all fundamental particles are fundamentally massless and receive a – comparatively low – mass
only via a Higgs mechanism.
In string phenomenology therefore all fundamental particles correspond to ground	state excitations
of strings. Indeed, the ground state excitations of superstring are massless (while that of the bosonic
string in fact has negative mass squared and hence models a tachyon particle). This is a nontrivial
statement due to the nature of quantum harmonic oscillators and follows from a careful analysis of
quantum effects.
For instance, in simple situations the gauge field particles of spin 1, such as the photon, are modeled
by the ground state excitations of the open string. Due to quantum effects even the ground state
oscillates a little, and the orientation of this oscillation accounts for the polarization degrees of
freedom of the photon.
Every excited mode of a string however corresponds to a particle of comparatively huge mass, not
meant to be close to any particle mass ever observed. So the infinite tower of higher string
excitations is not meant to be directly observable in string phenomenology. Nevertheless, these
massive particles have a crucial role to play: their appearance as virtual	particles in string scattering
amplitudes is what renders these probability amplitudes loopwise finite: they are the counterterms
that exhibit perturbative string theory as a renormalized perturbation theory. See also the
discussion at Isn’t	it	fatal	that	the	string	perturbation	series	does	not	converge?.
How	is	string	theory	related	to	the	theory	of	gravity?
The technical statement is that the effective	 quantum	 field	 theory defined by the string scattering
amplitudes is a supergravity version of Einstein-Yang-Mills theory (namely heterotic supergravity or
type II supergravity).
This means the following:
The string scattering amplitudes between given incoming and outgoing asymptotic quantum states
of free strings, are probability amplitudes abstractly defined by summing the correlation function of
a 2-dimensional SCFT over all super Riemann surfaces with given punctures.
One tends to think of this sum heuristically as computing the superposition of probability
amplitudes of all possible ways that the incoming strings can come in, interact with each other in a
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 20/27

===== PAGE 21 =====
given background spacetime, and come out of this scattering process again. But this heuristic idea
can be formalized: we can ask if there is an ordinary perturbative quantum field theory such when
we compute its scattering amplitudes by the usual Feynman diagram rules of expansion about a
solution to the equations of motion (e.g. Einstein's equations), the result coincides with the string
scattering amplitudes at low energy. If one finds such a quantum field theory, one calls it the effective
quantum	 field	 theory which effectively approximates the string dynamics at low energy. (See also
above Why/how	does	string	theory	depend	on	“backgrounds”?.)
In words this means: the “stringy” process defined by the string perturbation series looks in good
approximation at low energy as such-and-such interactions of such-and-such particles.
And if one now computes what this effective quantum field theory defined by the string scattering
amplitudes is, then one finds that it generically is a gravity coupled to Yang-Mills theory in a
supergravity version of Einstein-Yang-Mills theory.
Notice that an effective quantum field theory (and this one is no exception) is not in general
renormalizable, meaning that to a given energy scale one has to add higher order terms to it
(counterterms) to make it well defined. Here it is precisely the full string perturbation series that
provides these counterterms: the higher-energy interactions of the string provide the
renormalization of its effective low energy theory of gravity+-Yang-Mills theory. One says that the
string perturbation series provides a UV-completion for Einstein-Yang-Mills theory (hence for
gravity, or rather for supergravity).
By designs of what scattering amplitudes are, all this are statements in perturbation theory and in
perturbation theory. Notice that this is not some secret bug in string theory, but is so by the very
definition of perturbative string theory and perturbation theory.
The fact that perturbatively perturbative string theory is a UV-completion of perturbative quantum
gravity may of course make one want to find something like non-perturbative string theory. While
there are some hints as to what this might be (these days there are many hopes that the AdS-CFT
correspondence provides a non-perturbative extension of the description of quantum gravity by
string theory), this non-perturbative description remains unclear, in stark contrast to perturbative
string theory which is a rather well-defined and conceptually well-understood.
Do	the	extra	dimensions	lead	to	instability	of	4	dimensional	spacetime?
The parameters of size and shape of the compactified dimensions in string theory, and in fact in any
Kaluza-Klein compactification, are called “moduli”. Since they are part of the higher dimensional
metric, they are components of the higher dimensional field of gravity and hence are dynamical
fields that evolve. The problem of their stability, hence the question whether there are dynamical
mechanisms that make for instance the size of the compactified space remain stably at a given value,
is famous as the problem of moduli	stabilization	in	string	theory.
This problem used to be open until around 2002. Then it was realized that vacuum expectation
values (VEVs) of the higher form fields (“fluxes”) present in string theory generically induce effective
potentials for moduli that may stabilize them, at least for fluctuations that preserve the given special
holonomy (CY-compactifications of string theory or G₂-holonomy compactifications for M-theory).
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 21/27

===== PAGE 22 =====
For type IIB string theory/F-theory this was argued in the influential article KKLT 03. An analogous
moduli stabilization mechanism was also argued for M-theory on G₂-manifolds by Acharya 02. It is
the counting of all the many possible ways of stabilizing moduli via fluxes in type IIB that led to the
now infamous discussion of the landscape of type II string theory vacua (see also below). In any
case, there seems to be no lack of solutions of the stability problem.
What	does	it	mean	to	say	that	string	theory	has	a	“landscape	of	solutions”?
Being a perturbation theory (see What	 is	 string	 theory? above), there are perturbative string
scattering amplitudes for each solution of the equations of motion of the effective background
theory of (super)-Einstein-Yang-Mills-Dirac-Higgs theory (see also How/why	 does	 string	 theory
depend	on	backgrounds? above).
In fact, more precisely, a perturbative string theory vacuum for string perturbation theory is a choice
of super-2d CFT of central charge 15 (see What	is	a	string	vacuum?), and each of them induces such
an effective background (by a mechanism indicated at 2-spectral	triple). This imposes considerably
more constraints than one has to solve to find a solution to just Einstein-Yang-Mills equations (for
instance “modular invariance” of the 2d theory, etc.). As a result, it is considerably harder to find a
backround string vacuum for string theory than for its non UV-complete non-renormalized effective
Einstein-Yang-Mills-Dirac-Higgs theory.
Due to these strong constraints, there had for many decades be a wide spread hope among some
(many) string theorists that these constraints are in fact so strong as to maybe essentially uniquely
single out one small class of vacua. And since the vacua in a KK-mechanism theory like string theory
determine the fundamental particle content in the low dimensional effective QFT, that would have
meant that under maybe mild assumptions string theory would maybe even predict the particle
content of the standard model of particle physics, to some extent.
There had never been a formal argument for this hope, but this hope has influenced both the
community and its public perception. Then in the 1990s (only) string theorists began to start
solving some of these extra constraints that string theory imposes for consistent vacua. Among these
constraints is notably the phenomenological constraint that the “moduli” of the KK compactification,
hence the dilaton field and its many cousins, become massive. For if they were fundamentally
massless as the main particles in the standard model of particle physics, then they would have had
shown up in accelerator experiments (such as these days the LHC) which however they do not.
One way to deal with this is to consider models in type II string theory which have nontrivial RR-
field configurations in the internal space. It turns out that the periods of the corresponding field
strengths over cycles in the compact space induce a potential energy for some or all of the moduli
fields, hence a mass for them in perturbation theory, so that by choosing these “fluxes” appropriately
“all moduli can be stabilized”.
By a kind of Dirac charge quantization condition, the periods of these “flux fields” have to be integers
and hence form a discrete space, as opposed to the usual continuous spaces of solutions of field
theories. Moreover, due to some other constraints the potential energy which they induce cannot be
too large, so that the admissible choices of periods for a flux field over some internal cycle is some
finite number.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 22/27

===== PAGE 23 =====
Hence given some internal manifold, the number of choice of models with fluxes is the product of
some finite number, taken over each of the (still finite) classes of cycles.
Traditionally one considered KK compactification on real 6-dimensional Calabi-Yau manifolds (see
at supersymmetry	 and	 Calabi-Yau	 manifolds). Since these are generically topologically complicated,
they have comparatively large numbers of cycles. In a hand-waving estimate of the numbers to
expect here, somebody assumed that the number of possible values of flux for each cycle is maybe
about 10, and that the typical Calabi-Yau manifold has maybe about 500 classes of cycles. With these
numbers accepted, there would be 10500 many ways to choose the flux fields in such a flux
compactification of string theory.
While this number is large, for appreciating this number it is important to notice that typically the
spaces of solutions to a physical theory, such as Einstein-Yang-Mills-Dirac-Higgs theory, not only
have infinitely many points, but typically are highly infinite	dimensional continuous spaces. In view
of this even a large finite number of solutions still makes a very small space of solutions, compared
to the generic spaces of solutions that one traditionally deals with in physics.
Nevertheless, due to that latent and long-time hope that maybe the full constraints on string theory
vacua are so strong such as to only leave a handful, this number (obtained with plenty of
assumptions and hand-waving and estimating, as it were) gave rise to a wide-spread feeling that the
space of vacua of string theory is “vast”, and the word landscape	 of	 string	 theory	 vacua became
popular and accepted for this space – for what among sober mathematicians would just have been
called the moduli	space	of	2d	SCFTs.
Ever since the public discussion shows a strong preference towards being worried about a
“landscape problem” of string theory.
One might argue that instead of worrying much about a hand-waving statement which even at face
value is “better” than what one sees in generic field theories, energy might more fruitfully be
invested into getting a better technical handle of what the moduli space of 2d SCFTs – and hence the
landscape of string theory vacua – actually is.
For instance the authors of one of the few research programs these days to actually study the subtle
nature of string theory backgrounds
Jacques Distler, Daniel Freed, Gregory Moore, Orientifold	Précis, in Hisham Sati, Urs Schreiber
(eds.), Mathematical	Foundations	of	Quantum	Field	and	Perturbative	String	Theory, Proceedings
of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, volume 83 AMS (2011) (arXiv:0906.0795)
write on page 9 of their accurate study of orientifold backgrounds:
We hope that our formulation of orientifold theory can help clarify some aspects of and
prove useful to investigations in orientifold compactifications, especially in the
applications to model building and the “landscape.” In particular, our work suggests the
existence of topological constraints on orientifold compactifications which have not been
accounted for in the existing literature on the landscape.
In summary then, the landscape of string theory vacua is essentially the moduli space of 2d SCFTs.
As such it is a mathematically rich and subtle object about which almost nothing precise is known at
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 23/27

===== PAGE 24 =====
the moment. The hand-waving arguments about the nature of corners of this space, whether correct
or not, do not actually point to a problem in string model building that would be worse than in
model building in other theories. On the contrary, in as far as parts of the “landscape” are indeed
finite sets, then no matter how large that finite number is, it is still vastly smaller than the
cardinality of the infinite-dimensional spaces of solutions of a typical theory of physics.
Is	string	theory	mathematically	rigorous?
The core of perturbative string theory has a mathematically rigorous formulation. In fact much of
mathematical physics and mathematical insight into quantum field theory as such has been gained
from the study of the low-dimensional QFTs that constitute the worldvolume theories of the string
and the various branes. For instance the axiomatization of QFT in the “FQFT” flavor (roughly dual to
the AQFT picture) historically originates in insights gained in the study of (topological) string
(namely the Moore-Seiberg axioms). On the other hand, the attempted implementations and
applications of core string theory are vast and numerous, and when it finally comes to string
phenomenology the usual level of rigor is just that common among practicing quantum field
theorists. On the far end, deep aspects of string theory that are felt by many researchers to be of
metaphysical relevance, such as the “landscape of string theory vacua” (see above) have led and are
leading to speculations that are not anymore backed up by any disciplined reasoning.
More in detail:
The quantization of the string sigma-model may be obtained cleanly via the mathematical sound
process of geometric quantization, see the references at string	–	Symplectic	geometry	and	Geometric
quantization. The famous Weyl anomaly of the string is formally understood in terms of anomalous
action functionals, see for instance (Freed 86 2.). Various other obstructions to quantization
(quantum anomalies) in the background fields for the string sigma-model such as notably the Freed-
Witten-Kapustin anomaly, have been understood in fine detail in terms of obstructions in
differential cohomology, see for instance (Distler-Freed-Moore 09).
Particularly well analyzed are the two special sectors of first quantized string theory, that of rational
conformal field theory, which contains the example of strings propagating on Lie group manifolds –
the Wess-Zumino-Witten model; as well as the example of topological strings. Rational conformal
field theories indeed stand out as one non-trivial and rich class of QFTs which have been subject to
complete mathematical classification (in the same sense in which mathematicians for instance do
the classification of finite simple groups). For details on this classification see at FRS	formalism.
For the topological string much more is true. The topological string has effectively become a subject
in pure mathematics, with its rigorous axiomatization via the TCFT version of the cobordism
hypothesis-theorem, its formulation as mathematical homological mirror symmetry, its relation to
geometric Langlands duality etc. Here it is maybe noteworthy that all this mathematical insight into
string physics rests on homotopy theory and higher category theory (the cobordism hypothesis, to
wit, which governs the topological string, is a theorem in pure (infinity,n)-category theory). See also
the question How	does	string	theory	involve	homotopy	theory,	higher	geometry	and	higher	category
theory?.
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 24/27

===== PAGE 25 =====
But the FQFT-axiomatics that serves to mathematically formalize the topological string is not
restricted to the topological sector, it also applies to the physical string. For instance Huang’s
theorem shows that the familiar description of physical string via vertex operator algebra is an
instance of the FQFT-formalization. Indeed, in FRS formalism these two formalizations, vertex
operator algebras (via their modular tensor categories of representations, and TQFT combined via
the rigorous AdS3-CFT2 and CS-WZW correspondence give the classification of rational CFT). (In
particular this says that in this low dimensional holography and AdS-CFT duality is rigorous, of
course this is far, far from true in higher dimensions.) This means that the rigorous quantization of
the string in these approaches is “holographically” encoded in the quantization of Chern-Simons
theory: the space of quantum states of 3d Chern-Simons theory is identified with the space of
conformal blocks (correlators) of the string WZW-model on this surface. Here quantization of Chern-
Simons theory is one of the best analyzed quantizations of a non-trivial rich QFT.
In summary this is a level of rigour with which the worldsheet 2d QFT of the string is understood
which is well beyond of what one typically encounters for non-trivial interacting (non-free) QFT.
And this is full non-perturbative quantum field theory (on the worldsheet!), not just the
approximation in perturbation theory.
From here on, also string field theory (its action functional, that is), has a completely rigorous
formulation in terms of operads and L-infinity algebras (Lie n-algebras for 𝑛 → ∞).
Of course what does not have a rigorous formulation, not even a good non-rigorous formulation, is
any conjectured non-perturbative (in spacetime!) completion of string theory (M-theory). But this is
clear from the answer above at What	is	string	theory.
A snapshot of the state of the art of rigorous foundations of string theory as of 2011 is in
Mathematical	Foundations	of	Quantum	Field	and	Perturbative	String	Theory.
What	 does	 it	 mean	 to	 say	 that	 string	 theory	 depends	 on	 ‘miracles’,	 such	 as
anomaly	cancellation	and	avoidance	of	divergences?
(…)
How	 does	 string	 theory	 involve	 homotopy	 theory,	 higher	 geometry	 and
higher	category	theory?
Most of the major frameworks of theoretical physics go along with a certain field of mathematics
that naturally formalizes them. For instance classical mechanics today is understood as being
described by the mathematics of symplectic	 geometry, Einstein gravity is described by differential
geometry and gauge theory by what is called Chern-Weil	 theory. It turns out that string theory
involves all these physical and mathematical ingredients, but in a “higher dimensional” way. This
“higher dimensional mathematics” is known as homotopy	 theory and higher	 category	 theory, its
geometric incarnation as higher	geometry or derived	geometry.
At the heart of it, this increase in “mathematical dimension” is simply a reflection of the fact that a
string worldsheet is one dimension higher than a particle worldline. This has to do with a general
fact not just of string theory but of quantum field theory: the mathematical formulation of a local
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 25/27

===== PAGE 26 =====
field	theory of dimension 𝑛 is naturally captured by a higher dimensional mathematical structures
known as an n-category. (The precise formulation of this is a theorem known as the cobordism
hypothesis.) For instance where in quantum mechanics one has a 1-category of spaces of states, in
string theory one has a 2-category of 2-modules.
But string theory is really about the second	 quantization of these 2-dimensional worldsheet field
theories, and it turns out that under this passage other worldvolume theories of all kinds of
dimensions appear, too: the various “branes”. Accordingly, string theory involves n-categories for
various values of 𝑛.
Much of this relation of string theory to higher category theory (homotopy theory, see at: higher
structures) was unclear when string theory developed in the late 20th century. In fact also the theory
of n-categories did not really exist yet, just a vague feeling that such a theory ought to exist. What
was prevalent in string theory then was a feeling that some kind of new mathematics would be
necessary to capture the nature of the theory.
Back in the early ’70s, the Italian physicist, Daniele Amati reportedly said that string
theory was part of 21st-century physics that fell by chance into the 20th century. I think it
was a very wise remark. (Edward Witten, Nova interview 2003, also American Scientist
Astronomy Issue 2002)
For the moment, see the following for more:
Branislav Jurco, Christian Saemann, Urs Schreiber, Martin Wolf,
Higher	Structures	in	M-Theory,
Introduction to Higher	Structures	in	M-Theory	2018, Fortsch. d. Phys. Volume 67, Issue 8-9 2019
(arXiv:1903.02807, doi:10.1002/prop.201910001)
Domenico Fiorenza, Hisham Sati, Urs Schreiber,
The	rational	higher	structure	of	M-theory
in Proceedings	 of	 the	 LMS-EPSRC	 Durham	 Symposium: Higher	 Structures	 in	 M-Theory	 2018,
August 2018, Fortschritte der Physik, 2019 (arXiv:1903.02834)
Urs Schreiber,
Introduction	to	Higher	Supergeometry?
Lectures at Higher	Structures	in	M-Theory	2018
2. References
Textbooks on string theory and M-theory include the following (for more see at books	about	string
theory):
Mike Duff
The	World	in	Eleven	Dimensions:	Supergravity,	Supermembranes	and	𝑀-theory,
IoP 1999 (publisher)
Joseph Polchinski, String	theory, Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics (2001)
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 26/27

===== PAGE 27 =====
Pierre Deligne, Pavel Etingof, Dan Freed, L. Jeffrey, David Kazhdan, John Morgan, D.R. Morrison
and Edward Witten, eds.
Quantum	 Fields	 and	 Strings,	 A	 course	 for	 mathematicians, 2 vols. Amer. Math. Soc. Providence
1999. (web version)
Michael Douglas, Elias Kiritsis et. al. (eds.),
String	theory	and	the	real	world,
Les Houches Session LXXXVII 2007
Hisham Sati, Urs Schreiber (eds.) Mathematical	Foundations	of	Quantum	Field	and	Perturbative
String	Theory ,Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, volume 83 AMS (2011)
Luis Ibáñez, Angel Uranga,
String	Theory	and	Particle	Physics	–	An	Introduction	to	String	Phenomenology,
Cambridge University Press 2012
Peter West,
Introduction	to	Strings	and	Branes,
Cambridge University Press 2012
Gregory Moore,
The	Impact	of	D-Branes	on	Mathematics,
talk at PolchinskiFest 2014 (pdf)
Gregory Moore,
Physical	Mathematics	and	the	Future
talk at Strings 2014 (talk slides, companion text pdf, pdf)
Gordon Kane,
String	theory	and	the	real	world,
Morgan & Claypool, 2017 (doi:0.1088/978-1-6817-4489-6)
(on M-theory on G₂-manifolds and the G₂-MSSM)
History:
John Schwarz, String	Theory	in	the	Twentieth	Century, talk at Strings 2016 (pdf)
Last	revised	on	June	4,	2025	at	18:40:43.	See	the	history	of	this	page	for	a	list	of	all	contributions	to	it.
Edit Discuss Previous revision Changes from previous revision History (93 revisions)  Cite  Print  Source
7/10/26, 10:10 PM string theory FAQ in nLab
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/string+theory+FAQ 27/27
