===== PAGE 1 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS
ALEX ELZENAAR
Abstract. The conformal boundary of a hyperbolic3-manifoldM is a union of
Riemann surfaces. If any of these Riemann surfaces has a nontrivial Teichmüller
space, then the hyperbolic metric ofM can be deformed quasi-isometrically.
These deformations correspond to small pertubations in the matrices of the
holonomy groupπ1(M)⊂PSL(2,C) , which together give an island of discrete
representations around the identity map inX= Hom(π 1(M),PSL(2,C)) . De-
termining the extent of this island is a hard problem. IfM is geometrically finite
and its convex core boundary is pleated only along simple closed curves, then we
cut up its conformal boundary in a way governed by the pleating combinatorics
to produce a fundamental domain forπ1(M) that is combinatorially stable
under small deformations, even those which change the pleating structure. We
give a computable region inX, cut out by polynomial inequalities overR,
within which this fundamental domain is valid: all the groups in the region
have peripheral structures that look ‘coarsely similar’, in that they come from
real-algebraically deforming a fixed conformal polygon and its side-pairings.
The union of all these regions for different pleating laminations gives a countable
cover, with sets of controlled topology, of the entire quasi-isometric deformation
space ofπ 1(M)—which is known to be topologically wild.
1.Introduction
A discrete subgroup ofPSL(2,C) is the holonomy group of a complete hyperbolic
3-orbifold and is called aKleinian group. These groups were first introduced by
Poincaré [59] and later studied extensively from the point of view of quasiconformal
analysis and geometric function theory. They experienced a resurgence of interest
following their application in Thurston’s revolutionary work in three-dimensional
topology [63], and over the past two decades many structural conjectures have
been settled: the tameness conjecture by Agol [1] and Calegari and Gabai [14],
the ending lamination conjecture by Brock, Canary, and Minsky [12;51], and the
density conjecture by Namazi and Souto [54] and Ohshika [56]. Important questions
still remain about concrete problems, as the invariants and properties that these
conjectures describe are often hard to translate into a computable or otherwise
explicit algebraic form when a particular family of Kleinian groups is written down.
We fix a geometrically finite hyperbolic3-manifoldM (roughly, a3-manifold that
is obtained by taking a finite sided polyhedron inH3 and identifying pairs of faces)
with non-empty conformal boundary, and we study the locus of discretePSL(2,C)-
representations of the holonomy groupπ1(M). More precisely, we determine—
computably—the extent of the component of the discreteness locus which contains
π1(M), by cutting it up into simple pieces so that the representations within each
School of Mathematics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
E-mail address:alexander.elzenaar@monash.edu.
2020Mathematics Subject Classification.Primary20H10; Secondary20F65,30F40,51B10,
57K32.
Key words and phrases.hyperbolic 3-manifolds, Teichmüller spaces, quasiconformal deforma-
tions, character varieties, hyperbolic convex core, discreteness testing, Ford domains.
The author was supported by an Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP)
Scholarship during the period that this work was undertaken.
1
arXiv:2508.00297v2  [math.GT]  23 Dec 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
2A. ELZENAAR
piece have a combinatorially stable action on∂H3; i.e. they have combinatorially
stable fundamental domains. We use concrete hyperbolic geometry methods in order
to construct appropriate fundamental domains, which depend algebraically on the
coefficients of a generating set and which are closely related to Ford domains but
take into account the hyperbolic geometry of the peripheral structures of the group.
The deformations of the fundamental domains as the group parameters change
are controlled using techniques from real algebraic geometry and Möbius geometry.
Iterating through all the semi-algebraic regions produced gives a discreteness and
group recognition semi-algorithm for the representations ofπ1(M).
1.1.The motivating problem.To illustrate the difficulty of moving between the
geometry ofM and the algebra ofπ1(M), we consider two natural examples of
parameter spaces that have arisen in previous work in geometric topology.
Example1.1.The space of Kleinian groups uniformising a 3-ball with two drilled
ideal arcs (represented by rank1 parabolics), theRiley slice[23;40], is a subset of
the set of groups generated by the parameterised pair of matrices
C∋ρ↦→
([1 1
0 1
]
,
[1 0
ρ1
])
∈PSL(2,C) 2.
Example1.2.The space of Kleinian groups which uniformise (1; 2)-compression
bodies [20;44] is a subset of the set of groups generated by the parameterised triple
of matrices
C3∋(α,β,λ)↦→
([1α
0 1
]
,
[1β
0 1
]
,
[λ λ 2−1
1λ
])
∈PSL(2,C) 3.
The spaces parameterised by the maps of Example1.1and Example1.2are
very convenient to work with from the point of view of algebra: the maps are
low-degree and defined overQ, and the image groups are all non-conjugate so they
define parameterisations of sections of the character variety. However, from the
point of view of geometry, these spaces are not very well-behaved: the discreteness
locus in each is a complicated fractal subset which is very hard to compute. In
the case of Example1.1, the estimation of bounds on the discreteness locus has
occupied authors from as early as the1950s to the present day, see the discussion
in [22]. In general the locus of discreteness within aPSL(2,C)-character variety is a
highly non-algebraic subset that is known to have topologically wild closure [13;55].
Attempting to study the relationship between algebra and geometry in examples
like these leads to the motivating problem of the paper.
Geometric Recognition Problem.Let G be a Kleinian group which admits
deformations, and lett↦→Gt be an algebraic parameterisation of a subset of the
character varietyX(G) = Hom(G,PSL(2,C))//PSL(2,C) , where G0 =G . The
problem is, when given a parameter valuet∈C n, to decide whetherH3/Gt is quasi-
isometric to H3/G0. We can rephrase this in view of quasiconformal deformation
theory: let U be the subset ofCn consisting of all parameterss such thatGs is
discrete, and letU0 be the connected component ofintU that contains 0; then the
problem is to determine whethertlies inU 0.
Our strategy for attacking this problem is motivated by a study of earlier work
by Keen and Series [39;40] and previous work of the author with Martin and
Schillewaert [23]. We first construct a dense ‘lamination’, by semi-algebraic1 sets, of
the quasiconformal deformation space ofG. Each ‘leaf’ of this lamination consists
1Throughout this paper,semi-algebraicis shorthand for semi-algebraic overR. Roughly speaking
this means sets defined by finitely many polynomial inequalities inRn, see Basu, Pollack, and
Roy [6, §2.3].

===== PAGE 3 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS3
of groups with specified convex core bending lamination. We then thicken the leaves
semi-algebraically; since groups with rational bending laminations are dense, we
obtain a semi-algebraic covering of the entire space.
We begin in Section2with the introduction of definitions and notation that will be
used throughout the paper, together with some general machinery for decomposing
geometrically finite Kleinian groups in a purely formal way. Following this, in
Section3, we introduce the special families of subgroups (calledcircle chains) which
induce decompositions of geometrically finite Kleinian groups in ways that are
compatible with the geometry of the convex core quotient. The semi-algebraic leaves
of the lamination (calledpleating varieties) are defined in Section4in terms of the
existence of these geometric decompositions. Following this, in Section5we give
the algebraic structure that is used to talk about parameterisations of fundamental
domains. Then, in Section6, we state and prove the two main theorems of the
paper which we will now describe.
1.2.The two main theorems.Our first main result, in Section6.2, is a construc-
tion of canonical fundamental domains for groups on each pleating variety. These
domains can be interpreted as generalisations of Ford domains [25, §19;49, §II.H],
a class of fundamental domains which has been extensively studied in a number of
different contexts including in early work of Riley on hyperbolic knot theory [60],
the theory of punctured torus groups [2;32] and later punctured Klein bottle
groups [26], compression body groups [44], arithmetic Fuchsian groups [31], and
discreteness testing for closed3-manifold groups [46]. The appeal of Ford domains
is due to their simplicity of definition, as well as their remarkable connections to
other constructions in hyperbolic geometry, for instance being dual to canonical
triangulations [24, §4] which are themselves of extensive and continuing interest in
hyperbolic knot theory. The advantage of our construction is that it conforms to
the shape of the peripheral structures of the groups being studied and so is more
stable under deformation than the standard Ford domain. This conformality comes
from defining the domains in terms of hyperbolic geometry intrinsic to the groups;
by comparison, the Euclidean geometry used to define Ford domains requires the
choice of a ‘good’ conjugacy representative ofG in order to get useful results. We
give a rough formulation of the result here.
Main Theorem A(Theorem6.7).Let G be a geometrically finite torsion-free
Kleinian group, and letP⊂X(G) be the set of all geometrically finite Kleinian
groups with the same convex core bending lamination2 as G. There exists an explicit
family of polynomial inequalities onC, with coefficients varyingR-algebraically with
the matrix entries of the generators ofG, such that for all˜G∈P the feasible region
of the inequalities gives a fundamental domain for the action of˜G on its domain of
discontinuity. In addition, there is a countable semi-algebraic subdivison ofP such
that, within each region, the side-pairing maps for the domainalsovary algebraically.
This theorem statement is rather inexplicit in the sense that we have not written
it in a way which gives the inequalities on the nose. However, the proof gives a recipe
for writing down the inequalities in question in terms of any desired parameterisation
of X(G). This means that if one is interested in working with any one particular
family of groups then the inequalities can be made explicit, the only real difficulty
being computations of trace polynomials for the elements ofG representing the
convex core bending lamination, which is a hard problem to study abstractly (usually
specific features of the groups under study must be used to make the computations
tractable). Geometrically, for each flat piece of the convex core ofG one obtains
2All laminations are purely topological unless stated otherwise and do not come equipped with
measures.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4A. ELZENAAR
a small family of inequalities that encode a fundamental domain for the Fuchsian
group uniformising that flat piece. Most of the technical difficulty comes in ensuring
that everything depends algebraically on the starting parameterisation ofX(G) in
a controlled way; the actual fundamental domains constructed are cut out by circles
in a combinatorially straightforward way.
Example1.3.As an example where our results can be applied relatively simply,
consider a genus two Schottky groupG, i.e. a purely loxodromic Kleinian group
which is free of rank2. Then H3/G has a single conformal end, a compact surface
of genus2. If the bending lamination ofH3/G at this end is a rational lamination
Λ, then there are exactly two Fuchsian groups involvedΛ has two complementary
regions. Suppose we pinch two of the leaves ofΛ to parabolics, so we are in the
setting of Example1.1and the representation space has a single complex parameter
ρ. The semi-algebraic subdivision ofP mentioned in the theorem statement consists
of only one region in the complex plane (the whole ofP), andPis cut out by two
real polynomial inequalities onρ: one trace inequality on the word ofG representing
the non-parabolic leaf ofΛ and one inequality picking out the correct connected
component. The proof of the theorem furnishes us with a semi-algebraic map from
a well-behaved subset ofHom(F2,PSL(2,C)) to the set of10-tuples of circles (six
circles for each Fuchsian group, with two shared between them) in the Riemann
sphere so that one of the components of the common exterior of those circles is a
fundamental domain for the action of each representation on the Riemann sphere,
with side-pairings coming from the same words in every representation. In this
special case the construction can be viewed morally as a generalisation of our
earlier work with Martin and Schillewaert [23], but our results show that a similar
construction works for all hyperbolic3-manifolds with exactly one conformal end
where that end is ak-punctured sphere fork≥3; see Example6.10.
In Section6.3, we extend this theory to give fundamental domains on thickenings
of the strands. More precisely, we take the algebraic functions which assign a
fundamental domain to each group on a pleating ray and we extend them to algebraic
functions on the whole parameter space which assign to groups ‘putative fundamental
domains’ (i.e. formal conformal polygons with side-pairing relations). We then find a
semi-algebraic subsetY of X(G) within which these putative fundamental domains
are actually topological polygons without any degeneracies like overlapping sides, so
Y is a set on which this extended function actually produces fundamental domains:
Main Theorem B(Theorem6.12).Let G be a geometrically finite torsion-free
Kleinian group. Then there exists a full-dimensional semi-algebraic subsetY of
the quasiconformal deformation spaceQH(G) which contains the locusP of Main
Theorem A and such that the assignment of fundamental domains to groups inP
extends to give algebraically varying fundamental domains for all groups inY.
Again, although the statement we have given here is inexplicit, the proof follows
an entirely explicit construction based on the combinatorics and geometry of the
flat pieces of the convex core ofH3/G. The idea is to take the unique extension
of the R-algebraic map of Main Theorem A fromP to Y; then the only problem
is that the circles defining fundamental domains for the flat pieces ofG will now
twist around since we are leaving the locus where the corresponding groups are
Fuchsian, and so we need to be a little clever to define the deformation of the
pieces of fundamental domain joining them together. The most technical part of
the paper is Construction6.11, where we deal with this problem by explicitly giving
a deformation of these ‘joining pieces’ so that they also twist around algebraically
with the parameterisation of the generators ofG.

===== PAGE 5 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS5
One thing we obtain from Main Theorem B is a decomposition ofQH(G)into semi-
algebraic pieces so that the representations within each piece have combinatorially
stable fundamental domains. Constructions with similar goals have been carried
out in the past: classically, constructions of decompositions of deformation spaces
into pieces within which groups have stable Ford domains were been carried out by
Jørgensen [32] for once-punctured torus reresentations (see also Akiyoshi, Sakuma,
Wada, and Yamashita [2]), and by Riley for four-punctured sphere representations
(unpublished, see [2, Figure0.2a]), and these constructions are essentially theories
which give hyperbolic triangulations of the corresponding manifolds. The modern
descendent of this sort of construction is the model manifold theory originated by
Minsky [51;52] for the purpose of studying ending laminations, but in general the
combinatorial decomposition is of a bi-Lipschitz ‘model’ of the manifold, and a
fundamental domain is not found explicitly inH3. Unlike these constructions, we
are interested only in fundamental domains on the Riemann sphere, since this is
enough to detect membership of the quasiconformal deformation space. It is this
simplification of the problem which makes it tractable.
Remark1.4.In Corollary6.8we describe a Voronoi construction which produces an
H3-fundamental domain from our domains, but we do not have any control over the
nature of this three-dimensional domain. We suspect that if one is willing to lose
the conditions that everything is algebraic in the generators then it may be possible
to give enough control over this Voronoi construction to make explicit its relation
to the model manifold theory. Very roughly, the latter depends on decompositions
according to short geodesics controlled by the complexes of curves of the surface
ends of the manifold and in the large scale this is the same kind of data that we
are detecting with our Voronoi construction. OurH3-domains can be viewed as
analogous to the canonical triangulations constructed by Epstein and Penner [24]
for cofinite volume Kleinian groups, and these are known in special cases to be
related to the model manifold theory—as one example, the Keen–Series theory of
peripheral groups for the Riley slice has been explicitly connected to model manifold
theory by Ohshika and Miyachi [57]. Further development in this direction seems
interesting from the point of view of making the ending lamination theorem more
practical to work with computationally, but we will say no more about this in the
current paper.
Apart from its intrinsic interest in giving information about the conformal action,
Main Theorem B has an application to the Geometric Recognition Problem: it
produces a discreteness certificate for elements inY, and hence exhibits the semi-
algebraic setY as a full-dimensional well-behaved set of groups that lie in the same
component of the discreteness locus asG. In fact, it follows from the constructions
themselves that there is a countable sequence of semi-algebraic sets (indexed by
rational laminations on the conformal boundary ofH3/G) which exhaust the full
component of the discreteness locus containingG. Hence in principle we obtain
an semi-algorithm for certifying membership of representationsG→PSL(2,C) in
QH(G)and, as a consequence, certifying discreteness of their images.
1.3.Relation to the discreteness problem.The problem of determining the
discreteness of a group G≤PSL(2,C) given in terms of matrix generators is
an important and long-standing open problem in geometric group theory. The
Geometric Recognition Problem is slightly weaker than the full discreteness problem
for PSL(2,C), because instead of asking for a certificate of indiscreteness we ask for
eithera certificate of indiscreteness,ora certificate that the quotient 3-manifold is
incorrect. Putting it another way, we are asking for a solution of the discreteness
problem in the presence of some guess about the structure ofG, and we are allowed

===== PAGE 6 =====
6A. ELZENAAR
to fail without deciding discreteness if we verify that the guess aboutG is incorrect.
In practice the obstructions to solving the discreteness problem are the same as
the obstructions to solving the Geometric Recognition Problem: essentially, the
existence of finitely generated groups without a finite-sided fundamental polyhedron.
The difficulty of the discreteness problem forPSL(2,C) is well-studied. As one
example, Kapovich [34] has shown that discreteness inPSL(2,C) is undecidable in
the BSS model of computation, a model which includes oracles for computation over
R and which is sufficient to do computations for real semi-algebraic sets. In general,
the state of the art forPSL(2,C) seems quite far away from practical algorithms
or semi-algorithms for discreteness testing: the only tests available are tests that
can certify discreteness or indiscreteness in special cases, or tests for discreteness
together with some additional property. We refer the reader to recent survey articles
of Kapovich [35] and Gilman [27] for further discussion and references.
While our methods are impractical in practice (for example, the semi-algebraic
sets used to certify discreteness do not approximate the boundary well, and the
complexity of the trace polynomials involved makes computer implementation
hard), they do provide some hope that there exist useful partial algorithms for the
Geometric Recognition Problem. Such algorithms may provide a useful stepping
stone towards a fuller understanding of the general discreteness problem.
1.4.Acknowledgments.I thank Ari Markowitz for a detailed discussion of a false
theorem and for general conversations about geometric group theory. I thank Gaven
Martin, Jessica Purcell, and Jeroen Schillewaert for helpful comments and discussion
of various aspects of this work and surrounding mathematics.
2.Representations of hyperbolic3-manifold groups
We will freely identifyPSL(2,C) with the group of orientation-preserving Möbius
transformations of the Riemann sphere ˆC=C∪{∞} , and with the group of
orientation-preserving isometries of hyperbolic3-space H3; the identifications are
standard and correspond to the group action ofPSL(2,C)on ˆCgiven by
[a b
c d
]
·z= az+b
cz+d
and the induced action on upper-halfspace obtained from this conformal action by
Poincaré extension. LetG be a geometrically finite, torsion-free, non-elementary,
discrete subgroup ofPSL(2,C). These conditions imply thatH3/G is a complete
hyperbolic 3-manifold with finite volume convex core. Conversely given any such
manifold M development onto H3 induces a canonical representationπ1(M)→
PSL(2,C) (up to conjugacy) called the holonomy representation, and the image
of this is a discrete, geometrically finite, torsion-free, and non-elementary group.
Working with parameterised generating sets as in Example1.1and Example1.2
picks out a specific choice of representative for each conjugacy class, i.e. a section
of a subset of the character variety inHom(G,PSL(2,C)) . These sections can be
equivalently thought of as a family of subgroups ofPSL(2,C) with a consistently
marked generating set.
Definition2.1.A discrete subgroup of PSL(2,C) is called aKleinian group[49;50].
A geometrically finite, torsion-free, non-elementary Kleinian group is called aconvex
cofinite manifold group. Given a Kleinian groupG, the maximal open subset ofˆC
on whichG acts discontinuously will be denotedΩ(G); so Ω(G)/G is a (possibly
empty, possibly disconnected, possibly singular) Riemann surface that is canonically
identified with∂H3/G, the conformal boundary ofH3/G. The complement ofΩ(G)

===== PAGE 7 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS7
in ˆC is the set of all accumulation points ofG-orbits in H3 =H 3∪ ˆC and is called
thelimit setofG, denotedΛ(G).
In this paper, we will essentially only be interested in Kleinian groupsG with
Ω(G)̸=∅; these are sometimes calledKleinian groups of the second kind.
Given an hyperbolic 3-manifold M with ∂M̸=∅ , it is possible to slightly
deform the hyperbolic metric and obtain a new3-manifold ˜M. This corresponds to
taking a small deformation of the holonomy groupG=π 1(M) and producing some
isomorphic group ˜G<PSL(2,C) . The degrees of freedom of possible deformations
are classified by the following result of Marden [47] (in the torsion-free setting) and
Tukia [64]; this version also incorporates the earlier work of Ahlfors, Bers, Maskit,
and others on the Teichmüller spaces of Kleinian groups.
Theorem2.2([50, Theorems3.25,5.27,5.28, and5.32]).Let M=H 3/G be a
geometrically finite hyperbolic3-manifold and let|M| be the underlying topological
manifold. Decompose∂M as a union of connected components⋃n
i=1Si. The set
of hyperbolic metrics on|M| is parameterised by the product of the Teichmüller
spaces∏n
i=1T(Si); every choice of metric˜M is realised by some holonomy group˜G,
and the set of all possible holonomy groups forms a connected open subset of the
character varietyX(G) = Hom(G,PSL(2,C))//PSL(2,C).
The connected open subset which parameterises the hyperbolic metrics of|M|
is called thequasiconformal deformation spaceof G, and is denotedQH(G) [50,
§5.3]. It is equivalently defined as the set of conjugacy classes of representations
ρ:G→PSL(2,C)which satisfy three axioms:
(1)ρis faithful andρ(G)is discrete;
(2)ρ(g)is parabolic wheneverg∈Gis parabolic; and
(3) there exists a quasiconformal mapϕ: ˆC→ ˆCsuch thatϕGϕ −1 =ρ(G).
Note that (3) implies a strengthened version of (2), thatρ(g) is parabolic if and
only ifgis parabolic.
Algebraically, for each connected componentSi of ∂M we have a canonical map
π1(Si)→G given by inclusion of sets. This map is not faithful in general; there
might be compression discs inM with boundary onSi which kill elements, and
it could be that the surfaceSi is knotted nontrivially inM introducing further
relations. We writeΣi for the image inG of this map. In general there is no simple
algebraic decomposition ofG in terms of the subgroupsΣi, but in special cases one
can be explicit enough about their relationship to find such a thing.
Example2.3.In the special case that M is a compression body, there is a
distinguished conformal endS1 and π1(M) =G is a quotient ofΣ1. There is a
decomposition ofG into a sequence of amalgamated products of the groupsπ1(Si)
for i >1, arising from cuttingM along compression discs. This procedure arose
first algebraically in Maskit’s classification of function groups [49, Chapter X].
Definition2.4.Arational laminationon Ω(G)/G is a choice of rational lamination
(i.e. lamination with compact support)Λi on each surfaceSi such that:
(1)Λ i is complete with respect to rank1 cusps, i.e. ifSi has a rank1 cusp then
consider the deleted point as a loop on the surface with length0 and include
it inΛi.
(2) No leaves inΛ =⋃n
i=1 Λi are isotopic to other leaves, bound a compression
disc, or bound a punctured disc inH3/G. This is equivalent to asking that
the leaves correspond via the mapπ1(Si)→G to distinct nontrivial elements
of G such that the image is parabolic if and only if the loop corresponds to
a rank1cusp onS i itself as in (1).

===== PAGE 8 =====
8A. ELZENAAR
Remark2.5.An important special case is when every Λi is maximal on the surface
Si, i.e. the complementSi\Λi is a union of thrice-holed spheres. The algebraic
consequences of this setup forPSL(2,C)-character varieties of surface groups have
been studied by Kabaya [33].
We will now explain how the fundamental groups of the conformal surfaces at
the boundary of H3/G can be constructed from the much simpler fundamental
groups of the components of⋃(Si\Λ i). This construction will be key in our
later construction of conformal fundamental domains, since our method is to patch
together fundamental domains of the simpler groups to form a domain for the action
ofGon ˆC.
Construction2.6.For each i, let{Pi,j}mi
j=1 be the components ofSi\Λi. There
exists a decomposition ofπ1(Si) (recall, we distinguish betweenπ1(Si) and the
imageΣ i of the surface group inG) using combination theorems.
Let Γ(Λi) denote the dual graph to the laminationΛi, so the vertex set ofΓ(Λi)
is{Pi,j}mi
j=1 and the edge set isΛi with incidence defined in the obvious way. Fix
a maximal treeTi for Γ(Λi), topologically embedded onSi. For eachPi,j, there
are many possible conjugacy class representatives inΣi of im(π1(Pi,j)→π 1(Si)→
Σi), and we will simultaneously pick a representative for each in a way which is
compatible withT. We phrase the compatibility condition as a condition on the
graph neighbourhood of a singlePi,j, but we require it to be satisfied for alli and j
so it is in reality a global condition. For every non-loop edgee adjacent toP=P i,j,
ifP e is the vertex adjacent toPalongeand ifλis the leaf ofΛ i dual toe:
(1) If e lies in the distinguished treeT, then we require the primitive elements
of im(π1(P)→π 1(Si)) and im(π1(Pe)→π 1(Si)) which represent the loop
λto be equal.
(2) Ifedoes not lie in the distinguished tree, then letγe be a loop inπ1(Si)which
represents the simple closed curveτ∪e whereτ is the path inT fromP toPe.
We require the elements ofim(π1(P)→π 1(Si)) and im(π1(Pe)→π 1(Si))
representing the loopλto be conjugate byγe.
For a loop edge, i.e. an edgee joining some vertexPi to itself, we defineγe to
be the word corresponding to a path on the surfacePi joining the two boundary
components ofPi obtained from the cut along the leaf onSi that is dual toe.
A proof that there exist simultaneous compatible choicesΠi,j for conjugacy
representatives of im(π1(Pi,j)→π 1(Si)) is a minor generalisation of results in
Kabaya [33, §3]. Having made these choices, each surface groupΣi is obtained
from theπ1(Pi,j) by amalgamated products (along the elements represented by
edges inT), HNN extentions (where the stable elements are the transformationsγe),
and then a projection fromπ1(Si) to Σi. It is not quite true thatΣi is obtained
from the Πi,j directly by amalgamated products and HNN extensions since the
projection fromπ1(Si) to Σi (i.e. embedding the surfaces inG) can trivialise the
stable elements of the HNN extensions.
The construction gives us a decomposition ofG into local pieces represented by
the diagram
Πi,j Σi G= Π 1(M)
π1(Si)
π1(Pi,j)
where i ranges from 1 to n and where for eachi, j ranges from 1 to mi. From
left to right the algebraic maps along the diagonal require more and more global

===== PAGE 9 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS9
U2
U3
U1
Figure1.The curves on the genus 2 surface represented by the
three words of Example2.7. The full surface isS1, and when it is cut
along the maximal lamination it falls into two thrice-holed spheres,
P1,1 and P1,2. The graphΓ(Λ) is aθ-curve, and the maximal tree
T1 can be chosen to consist of a vertex interior to each thrice-holed
sphere joined by a single edge intersecting theU2 curve once.
information to write down explicitly. Our results and constructions are primarily
concerned with the action of the groupG on the Riemann sphere and not with the
‘global’ action onH3, and so most of our interest concentrates on the groupsΠi,j
and their constituents since these are the things detected by fundamental domains of
G on ˆC. A great deal of literature does exist on the global algebraic decompositions
ofG, see the monograph of Aschenbrenner, Friedl, and Winton [3].
Example2.7.We give an explicit example whereG is a maximal cusp group on
the boundary of genus2 Schottky space. We first construct the group inside the
character variety ofF2. The space of free groups inPSL(2,C) on two generatorsX
and Y is a 3-dimensional complex variety and may be parameterised bytrX, trY ,
andtrXY. We take the parameterisation
X=
[1
2(tX +itXY )− 1
2(tX +v)
− 1
2(tX−v) 1
2(tX−itXY )
]
andY=
[tY
2 −i tY
2tY
2
tY
2 +i
]
where v satisfies v2 = 4−t 2
XY ; this is chosen so thattrX=t X, trY=t Y, and
trXY=t XY . Algebraically, the parameterisation is a mapΦ :C 4→PSL(2,C) 3,
defined over Q and with the coordinates ofC4 labelled tX,tY,tXY,v, restricted to
the subvarietyZ(v 2 +t 2
XY−4)⊂C 4.
If F2 =⟨X,Y⟩ is identified with the genus2 handlebody group such thatX and
Yare the cores of the two handles, then the three words
U1 =X−1Y 2, U2 =X−1Y 3X−2,andU 3 =YX −2
represent simple closed curves on the boundary of the manifold. These curves form
the three leaves of a maximal rational laminationΛ on the single surface end of the
handlebody, shown in Figure1. The motivation behind this particular choice of
words is explained in [21, Example3.7] but is not material to our current discussion.
It is not hard to find a representation ofF2 such that the three words{Ui}3
i=1
are parabolic: the isolated solution to the system of equationstr2U1 = tr2U2 =
tr2U3 = 4approximated by
(tX,tY,tXY ) = (0.7607 + 0.8579i,−0.7610−0.8579i,2.3146−2.6103i)
gives a representation with discrete imageG so that H3/G is a handlebody with
boundary two thrice-punctured spheres,P1,1 and P1,2. In our notation the group
has a single conformal surfaceS1 (of genus2, corresponding to plumbing3 the two
surfaces P1,i together), and the end groupΣ1 which is the image ofπ1(S1) in G
is the entire groupG. Let (−)† denote reversal of a word, and consider the two
3Given a rank1 cusp in a geometrically finite group joining two surfaces, we may ‘plumb’ the
surfaces across the cusp by cutting out a punctured disc neighbourhood of the cusp from both and
stitching together the resulting boundary curves [43;45].

===== PAGE 10 =====
10A. ELZENAAR
subgroups Π1,1 =⟨U 1,U 2⟩ and Π1,2 =⟨U †
1,U†
2⟩. It is not too hard to see, e.g. by
curve coding techniques, that these represent images ofπ1(S1,1) and π1(S1,2) inside
G. If we conjugateΠ1,2 byX−1Y and call the resultΠ′
1,2, then Π′
1,2∩Π 1,1 =⟨U 2⟩
and the full groupG is obtained by two HNN extensions of the amalgamated product
of Π′
1,2∗⟨U2⟩ Π1,1 followed by killing the compression disc boundary curves in the
genus2handlebody.
3.Peripheral groups and the convex core boundary
In the previous section we studied algebraic decompositions of a convex cofinite
manifold groupG arising from topological decorations on the conformal boundary
of H3/G. These decompositions are useful in studying the algebraic structure
of the character variety, but since they are purely topological they do not give
much information on the structure of subsets of the character variety of interest
to geometric topologists, most notably the discreteness locus. In this section we
introduce machinery to isolate loci within the character variety within which there
are algebraic decompositions compatible with the geometry.
Definition3.1.A subgroup Π≤G is calledperipheralif there exists a non-empty
open simply connected subsetU⊂Ω(G) left invariant byΠ. Since Λ(Π)⊂Λ(G) ,U
is necessarily a subset ofΩ(Π). We say thatΠ isF-peripheralif it is Fuchsian and
U is one of the discs on which it acts. We write∆(Π) for the maximal topological
disc U preserved by Π; it is called theperipheral discof Π. The set of maximal4
F-peripheral subgroups ofG forms the vertices of a natural graph˜Γ(G), where
the incidence relation is inclusion (two subgroups lie in a face if they intersect
nontrivially). The overgroupGacts on this graph by conjugation.
Historical remark3.2.This definition was introduced to the literature by Keen
and Series [40] as a technical tool to deal with the combinatorial circle-packing
structure of limit sets (an example of such a circle-packing is shown in Figure2
below) which they had previously used to study a deformation space of punctured
torus groups [39]. They attributed the insight that the circle patterns in limit sets
(which they called circle chains, see Definition3.6below) can be controlled via less
ad-hoc algebraic methods to David Wright. The notion of a peripheral subgroup
of a hyperbolic groupG as a subgroup whose Cayley graph is an ‘extremal’ subset
of the ends of the Cayley graph ofG originated with Gromov and is of interest in
geometric group theory [8;11;28].
Example3.3.If G is the group generated by the two parabolicsX(z) =z+ 1
and Y(z) =z/(2iz+ 1) , then H3/G is topologically a genus2 handlebody. The
commutator [X,Y] is parabolic, and the three wordsX, Y, and [X,Y] represent
three rank 1 cusps and three disjoint simple closed curves on the topological genus
2surface obtained by plumbing the boundary ofH3/G.
There are two conjugacy classes of F-peripheral groups inG. They are represented
by the two(∞,∞,∞) -triangle groups⟨X−1,Y−1XY⟩ and⟨X−1Y−1X,Y⟩ . One
possible fundamental domain for the action ofGon˜Γ(G)is
⟨X,YX −1Y−1⟩
⟨X−1,Y−1XY⟩ ⟨X−1Y−1X,Y⟩
⟨Y−1,XYX −1⟩.
⟨X⟩
⟨X−1Y−1XY⟩
⟨Y⟩
4If ‘maximal’ is deleted we still obtain a graph, but it is much larger as every subgroup of an
F-peripheral group is itselfF-peripheral.

===== PAGE 11 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS11
Since Y acts to identify the two vertices on the left andX acts to identify the two
vertices on the right, the quotient˜Γ(G)/Gis the graph
⟨X−1,Y−1XY⟩ ⟨X−1Y−1X,Y⟩⟨X⟩
⟨X−1Y−1XY⟩
⟨Y⟩
which can be identified with the dual graph to the maximal rational lamination
defined byX,Y, and[X,Y].
Remark3.4.In this remark we use terminology from Dicks and Dunwoody [17, §§I.1–
I.2] (but with obvious modifications to account for our graphs being undirected).
We will not use any technical machinery from the theory of groups acting on graphs
in this paper, but readers already familiar with this field may find it useful to
note that our ‘fundamental domains’ (as in Example3.3) are obtained by taking a
G-traversal for the action ofG on ˜Γ(G) and then adjoining to every ‘hanging’ edge
its other vertex; i.e. the graph closure of theG-traversal. We will usually (in light
of Construction2.6) take allG-traversals to befundamental, i.e. the graph interior
of the traversal is a subforest of˜Γ(G) such that every component of the traversal
lies in a distinct connected component of˜Γ(G); this is possible by [17, Proposition
I.2.6].
The peripheral discs of the conjugates of an F-peripheral group form a series of
round open discs inΩ(G), and the domes above these open discs support some of
the flat pieces of the pleated hyperbolic surfaceh.conv Λ(G)(the hyperbolic convex
hull ofΛ(G)[50, §3.1.1]).
Remark3.5.The relationship of the convex core bending lamination to the structure
of the quasiconformal deformation space is well established. Choi and Series have
proved, using the Hodgson–Kerchkoff theory of cone manifold deformations, that
normalised lengths of leaves of the bending lamination give a coordinate system on
the space of convex structures of hyperbolic3-manifolds [15]. A related conjecture
usually attributed to Thurston is that the holonomy representation of a hyperbolic
manifold is determined exactly by the angles across of the bending lamination
of its convex core boundary. In certain special cases, bounds on the relationship
between pleating angles and pleating lengths are known, for instance see Miyachi [53,
Lemma7.1]. Bonahon and Otal have proved [10] the existence of quasi-Fuchsian
groups that realise every possible bending lamination on their two ends, and proved
uniqueness of these groups in some cases; an alternative existence proof was given by
Baba and Ohshika using model manifold theory [5]. Proofs of Thurston’s conjecture
have been announced for convex cocompact groups by Dular and Schlenker in
2024[19] and for singly degenerate manifolds on the boundary of quasi-Fuchsian
space by Dular [18]. It remains open for arbitrary Kleinian groups. Of additional
interest to us is work of Series [62] who proved, using the theory of peripheral
structures and their limits, both existence and uniqueness of groups realising every
measured lamination for the special case of representations ofπ1(S0,4) and π1(S1,1).
Definition3.6.Let Λ =⋃n
i=1 Λi be a rational lamination ofΩ(G)/G as described
in Definition2.4; let T be a maximal forest ofΓ(Λ) and use it to define a family of
subgroups Πi,j ofGviatheproceduredescribedinConstruction2.6. Ifthesubgroups
Πi,j are all maximal F-peripheral subgroups, then we say that they form aΛ-circle
chainin G. Further, if ˜G is the image of a representationρ:G→PSL(2,C) then
we say that ˜G has a Λ-circle chain if the imagesρ(Πi,j) are maximal F-peripheral
and have the same incidence structure as the groupsΠi,j.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12A. ELZENAAR
Π1,2
Π′
1,2
Π1,1
Figure2.The peripheral discs for the subgroups Π1,1, Π1,2, and
Π′
1,2 ofG defined in Example2.7. The graph˜Γ(G) can be identified
with the tangency graph of the circle packingˆC\Λ(G).
Example3.7.Keen and Series studied the case that the groupG is free on two
parabolic generators andΩ(G)/G is a four-punctured sphere (i.e. lies in the Riley
slice, the locus of free quasiconformally deformable groups in the parameter space of
Example1.1) [40], and the case that the groupG is freely generated by a parabolic
element and a loxodromic element which have a parabolic commutator (i.e. lies in
the Maskit slice) [39]. Example3.3above gives an example of a circle chain in a
group on the boundary of the Riley slice.
Example3.8.The groups Π1,1 =⟨U 1,U 2⟩ and Π1,2 =⟨U†
1,U†
2⟩ of Example2.7are
F-peripheral and lie in different conjugacy classes in the groupG of that example.
They do not intersect, so do not form a circle chain (since by definition a circle
chain comes from a connected subgraph of˜Γ(G) for each surface); the two groups
Π1,1 and Π′
1,2 do form a circle chain. The limit sets of all three F-peripheral groups
are shown superimposed on the limit set ofGin Figure2.
Example3.9.We give an example where the lamination Λ is not maximal.
Consider the groupG defined by choosingα= 3 +i
√
3, β= 3−i
√
3, andλ= 1 in
the parameterisation of Example1.2. This group is theθ=π/3 circle pattern group
studied in our earlier work [21, Example2.1], and lies on the boundary of(1; 2)-
compression body space. The subgroup Π =⟨MP −1MQ−1,M⟩ is F-peripheral,
but is not maximal. This can be seen in Figure3, where the limit setΛ(Π)covers
only part of the boundary of a peripheral disc ofG; in the language of Keen and
Series [40], it is notstronglyF-peripheral. The maximal F-peripheral group which
contains Π is Π′ =⟨Π,PQ −1MQP−1⟩; the limit setΛ(Π′) consists of every limit
point ofG that lies on the boundary of the disc preserved byΠ. This maximal
F-peripheral group is a Fuchsian four-punctured sphere group: the corresponding
lamination has only two leaves on the topological genus2surface.
The goal of the remainder of this section is to show that the quotient of˜Γ(G) by
the conjugation action is equal to the graphΓ(Λ), when there is aΛ-circle chain; in

===== PAGE 13 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS13
Figure3.In grey, we show the limit set of a(1; 2)-compression
body cusp groupG. The subgroupΠ with highlighted limit set is
F-peripheral, but not maximal.
fact a Λ-circle chain is identified with a connected fundamental set for the action of
G on vertices. An alternative way of putting this is that ifΛ is a lamination which
is compatible with the geometry of the group, then there is a well-defined covering
map ˜Γ(G)→Γ(Λ) . This is a consequence of the following proposition, which states
that knowing aΛ-circle chain inG is equivalent to knowing the entire combinatorial
convex core angle structure.
Proposition3.10.LetGbe a convex cofinite manifold group withΩ(G)̸=∅and
let Λ be the convex core bending lamination ofΩ(G)/G. Suppose that ρ:G→
PSL(2,C) is discrete, non-elementary, and admits aΛ-circle chain. IfH3/ρ(G) is
homeomorphic toH 3/G, thenρ(G)∈QH(G).
Remark3.11.In particular, if X(G) is known to have a single locus of discrete
groups with a given conformal boundary structure—e.g. the case of the Riley and
Maskit slices of Example3.7, or more generally genus2 Schottky space, since all
genus 2 handlebodies are homeomorphic—then existence of aΛ-circle chain gives a
full certification of membership ofQH(G).
The proof of Proposition3.10, which will be completed in Lemma3.14, goes
via the following chain of reasoning: if there exists a Λ-circle chain then the
image underρ of each peripheral groupΠi,j≤G acts as a hyperbolic isometry
group on the hyperbolic dome∆i,j above its peripheral disc, and the union of the
quotients ∆i,j/Πi,j is the end of the convex core ofH3/ρ(G) facing the surfaceSi.
In other words,Λ-circle chains model the convex core boundary of the manifold.
Our arguments generalise those given by Keen and Series [40, Lemma3.5], with
two additional difficulties: first, we allow more complicated global groupsG than
quotients of the genus2 surface group; and second, we allow arbitrary laminations,
not just maximal ones.
In the following sequence of lemmata we assume the hypotheses of Proposi-
tion3.10, soρ(G)is discrete and admits aΛ-circle chain{Π i,1,...,Π i,mi}n
i=1.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14A. ELZENAAR
Lemma3.12.For all i,j, Λ(Πi,j) = Λ(ρ(G))∩ ∆(Πi,j) where ∆(Πi,j) is the
peripheral disc preserved byΠi,j.
Proof. The quotient∆(Πi,j)/Πi,j is a hyperbolic surface withb boundary compo-
nents represented by the hyperbolic elementsg1,...,g b∈Π i,j and p punctures
represented by parabolic elementsgb+1,...,g b+p∈Π i,j. By the definition of a circle
chain, for eachgk there exists somejk∈{1,...,m i} and someγk∈ρ(G) such that
gk∈Π i,j∩γΠ i,jkγ−1. The boundary circle∂∆(Πi,j) intersects with the boundary
circle ∂∆(γΠi,jkγ−1) at the fixed points ofgk. Ifgk is hyperbolic (i.e.k≤b ), then
let σk be the arc in∂∆(Πi,j) between the two fixed points ofgk which is contained
in ∆(γΠi,jkγ−1); it contains no limit points ofρ(G) since γΠi,jkγ−1 is F-peripheral.
Now by standard theory of Fuchsian groups [7, §10.3] every interval of discon-
tinuity ofΠi,j on ∂∆(Πi,j) is Πi,j-equivalent to the interval between fixed points
of γΠi,jkγ−1 for some F-peripheral group in the conjugacy class of a circle chain
element. Since points on∂∆(Πi,j) are either in intervals of discontinuity or are limit
points of Πi,j, and no limit points ofρ(G) can lie on any images ofσk, we see that
∂∆(Πi,j)∩Λ(ρ(G)) = Λ(Π i,j)as required.
Lemma3.13.For eachi,jletH i,j be the hyperbolic plane erected above∆(Πi,j);
by Poincaré extension fromˆC to H3, Πi,j acts as a group of hyperbolic isometries on
Hi,j≃H 2 and so we may define a Nielsen regionNi,j for this action. This Nielsen
region is precisely invariant underΠi,j inρ(G).
Proof. We first show thatΠi,j = Stabρ(G)Ni,j. Let S= Stab ρ(G)Ni,j. The sub-
group S stabilises the boundary of∆(Πi,j). Indeed, S sends an arc through two
points in Ni,j to another arc through two points inNi,j, and sinceNi,j is full-
dimensional inHi,j, for any pair of pointsξ1,ξ 2 in ∂∆(Πi,j) there exist two points
in Ni,j lying on the geodesic[ξ1,ξ 2]; thusS, sendingξ1 and ξ2 to the endpoints of
the geodesic joining the images of the two points inNi,j, sendsξ1 and ξ2 to two
other points on∂∆(Fi,j). SinceS stabilises the boundary, and therefore stabilises
the entire hemisphereHi,j, it is Fuchsian. Thus, sinceS≥Π i,j, there is an induced
covering mapNi,j/Πi,j→N i/S. The maximality ofΠi,j completes the proof that
Πi,j =S.
Now suppose for contradiction thatg∈ρ(G)\Π i,j but g(Ni,j)∩N i,j̸=∅ . We
have two cases.
(1) Suppose ∆(Πi,j) =g∆(Π i,j). Theng stabilises ∆(Πi,j), and by Lemma3.12
it must permute the arcs of discontinuity ofΠi,j on the boundary. Further
it is conformal onHi,j and so preserves the angles of the edges ofNi,j on
translation. These two facts imply thatg stabilises the Nielsen region and
thusg∈Π i,j, giving the required contradiction.
(2) On the other hand, suppose∆(Πi,j)̸=g∆(Π i,j). The setg(Ni,j)∩N i,j lies
on the arc of intersection of the two geodesic domesHi,j and gHi,j. Since
Πi,j is F-peripheral, the arc∆i,j∩∂g∆ i,j is an arc of discontinuity forΠi,j
and soNi,j is bounded by the arc joining the intersection points of∆i,j
with ∂g∆i,j. On the other handNi,j is open, and soNi,j cannot contain
any points of this arc (which gives the contradiction).
Lemma3.14.The convex core boundary ∂(h.conv Λρ(G))/ρ(G) consists ofr=∑n
i=1mi flat pieces, glued along the pleating locus of the surface which consists
exactly of the projection of the axes of the boundary-parallel generators of theΠi,j
(i.e. the words representing the leaves ofΛ).
Proof. LetHi,j be the hemispheres above the∆(Πi,j) and letNi,j be the respective
Nielsen regions for the actions on the hemispheres by theΠi,j. EachSi,j :=N i,j/Fi,j
is a thrice-holed sphere (possibly with some holes represented by parabolics). All

===== PAGE 15 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS15
Λ
Λ′
cuspexterior ofQH(G)
Figure4.The relative position of two pleating varieties inS2⊂
X(F2).
surfaces are hyperbolic and so have curvature−1. We can therefore compute the
area of eachSi,j using the Siegel area formula [7, Theorem10.4.3]. By Lemma3.13,
Ni,j/Πi,j =N i,j/ρ(G) for alli. Since all theΠi,j are F-peripheral, eachNi,j/ρ(G)
lies in ∂(h.conv Λ(ρ(G)))/ρ(G); and since the Πi,j are non-conjugate, they are
disjoint subsets of the surface. On the other hand, we may apply the Siegel area
formula to the full surface, and the result is the same as the sum of the areas of the
surfaces. Thus the full surface must be the union of theSi,j.
Remark3.15.This concludes the proof of Proposition3.10.
4.Pleating varieties
Given a rational laminationΛ on the conformal boundary of a finite-type topo-
logical 3-manifold M, we have defined algebraic structures calledΛ-circle chains in
G=π 1(M) which control the large-scale geometry of the surface ends of convex
cofinite manifold representationsρ:G→PSL(2,C) ; equivalently, they control the
bending lamination on the convex core boundary ofH3/ρ(G).
Definition4.1.Let G be a convex cofinite manifold group, letΛ be a maximal
rational lamination onΩ(G)/G, and letX be an algebraic parameter space for the
representations ρ:G→PSL(2,C) . The Λ-pleating varietyis the setPΛ⊂X of
ρ∈X such thatρ(G) has a Λ-circle chain. Here, as we will often do, we identify
points ofX with their corresponding images inX(G), forgetting the data of the
parameterisation.
Remark4.2.Our definition differs slightly from that of Choi and Series [15] as they
do not require circle chains to consist of maximal F-peripheral groups.
Remark4.3.We will usually work with parameter spacesX rather than the character
varietyX(G) since it is convenient when constructing examples. For example, the
Riley slice (Example3.7) contains free groups on two generators, so embeds into
a three-dimensional character variety; but it also embeds into a one-dimensional
linear slice where two group elements are fixed parabolic. In this situation it is
much easier to work with the one-parameter subvariety.
The object of this section is to describe the geometry of the pleating varieties
in X. The most naïve observation one makes is that a representationρ∈X lies
on the Λ-pleating variety only if the words inG corresponding to all the leaves
of Λ are real (a more precise version of this is Proposition4.7below). There are
two immediate obstructions to the converse holding: first, it is possible for the
Fuchsian groups generated by these words (which are putative F-peripheral groups)

===== PAGE 16 =====
16A. ELZENAAR
to fail to be maximal Fuchsian groups; and second, it is possible for there to exist
maximal Fuchsian subgroups, generated by words representingΛ, which are not
peripheral. We will see that the edge of the pleating variety is detected by the first
type of obstruction. That is, supposeG is a convex cofinite manifold group with a
Λ-circle chain and thatσ: [0,1]→QH(G) is a path such thatσ(0) is the identity
representation and such thatσ(1)(G) does not admit aΛ-circle chain; then the
infimumtβ of t∈[0,1] such thatσ(t)(G) does not have aΛ-circle chain is of one of
two kinds:
• it does not admit any circle chain, i.e. the bending lamination of the convex
core ofH 3/σ(tβ)(G)is not rational; or
• it admits aΛ′-circle chain whereΛ′ is obtained by deleting some leaves from
Λ, and this circle chain is produced by taking the image of anyΛ-circle
chain inG under the mapσ(tβ) and, for every leafλ that is deleted from
Λ, replacing the F-peripheral groupsΠ and Π′ joined by an edge dual to
λ with the group⟨Π,Π′⟩ iteratively (if a peripheral group is incident to
two deleted leaves then the new group replacing it is generated by all three
groups incident with these leaves, etc.); the new groups produced after the
iterative procedure terminates (all leaves are removed) is now maximal and
F-peripheral.
Example4.4.Figure4is a schematic illustrating the relative embeddings of PΛ
andPΛ′ in a slice of genus two Schottky space where the two core curves of the
handlebody are fixed hyperbolic. These curves define a laminationΛ′ with two
leaves that can be completed to a maximal laminationΛ by adding an additional
curveλ. The 2-dimensional pleating variety forΛ′ is an embedding of a subset of
the Teichmüller space of a four-holed sphere, viewed as the genus2-surface cut along
the Λ′. This variety meets the boundary of the quasiconformal deformation space at
the cusp corresponding to pinchingλ to a parabolic. Also eminating from this cusp
is the 1-dimensional pleating variety forΛ; the pleating angle acrossλ increases
from 0 at the cusp toπ where the two F-peripheral subgroups in the circle chain
cease to be maximal and the1-dimensional variety hits the2-dimensional variety.
LetSg denote genusg Schottky space embedded intoX(Fg) and therefore into
CN (N some sufficiently large integer) by traces: this is possible in general by
standard results, and the particular traces may be chosen so thatG∈X(F g) is
conjugate to a subgroup ofPSL(2,R) if and only if all its coordinates are real; i.e.
the Fuchsian locus ofSg isS g(R) :=S g∩RN.
Example4.5.Of special interest to us is the Fuchsian locus of genus2 Schottky
groups. These act onH2 to produce thrice-holed spheres; ifG is such a group then
the generators ofG can be chosen to beX, Y, andXY such that all three of these
elements are primitive boundary hyperbolics. The traces of these three elements of
F2 =F{X,Y} may be taken to parameteriseX(F2) and they are all real if and only
if the corresponding representation is conjugate to a subgroup ofPSL(2,R). We
gave an explicit parameterisation ofX(F2)by these traces above, in Example2.7.
Lemma4.6.The locus S2(R) is a union of connected components of the four
semi-algebraic sets
(−trX,−trY,−trXY)>−2 (−trX,trY,trXY)>2
(trX,−trY,trXY)>2 (trX,trY,−trXY)>2.
The closure of each connected component meets a cusp.
Proof. The setS2∩R 3 is a subset of the union of the four semi-algebraic sets.
Consider an analytically parameterised pathG(t) throughS2∩R 3; for this path to

===== PAGE 17 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS17
reach the boundary, since finitely generated Fuchsian groups are geometrically finite,
a new parabolic must appear in the group, say whent= 0 ; we will show that if any
word becomes parabolic, then necessarily one ofX, Y, orXY becomes parabolic.
Suppose thatW is the word representing a geodesic that becomes parabolic, so
tr2W→4 as t→0 , and letξ,ξ′∈Λ(G(t)) be the fixed points ofW so thatξ→ξ ′
ast→0 . On the circle bounding the hyperbolic disc acted on byG(t), there are two
arcs bounded byξ and ξ′; letS(t) be the arc out of these two which contracts to
the empty set whent→0 . SinceS(t) necessarily contains an attractive fixed point
of an elementg∈G(t) , it must contain an arc of discontinuity ofG(t) for t̸= 0
(namely, an image under a sufficiently high power ofg of any boundary component).
As t→0 , since limit points cannot pass each other on the unit circle as this would
produce either parabolics or relators in the group, this arc of discontinuity must
also tend to length0 as t→0 . In particular the two fixed points of the boundary
hyperbolic bounding this arc must collide and att= 0 this boundary hyperbolic,
which is one ofX, Y, orXY (or their inverses), must become parabolic. In other
words, the pathG(t) reaches the boundary exactly when one ofX, Y, or XY
becomes itself parabolic.
More generally, consider a Fuchsian groupF uniformising a genusg surface S
with b>0 boundary components andp punctures. This group can be viewed as a
Kleinian group uniformising a single surface withp rank 1 cusps and genusg+b−1 ,
obtained by ‘doubling’S across its boundary and punctures. The Teichmüller space
T(S) embeds into the character varietyX(F) as a subset of the quasiconformal
deformation space QH(F). By a series of ideas originating with Fricke and studied
extensively by (for example) Keen [36;37], we can choose a generating set forF, say
f1,...,f N, such that the traces of all elements ofF are Z-polynomial in the traces
of all words in these generators; more precisely, we can take the elementsf1,...,f N
to be the set of all words inF which can be written in the usual surface-group
generators with word-length less than some universal bound depending ong, b, and
p. That is, we can choose an embedding ofX(F) into CN for some largeN such
that a representationρ∈X(F) is Fuchsian if and only if theCN-coordinates ofρ
are real.
LetTg,b,p be the set QH(F) and letTg,b,p(R) be the set T(S); for example,
Sg =T 0,g+1,0. A proof of the following result may be found in Saito [61, §6]:
Proposition4.7.The locus Tg,b,p(R)⊂C N, where CN is coordinatised by the
tracestrf j as just described, is a semi-algebraic set.
In later sections of the current paper we will be restricting to maximal laminations,
and in particular every F-peripheral group will be genus2. Hence the only explicit
inequalities which will be interest are those for the special case which we gave the
details of in Lemma4.6above; computing them in general is complicated (for the
special case of a compact surface, i.e.b=p= 0 , see Komori [41, Theorem4.2]) so
since we do not need them in further cases we will not work them out.
Remark4.8.We will end up working with real subvarieties ofTg,b,p(R) obtained by
restricting the hyperbolic lengths of various boundary components to be equal to
hyperbolic lengths of other boundary components. Of course, the hyperbolic length
is not algebraic, but we can set up algebraic conditions to force lengths to be equal
by fixing the trace of the corresponding elements to be equal. In reality, all these
groups with identified boundary components will be embedded into the overgroup
G in such a way that the elements whose traces are to be equal are conjugate inG,
and so the fact that we end up with proper subvarieties of the Teichmüller space will
be induced by the global combinatorics and we will not need to impose it by hand.

===== PAGE 18 =====
18A. ELZENAAR
Returning to our general setup, letG be a convex cofinite manifold group with
Ω(G)̸=∅ and letΛ be a rational lamination onΩ(G)/G. Define the groupsΠi,j≤G
as in previous sections, wherei ranges from1 ton (the number of components of the
boundary when rank1 cusps are plumbed in) and wherej ranges from 1 to mi (the
number of components of the complement ofΛi on the boundary surfaceSi). We do
not assume that theΠi,j form a circle chain, but it is true that each of these groups
is quasi-Fuchsian and so acts on some quasidisc∆i,j (possibly not contained within
Ω(G)); let (gi,j,bi,j,pi,j) be the respective genus, number of boundary components,
and number of punctures of∆(Πi,j)/Πi,j. To save space we will writeT (i,j) for
Tgi,j,bi,j,pi,j.
Definition4.9.We define three product spaces:
XΛ :=
n∏
i=1
mi∏
i=1
X(π1(Pi,j)),T Λ :=
n∏
i=1
mi∏
i=1
T (i,j),T Λ(R) :=
n∏
i=1
mi∏
i=1
T (i,j)(R).
ClearlyX Λ⊃T Λ⊃T Λ(R). Define also themulticharacter map
χΛ :X(G)→X Λ
by taking as its components the canonical maps
ρ∋X(G)↦→ρ↾Πi,j◦p∈X(π 1(Pi,j)).
wherepis the canonical mapπ 1(Pi,j)→Π i,j.
If ρ∈X(G) is such thatρ(G) has a Λ-circle chain, thenχΛ(ρ(G))∈T Λ(R).
By Proposition4.7, this implies thatPΛ⊂X(G) is identified with a holomorphic
embedding (sinceρ↦→trρ(W)is a holomorphic map onX(G)) of a subset of certain
branches of the inverse image underχΛ ofTΛ(R). We next identify the exact nature
of this subset.
Firstly, one must choose the correct asymptotic branch ofχ−1
Λ (TΛ(R)) to ensure
that one hits the pleating ray (otherwise one ends up with elementary groups or
perfectly good Fuchsian subgroups which are not peripheral, likely embedded in
an indiscrete supergroup); see for more context the discussion in the introduction
to Parker and Series [58]. The correct branches are those whose closures meet
the maximal cusp corresponding to the lamination, and this point is can be found
by solving the trace equations and then selecting the solutions which have a Ford
domain giving the correct topological type.
Problemsalsoariseoncethebendinganglealongoneoftheleavesofthelamination
becomes π; this happens when the discs preserved by the two incident F-peripheral
groups merge into a single disc, so that the group generated by the union of both
groups is also F-peripheral (c.f. Example3.9). Moving past this point gives a
concave angle between the preserved discs, the discs are no longer peripheral, and
their convex hull boundaries do not project to the convex core boundary. We need
the following technical result to detect this situation.
Proposition4.10.Let G be a convex cofinite manifold group with aΛ-circle chain
Π={Π i,j}. Lett↦→Gt (t∈[0,1] ) be an algebraically parameterised curve inX(G)
with G0 =G , such that for allt the images of theΠi,j continue to be Fuchsian.
There exist rational inequalities int that detect the collision of the peripheral discs
of the quasiconformal deformations of the F-peripheral groups inΠ.
Proof. For each group Πi(t) take u1(t),u 2(t),u 3(t) to be an arbitrary choice of
fixed points of three fixed elements varying witht (e.g. for a maximal lamination
one might take fixed points from the elements representing the three holes of the
quotient surface); the choice of one or the other of the two fixed points in the case
of a hyperbolic element is to be taken consistently for allt, so the fixed points are

===== PAGE 19 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS19
algebraic int. By Cramer’s Rule, the coefficients of the quadratic equation defining
the peripheral disc ofΠi(t) are algebraic in theui(t), so long as theui are not
colinear (which is always true after a suitable conjugation). Now for each pairΠi(t)
and Πj(t) we may take inequalities in the radius and centre of the corresponding
peripheral discs (which are algebraic in the coefficients of the defining quadratic) to
detect whether the two discs intersect or coincide.
Remark4.11.In fact, the parameterisation is allowed to be of higher dimension.
Arbitrary deformations inX(G) do not preserve Fuchsian groups, but ifΛis maximal
in a Schottky group of genusg (for instance) then, heuristically, the pleating variety
PΛ has real dimension1
2 dimRX(G) (since one is imposing realness conditions on
the traces of3g−3variables, i.e. on a full set of coordinate functions forX(G)).
Theorem4.12.The Λ-pleating varietyPΛ⊂X(G) for a convex cofinite manifold
groupG and lamination Λ is a real semi-algebraic set. If aΛ-circle chain{Πi,j} is
chosen, thenPΛ is obtained as the intersection of the feasible regions of the three
sets of inequalities listed in (1)–(3) below, together with an additional inequality
that selects the connected components of the result which meet the cusp on∂QH(G)
indexed by Λ (which may be chosen to be polynomial, because connected components
of semi-algebraic sets can be separated by polynomial inequalities [6, Theorem5.21]).
(1) Every Πi,j must have trace parameters satisfying the real semi-algebraic
conditions in Proposition4.7; that is,PΛ⊂χ−1
Λ (TΛ(R)).
(2) For every pair of peripheral groups in the circle chain which are incident
modulo the conjugation action ofG (i.e. have lifts which are incident in
˜Γ(G)), an inequality given by Proposition4.10must be satisfied that ensures
that the two peripheral discs intersect but do not coincide.
Proof. Let S⊂X(G) be the set of points satisfying the claimed inequalities. If a
parameter for a group lies onPΛ then clearly it satisfies the given inequalities, i.e.
PΛ⊆S . To see thatPΛ is a union of connected components, we run an open-closed
argument similar to those in Keen and Series [40, §§3–4] and Komori and Series [42].
Suppose we fix a point inPΛ, and then deform slightly away from it while keeping
the inequality conditions satisfied. By Proposition4.7every F-peripheral group
remains F-peripheral and hence by Lemma3.14the new group remains on the
pleating ray. ThusPΛ is open inS.
To see thatPΛ is closed inS∩QH(G) and thus inS, suppose that(Gi)∞
i=1 is any
sequence of groups with aΛ-circle chain; equivalently, the corresponding manifolds
have bending laminationΛ. By continuity of bending laminations [38] this sequence
of 3-manifolds either has bending laminationΛ, or is a cusp group on∂QH(G), or
one of the leaves ofΛ has flattened to angleπ. Thus the limitlimi→∞Gi either has
a Λ-circle chain (so lies inPΛ), or one of the dihedral angles between two peripheral
discs degenerates to0 (corresponding to replacing an inequality in condition (1) of
the theorem statement with an equality), or one of the angles degenerates toπ and
the two discs coincide (corresponding to replacing an inequality in condition (2) of
the theorem statement with an equality). In other words, if a sequence of groups in
PΛ converges to a group inS, then it converges to a group inPΛ.
5.Formal curvilinear polygons with side-pairing structures
Our main theorems involve the algebraic movement of fundamental domains
for certain Kleinian groups. We therefore require an algebraic structure which
parameterises the particular class of fundamental domains that we construct. The
key observation is that we can decouple the combinatorial side-pairing structure from
the geometric information associated with a fundamental domain: the combinatorial
structure is just a set of edges and a set of Möbius transformations which pair them,

===== PAGE 20 =====
20A. ELZENAAR
and the geometric information consists of intersection data that cuts out subspaces
of possible combinatorial structures.
5.1.Generalities on algebraic geometry of circles.
Definition5.1(Projective spaces of circles).The space of circles in ˆC is identified
with a subset ofP3 [9, Vol. II, §20.1].5 Having already chosen an affine coordinate
system for the Riemann sphere, we define this identification by
Z(k(x2 +y 2) + (ax+by) +h)↦→[k:a:b:h]
where Z is the usual map sending a polynomial to its corresponding affine hy-
persurface. The radius-squared and centre of a circle (k̸= 0 ) are algebraic in its
homogeneous coordinates, with formulae
rad2 [k:a:b:h] = a2 +b 2−4kh
4k2 andcen [k:a:b:h] = (−a/2k,−b/2k).
The inner product corresponding to the quadratic formrad2 may be used to compute
angles between circles. The formalism also includes points (as circles of radius0)
along with a copy ofH3 representing circles with purely imaginary radius [9, Vol.
II,20.2.5].
There is a uniqueP1 passing through any pair of pointsc,c′∈P 3 called the
pencilspanned by c and c′; we denote this line by⟨c,c′⟩. Ifg∈PSL(2,C) does not
fix∞, then we definePen(g) to be the pencil inP3 spanned by the two isometric
circles ofg. This definition does not suffice ifg is order 2, but ifg is elliptic then
Pen(g) is the pencil of circles passing through the two fixed points ofg and this
definition includes the order2 case. Ifg is non-elliptic, then the fixed points ofg
lie in the pencil as limits of circles, and form a distinguished frame for the pencil
(they are the only two points onPen(g) in the nullspace torad2). Ifg is elliptic or
parabolic then there is no canonical frame forPen(g).
If h∈PSL(2,C) then the isometric circles ofhgh−1 (if they exist) arenotthe
h-translates of the isometric circles ofg. However, the pencil Pen(hgh−1) is the
h-translate of the pencilPen(g): the images underh of the isometric circles ofg give
a frame ofPen(hgh−1)that is different to the frame of isometric circles ofhgh−1.
Remark5.2.To save space, often we will state results and give proofs only in the
‘generic’ situation that the relevant circle configuration is finite (i.e.∞ is not a point
on any circle). The cases where Euclidean lines are allowed may be obtained as
limiting cases, or by changing to a different affine chart.
For computational purposes the following lemma is useful; it explicitly describes
the action of a matrixg∈PSL(2,C) on Pen(g)⊂P 3 without passing explicitly
through the representationPSL(2,C)→PO(3,1).
Lemma5.3.If g∈PSL(2,C) is loxodromic, and if coordinates are chosen on
Pen(g)∼= P1 so that 0 is the repelling fixed point,∞ is the attracting fixed point ofg,
and 1 is the isometric circle ofg that contains the repelling fixed point, theng acts
on Pen(g) by g(c) =λc where λ∈C is the coordinate of the attracting isometric
circle ofg. Ifg is parabolic and coordinates are chosen onPen(g)∼= P1 so that∞ is
the fixed point ofg and the isometric circles ofg are 0 and 1, theng acts in these
coordinates byg(c) =c+ 1.
Proof. This is a routine calculation using the fact thatg is acting as a projectivity
inP 3 restricted to aP1, so is acting as an element ofPSL(2,R).
5Throughout this paper, all projective spacesPr are real projective spaces.

===== PAGE 21 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS21
Remark5.4.In connection with Lemma5.3, it may be useful to recall that for a
hyperbolic transformation represented byM∈PSL(2,C) , the attracting fixed point
is the projectivisation of the eigenvector ofM corresponding to the eigenvalueλ
satisfying|λ|>1; and the eigenvalues satisfyλ+λ −1 = trM.
A more general but less explicit version of Lemma5.3:
Lemma5.5.If g:C n→PSL(2,C) is a rationally parameterised matrix, and
ϕ:C m→(Conf C(3))k is a family ofk rationally parameterised triples of points,
then (i) the circle throughϕ(z) moves rationally in P3 with z∈C m, and (ii) the
imagesg(w)◦ϕ(z)move rationally in terms ofw∈C n andz∈C m.
Proof. Part (i) is an application of Cramer’s rule to the system of equations{qi(z) =
0 : 1≤i≤k} where eachqi is a homogeneous quadric with variable coefficients;
Cramer’s rule shows that the coefficients of the quadrics move rationally with
z∈C m. Similarly part (ii) is an application of Cramer’s rule to the system
{qi(g(w)(z)) = 0 : 1≤i≤k}.
An important type of result for our applications is a result guaranteeing that
certain incidence conditions are semi-algebraic. We have already seen in Proposi-
tion4.10above that incidence between circles is semi-algebraically decidable. In
addition, incidence of points on a pencil inP3 is algebraic:
Lemma5.6.The set of triples (x,y,z)∈(P 3)3 satisfying x∈⟨y,z⟩ is an algebraic
set, cut out by equations in the homogeneous coordinates ofx,y, andz.
Proof. Asking ifx is included in⟨y,z⟩ is equivalent to asking that the system of
equations x=λy+µz has a solution for(λ,µ)∈R 2. Let A be the 4×2 matrix
encoding this system; then a solution exists if and only ifx= Proj Ran(A)x and by
standard results in linear algebra this is equivalent to(A(AtA)−1At−I 4)x= 0 .
The problem of determining whether (convex) polytopes inRn intersect non-
trivially is a well-studied problem due to its applications in linear programming.
The main computational difficulty is in computing the vertices from the linear
inequations which cut out the polytope, or in computing the linear inequations from
the vertices. Once this computation is done, by convexity the problem is reduced
to simply checking the (finitely many) vertices of one polytope against the linear
inequations of the other.
In our setting, we have the advantage that our vertices are easy to determine
since we know the incidence structure of the circles cutting out our fundamental
domains. However, we no longer have convexity since edges of our polygons are
allowed to be circle pieces, hence it is possible for our polygons to intersect in the
interior of edges and not at vertices: it is no longera prioria finite problem. We
therefore need to rely on heavier machinery.
Lemma5.7.The intersection problem for curvilinear polygons (i.e. domains cut
out by finitely many circle arcs and line segments) inˆC is real semi-algebraic in the
homogeneous coordinates of the defining circles.
Proof. This follows from quantifier elimination forR, [6, Corollary2.75]. More
precisely, suppose that our two curvilinear polygons are defined respectively by the
intersections
P=
{
z:∀ n
i=1ϵi|z−w i|2 <ϵ ir2
i
}
andP ′ =
{
z:∀ n′
j=1ϵ′
j
⏐⏐z−w ′
j
⏐⏐2
<ϵ′
jr′2
j
}
where z is a complex indeterminate and where each of thewi,w′
j∈C , ri,r′
j∈R ,
and ϵi,ϵ′
j∈{±1} for i∈{1,...,n} and j∈{1,...,n ′}. Then the problem is to

===== PAGE 22 =====
22A. ELZENAAR
determine the truth of the sentence
Ψ =∃
(x,y)∈R2
[( n⋀
i=1
ϵi(x−ℜw i)2 +ϵi(y−ℑw i)2 <ϵ ir2
i
)
∧
( n′
⋀
j=1
ϵ′
j(x−ℜw ′
i)2 +ϵ′
j(y−ℑw ′
i)2 <ϵ′
ir′2
i
)]
The content of the quantifier elimination theorem is that there is a quantifier-free
sentence in the language of ordered fields (i.e. a sentence defining a semi-algebraic set)
that is true overR if and only ifΨ is true, at the expense of increasing the number
of dimensions of the problem. This theorem is constructive and implemented in the
softwareQEPCAD[16;30] (also available as an optional package forSage).
5.2.Families of purely formal fundamental domains.We now relate these
general algebraic structures to fundamental domains of Kleinian groups. For compar-
ison the reader should refer to the definition of fundamental domain ofG≤PSL(2,C)
acting on Ω(G) given in [49, §II.G] and the definition of a fundamental polyhedron
for the action ofGonH 3 given in [49, §IV.F].
Definition5.8.Aformal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structurein ˆC
consists of:
•A choice ofrlines (i.e.P 1’s) inP 3,L 1,...,L r;
• For everyi, a choice of two (not necessarily distinct) pointsFi,1 andFi,2 on
Li such thatrad 2Fi,− >0(i.e. both points give circles or lines inS2); and
•For everyi, someϕ i∈PSL(2,C)so thatL i = Pen(ϕi)andϕ i(Fi,1) =F i,2.
Lemma5.9.The set of formal curvilinear polygons with side-pairing structures
with2rsides is parameterised by a semi-algebraic subset of(P3×PSL(2,C)) r.
Proof. The data of a formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure can
be recovered from a choiceϕ1,...,ϕ r of r elements of PSL(2,C) together with a
choice of a single circle (of nonzero radius) or line inPenϕi for eachi. The set
of all formal curvilinear polygons of rankr is therefore 7r dimensional overR, or
7r−6 -dimensional up to conformal automorphisms or conjugation inPSL(2,C),
and is parameterised by the Cartesian product(P3×PSL(2,C)) r.
Picking coordinates by writing an arbitrary element of the Cartesian product as
((x1,ϕ 1),...,(x r,ϕr)), the subset of admissable points is cut out by ther inequalities
rad2xi >0 together with the conditionsP(i) :=“x i∈Pen(ϕi)” for alli∈{1,...,r} .
We can rephraseP(i) as “the homogeneous coordinates ofxi lie in theP1 spanned
by the two fixed points ofϕi”. The computation of the fixed points is algebraic,
requiring at most a quadratic field extension over the domain of definition ofϕi,6
and so the linePenϕi is algebraically defined. Checking whetherxi lies on this line
is then semi-algebraic by Lemma5.6.
Definition5.10.Analgebraic familyof formal curvilinear polygons with side-
pairing structures is anR-algebraic mapU→(P 3×PSL(2,C)) r where U⊂R s is
some open semi-algebraic set.
If G is discrete and geometrically finite, then a Ford domain forG gives rise nat-
urally to a formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure that, additionally,
has certain geometric conditions associated to it. Our constructions in Section6
are motivated by this setting: the idea is that we first construct algebraic families
6More precisely, add an additional dummy variablevi for each quadratic field extension and
then slice the resulting space by the quadratic polynomialsv2
i =· · ·; c.f. Example2.7.

===== PAGE 23 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS23
F1,1
F1,2
F3,1 F3,2
F2,1
F2,2
ϕ2
ϕ3
ϕ1
Fixϕ 2 =∞= Fixϕ 3
F3,1
F1,2
L1 = Penϕ 1 L3 = Penϕ 3
F3,2
F1,1
F2,2
L2 = Penϕ 2
F2,1
P3
Figure5.A formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure
corresponding to a(1; 2)-compression body. On the left, a generic
fundamental domain; on the right, the structures inP3.
of formal curvilinear polygons, and then we find subsets of these families in which
the polygons satisfy angle and incidence conditions that imply they are actually
fundamental domains in some open subset of the parameter space.
Example5.11.The generic fundamental domain for a (1; 2)-compression body
group (i.e. a paralellogram with opposite sides paired by parabolics and two round
discs deleted from its interior with boundary circles paired by a loxodromic) corre-
sponds to a choice of
(1) a lineL1 which intersects the nullspace ofrad2 exactly twice, with two
marked distinct marked pointsF1,1 and F1,2 so that rad2F1,j >0 for each
j∈{1,2};
(2) two projective linesL2 and L3 in P1, withL2∩L 3 ={ξ} where ξ∈P 3 is a
point with rad2ξ= 0 and where no other points on eitherL2 or L3 is in
the nullspace ofrad2, with two marked points on each line,F2,1, F2,2, F3,1,
andF 3,2, so thatrad2Fi,j >0for eachi∈{2,3}andj∈{1,2}.
This data uniquely determinesϕ2 and ϕ3 (for eachi∈{2,3} there is a unique
parabolic fixing the point inˆC represented byξ which translatesFi,1 toFi,2) but to
determine ϕ1 an additional real number (the holonomy angle) must be given. This
setup determines a fundamental domain for a discrete group if the two circlesF1,1
andF1,2 lie inside the four-sided shape bounded by theFi,j fori∈{2,3} ,j∈{1,2} ;
this is a semi-algebraic condition on points in(P3×PSL(2,C)) 3. Figure5is a
cartoon of the various geometric structuresin situ.
Example5.12.In [20], the central result is the construction of an algebraic family
of formal curvilinear polygons that satisfy additional geometric conditions which
are algebraic in the parameters ofX(G) for G a genus 2 surface group. These
conditions imply that each of the polygons has a well-defined interior onˆC, and
that the hyperbolic convex hull of this interior is a finite-sided polyhedron inH3.
Further, the metric space quotient of this polyhedron induced by the side-pairing
maps is a cone manifold that is supported on the thickened genus2 surface and has
a controlled singular structure.
6.Construction of fundamental domains
In this section, we will continue to assume thatG is a convex cofinite manifold
group withM=H 3/G and that Λ is a rational lamination on∂M, and thatX is a
parameter space for the character varietyX(G). We will give, in Theorem6.7, an
explicit construction of fundamental domains for groups˜G∈P Λ⊂X . This will be
an algebraic construction, in the sense that ifν:U→P Λ (U a real ballD(R) of
dimension dimP Λ) is a real algebraic parameterisation of some subset ofPΛ then the
structures that define the fundamental domain ofGν(t) vary real-algebraically with

===== PAGE 24 =====
24A. ELZENAAR
t(in fact, they vary algebraically over a finite tower of quadratic extensions of the
field over which the parameterisation of representations is defined). We then extend
the construction to allow for arbitrary deformations whereU is a complex ballD(C)
of dimensiondim QH(G)and prove our second main theorem, Theorem6.12.
6.1.Fundamental domains of F-peripheral groups.In many of our construc-
tions, we can restrict to the setting thatΛis a maximal rational lamination.
Observation6.1.Let Π be an F-peripheral subgroup; then there exists a finite set
of F-peripheral subgroupsΠ1,...,Π n <Π such that (a) for alli, ∆(Πi) = ∆(Π),
(b) for alli the surface ∆(Πi)/Πi is a thrice-holed (or punctured) sphere, and (c)
h.conv Λ(Π)/Πis the union of the surfacesh.conv Λ(Πi)/Πi across their boundaries.
This follows by cutting∆(Π)/Π up along suitable closed geodesics and taking
the corresponding subgroups as in Construction2.6above. The consequence of the
observation is that we can replace ‘large’ peripheral subgroups that with a suitable
family of thrice-holed sphere subgroups. The resulting groups do not form a circle
chain, but are a consequence of viewing everything lying on a higher-dimensional
pleating variety as being a point ‘at the end’ of a pleating variety corresponding to
a maximal lamination. Because of this we can carry out our fundamental domain
constructions in the pleating rays corresponding to maximal laminations, and then
take limits of these domains to get fundamental domains for arbitrary rational
laminations.
Let G admit a Λ-circle chain Π. Recall we have a graph˜Γ(G) of F-peripheral
subgroups ofG, which admits an action ofG by conjuation; and the circle chain
Π is induced by a choice of connected fundamental domain, which is a subforest
T of ˜Γ(G), for this action. We aim to construct fundamental domains for the
action ofG on Ω(G) by locally choosing fundamental domains for each peripheral
subgroup Πi,j∈Π , and then making small modifications so that the action ofG
correctly glues together the fundamental domains for the peripheral subgroups on
the extremities ofT.
Definition6.2.Let Π be a genus2 Fuchsian Schottky group uniformising a thrice-
holed sphere, and letf2, f4, andf6 be primitive hyperbolic elements representing
the three boundary components. A fundamental polygon forΠ acting as a subgroup
of Isom+(H2) is calledminimally boundedif it has three ideal edges and six geodesic
edges paired byf2,f 4, andf 6 (see the leftmost image in Figure6).
This definition stands in opposition to a classical Schottky domain for the same
group, which has four ideal edges such that two of them are joined end-to-end to
form one of the three boundary holes of the quotient surface.
Remark6.3.ReferringtotheconvenienttableT.1onp.viiof[29]wecan‘projectivise’
the definition of a minimally bounded domain. We say that a set of six lines in
P3 forms askew-hexagonif there is a cylic ordering (i.e. indices taken mod6) of
the linesl1,...,l 6 such thatli intersects li+1 and li−1 transversely and does not
intersect any otherli. Let S2 be the nullspace of the quadratic formrad2 in P3,
and let Σ∈P 3 be the circle bounding the peripheral disc ofΠ. Then a minimally
bounded fundamental domain is a skew-hexagonl1,...,l 6 such that:
(1) Eachli is orthogonal toΣ, that is if[−,−] is the Minkowski product arising
fromrad 2 then[l i,Σ] = 0.
(2) The boundary-parallel primitive elementsf2,f 4,f 6 of Π have the property
thatf i(li) =l i+2.
(3) If i is even, then li intersects S2 exactly twice (or exactly once, if the
generatorf i/2 ofΠis parabolic).

===== PAGE 25 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS25
F1,2 F3,2
f2 f6
F1,1
f4
F3,1
F2,1 F2,2
Σ =∂∆
∆
l2 = Penf 2 F1,2
l1 =⟨F 3,2,F 1,2⟩
F3,2Σ l6 = Penf 6
F3,1
l5 =⟨F 2,2,F 3,1⟩F2,2
l4 = Penf 4
F2,1
l3 =⟨F 1,1,F 2,1⟩
F1,1
Figure6.A formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure
corresponding to a Fuchsian thrice-holed sphere group, illustrating
some additional geometric constraints. On the left, a minimally
bounded fundamental domain; on the right, the structures inP3
corresponding to the three side-pairings (solid lines) as well as the
three elliptic pencils (dashed lines). The six lines are not coplanar
in P3, but every side of the hexagon is orthogonal to the circle
Σ =∂∆so we draw the latter as an ‘orthogonal vector’.
T
S∗
˜T
S∗
Figure7.The surface S∗ and embedded trees appearing in the
proof of Lemma6.4.
(4) Ifiis odd, thenl i does not meetS2.
When i is even,li = Pen(fi). The intersection pointsli∩li+1 are the six circles in
the minimally bounded domain forΠ. The corresponding formal curvilinear polygon
with side-pairing structure is shown in Figure6.
Lemma6.4.We may choose for each Π∈Π a minimally bounded fundamental
polygonD(Π) for the action on its corresponding peripheral disc∆(Π) in such a
way that the domains are compatible: ifΠ and Π′ are two elements ofΠ which
intersect in a primitive subgroup⟨g⟩, then the facets ofD(Π) paired byg are arcs
of the same circles as the facets ofD(Π′)paired byg.
Proof. LetT be the tree inΓ(Λ) (Construction2.6) which is dual toΠ. Consider the
possibly disconnected pleated surfaceS=∂h.conv(Λ(G))/G ; its bending lamination
is Λ. Cut this surface along the leaves ofΛ which do not intersect the treeT. The
result is an abstract pleated hyperbolic surfaceS∗ with a number of geodesic
boundary components, as in the left cartoon of Figure7. Let˜T be the tree obtained
by adding a leaf toT for every boundary component; the resulting tree has only
leaves and trivalent vertices. Choose an orientation on˜T, i.e. a choice of orientation

===== PAGE 26 =====
26A. ELZENAAR
(a)Isometric circles of the three boundary-
parallel elements for each of the groups.
(b)Circles forming compatible minimally
bounded fundamental domains for the two
groups.
Figure8.Peripheral subgroups of a partially cusped genus two
function group. A choice of peripheral discs is shaded: the smaller
blue disc is∆(Π1,1)and the larger red disc is∆(Π1,2).
for each edge, such that a vertex has no out-edges only if it is a leaf of˜T, and
such that there is exactly one leaf with an out-edge. Arbitrarily fix a point on
the boundary component corresponding to this unique ‘source’ leaf, and fire from
this point an orthogonal geodesicξ into the interior of the thrice-holed sphere. Let
β1 and β2 be the boundary components corresponding to the out-vertices from
the vertex of ˜T corresponding to this thrice-holed sphere. Choose an arbitrary
point onξ; for eachi∈{1,2} there is a unique geodesic ray fromξ that meetsβi
orthogonally. Continuing via induction on trivalent vertices of˜T ordered according
to the orientation, we obtain a geodesic embedding of˜T ontoS∗ so that leaf vertices
lie on boundary components, trivalent vertices lie in the interior of flat pieces, and
every edge of ˜T is orthogonal to all of the leaves of the bending locus ofS∗ that it
intersects. See the right cartoon of Figure7.
Lift this topological graph to∂h.conv(Λ(G)). The lift of an edgee, ˜e, is piecewise
geodesic in H3, with geodesic pieces on each ‘dome’ of the hyperbolic convex hull
boundary and possible corners only at intersections between adjacent domes. By
construction, each component of˜elies on two geodesic domes which are (up to the
action ofG) of the formh.conv∂∆Πi,j and crosses exactly one pleating curve, which
is the axis of the primitive hyperbolic or parabolic elementg lying in the intersection
of the corresponding F-peripheral groups in the circle chain. Since the intersection
of ˜ewith Ax(g) is orthogonal (by construction), each connected component of˜eis a
connected subset of the intersection ofh.conv Λ(G)with a geodesic dome supported
on a circle inPen(g). In other words, cuttingS∗ along the topological embedding
of ˜T, lifting to∂h.conv(Λ(G))/G, and projecting in the natural way toˆC, gives a
system of minimally bounded fundamental polygons for the circle chainΠ, with
all paired edges lying in the pencil of the side-pairing transformation, and with all
edges matching across the ‘internal’ boundaries of the circle chain as desired.
Example6.5.Consider the space X of function groups [49, Chapter X] obtained
from a productS2,0×I by pinching one end to a pair of thrice-punctured spheres to

===== PAGE 27 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS27
produce three accidental parabolics on the other end. ThenX is a subvariety of the
character variety of the genus2 surface groupS2,0. Writeπ1(S2,0) =⟨P,Q,M,N:
[P,Q][M,N]⟩ ; in [20, Proposition3] we gave an explicit parameterisation ofX by
(α,β,σ)∈C 3. The loops onS2,0 represented by the three wordsM, M−1Q, and
M−1N−1PMP−1 form a maximal rational laminationΛ; one choice of fundamental
groups for the two components ofS2,0\Λis
Π1,1 =⟨M,P −1NMN−1P⟩andΠ 1,2 =⟨M−1Q,P−1M−1QP⟩.
With some experimentation we find that a compression body group where both
of these groups are F-peripheral and where the three words representingΛ are
hyperbolic with trace±3corresponds to theX-coordinates
α= 10−3i
√
5, β= 5
29(171 + 2i
√
5),andσ= 4
29(3−2i
√
5).
The limit sets of this group and the peripheral discs ofΠ1,1 and Π1,2 are shown
in in Figure8. We also show the isometric circles of the generators; the primitive
hyperbolic word in the intersectionΠ1,1∩Π 1,2 is M−1P−1NMN−1P. The Ford
domain ofΠ1,1 is already minimally bounded. Using Lemma5.3, we can pick circles
in the pencils of the two generators ofΠ1,2 which intersect the isometric circles of
the intersection word, and compute the circles that they are paired with. Thus we
can produce a pair of compatible minimally bounded fundamental domains, shown
in Figure8b. We also show the translates of the circles forming the domain to the
four adjacent peripheral discs (the translating elements are the elements used in
Construction2.6to produce an HNN extension: in this case,P±1 and (NP−1)±1).
6.2.Global fundamental domains from circle chains.We continue with the
same notation as in the statement and proof of Lemma6.4; soG is a group on a
pleating ray with a fixed circle chainΠ and we have chosen minimally bounded
fundamental domains for each F-peripheral group inΠ; the side-pairings on these do-
mains induce a topological quotient on the union of the minimally bounded domains
to form a surfaceS∗ with boundary components. These boundary components are
paired up by the images inG of the stable elements of the various HNN extensions
used to produce the fundamental groupsπ1(Si) from the thrice-holed sphere groups
π1(Pi)(c.f. Construction2.6).
Take one such stable elementg; it pairs two boundary components by conjugation
inG, so there are two elementsh1 andh2 which represent the boundary components
of two F-peripheral groups inΠ so thath2 =gh 1g−1. Letξ1,ξ′
1 be the two circles
constructed in Lemma6.4which are paired byh1, and letξ2,ξ′
2 be the two circles
paired byh2. In general it is not the case thatg(ξ1) =ξ 2 and g(ξ′
1) =ξ′
2 and there
is usually a ‘dogleg’ in the topological embedding˜T at the curves which are glued
to turnS∗ intoS. If we view the construction of the lemma as producing a formal
curvilinear polygon with edges paired by the primitive boundary hyperbolics and
parabolics of the groups inΠ, theng maps the lineL1 = Pen(h1)⊂P 3 to the line
L2 = Pen(h2) but does not send the marking(F1,1,F 1,2) to the marking(F2,1,F 2,2).
Definition6.6.The unique hyperbolic Möbius transformation with the same fixed
points and axis ash2 which sends (ϕ(F1,1),ϕ(F 1,2)) to (F2,1,F 2,2) will be called
thefine holonomyof the stable elementg with respect to the particular choice of
compatible minimally bounded fundamental domains. There is a uniqueδ∈Z such
that hδ
2(F2,1)≬ϕ(F 1,1)≬h δ
2(F2,2)≬ϕ(F 2,2) (where≬ is the ‘betweenness’ relation
and can be taken to be an inequality onR after choosing a frame) and we callδ the
coarse holonomyor justholonomyof g in⟨h2⟩; hδ
2 is the ‘best approximation’ in
⟨h2⟩to the fine holonomy map.

===== PAGE 28 =====
28A. ELZENAAR
This definition is encoding a similar kind of idea to the shearing parameter
studied by Parker and Series [58], except here we are not able to choose a canonical
curve on the surface from one side of the cut to the other that we can measure the
complex distance between the start and endpoints of.
A choice of polygon where the fine holonomy associated to all of the HNN
extensions is the identity map corresponds to a geometric dual graph for the bending
lamination (i.e. a graph which is geodesic on each flat piece and meets every pleating
leaf orthogonally). It is not clear whether or not such a graph exists in general, but
in sufficiently symmetric settings it does. This includes Example6.5, where the
pencils of the side-pairing maps in each peripheral disc are symmetric with respect
to the HNN extension stable elements.
Even in the case of nontrivial holonomies, we can use compatible minimally
bounded domains to construct a fundamental domain for the action ofG on Ω(G).
Theorem6.7(Main Theorem A).Suppose that G is a convex cofinite manifold
group admitting aΛ-circle chain and letX be a parameter space forX(G). There
exists a decomposition ofPΛ⊂X into countably many semi-algebraic subsetsUj
so that for eachj there is a family of formal curvilinear polygons, parameterised
R-algebraically by ˜G∈U j, with side-pairing transformations generating˜G; each
polygon in this family induces a fundamental domain for the action of˜GonΩ( ˜G).
Proof. We first show that we can extend the construction of Lemma6.4to produce
a fundamental domain forG. Fix a Λ-circle chain Π={Π i,1,...,Π i,mi}n
i=1 for
G. As in the proof of Lemma6.4we consider the surfacesS∗ obtained by cutting
Ω(G)/G along the leaves ofΛ that are not dual to the spanning tree ofΓ(G) arising
from the circle chain. Let g1,...,g n ∈G be choices of images of elements for
the HNN extensions that glue the geodesic boundaries of these surfaces together
(in other words, thegi are the elements ofG that generate the action ofG on
the graph ˜Γ(G) from the fundamental domain given by theΠ). Suppose that
the boundary hyperbolics of the various F-peripheral groups areh1,...,h s and
g1h1g−1
1 ,...,g shsg−1
s . For eachi∈{1,...,s}, we let:
•δ i be the coarse holonomy ofgi in⟨h i⟩;
•Π i be the F-peripheral subgroup inΠthat containshi;
• ˆC(hi)be a circle passing through the fixed points ofhi, and
•C(h i) = ˆC(hi)∩∆(Π i).
For example, one choice ofˆC(hi) givesC(hi) = Ax(hi) (the translation axis ofhi
as it acts as a hyperbolic isometry on∆(Πi)); alternatively one might takeC(hi) to
be the Euclidean segment joining the two fixed points ofhi.
We use these data to produce a formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing
structure. First, take the circles used to define the compatible minimally bounded
domain produced in Lemma6.4: for each F-peripheral group inΠ we have three
pairs of circles paired by a primitive boundary parallel element which match up
along intersections of peripheral discs. To these, we must add sides that will be
paired up to glue together the boundary components ofS∗ to formS= Ω(G)/G .
As we continue with this construction, the discussion may be clarified with reference
to Figure9.
The sides paired by the stable elements will be supported on the circlesˆC(hi) and
gi ˆC(hi); it remains to choose suitable side-pairing transformations here. Consider
the circular arcC(hi); this arc meets the two circles paired byhi. In addition,
the two circles paired bygihig−1
i are mapped by(gihδi
i )−1 to two circles that meet
C(hi). This gives four circles in total that meetC(hi), and these circles cut out
three subarcs of the arcC(hi). Similarly, we obtain three subarcs of the arcgiC(hi)
cut out by thegi-translates of the circles paired byhi, together with the circles

===== PAGE 29 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS29
hi
gihδi
i
gihδi+1
i
gihig−1
i
gihδi+1
i
gihδi
i
Figure9.A dogleg arising from choosing a realisation of ˜Tthat
has holonomy. There are two valid choices for the stable element
realising the gluing of the two thrice-holed spheres, which differ
by a Dehn twist. Left: the lift of a portion of a circle chain toˆC,
along with the side-pairing transformations that are conjugated by
gihδi
i (here, δi = 0). Right: a section of the pleated surface facing
Si that includes the pleat represented bygi; the embedding of˜T
intoS∗
i does not match across the join.
paired bygihig−1
i . The central subarc ofC(hi) is sent to the central subarc of
giC(hi) bygihδi
i . If Πi∈Π is the F-peripheral group containinghi then a second
of the three subarcs ofC(hi) is contained within the fundamental domain ofΠi.
Similarly if Π′
i∈Π is the F-peripheral group containinggihigi−1 then there is a
second subarc ofgiC(hi) contained within the fundamental domain ofΠ′
i, and these
two subarcs are paired bygihδi+1
i .
In summary, we obtain a formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure
consisting of the circles and side-pairings from the compatible minimally bounded
domains of the circle chain groups, together with the circlesˆC(hi) and gi ˆC(hi),
which each appear twice: once paired bygihδi
i and once bygihδi+1
i . This structure
forms a fundamental domain when an additional vertex is added in the interior of
eachC(h i)as just described, with a different side-pairing on each half.
We now show that this definition can be chosen to vary algebraically as we deform
G to ˜G alongPΛ. To do this we first make a canonical choice forˆC(hi), namely
we take ˆC(hi) =∂g−1
i ∆(Π′
i) where Π′
i is the peripheral group inΠ which contains
gihig−1
i (this is notgiΠi, which does not lie inΠ); the location of this circle clearly
depends algebraically on the trace parameters ofG.
The only other arbitrary choices involved in the construction are those in
Lemma6.4: an arbitrary choice of first base point, and an arbitrary choice of
point on each fired geodesic in the interior of a flat piece. We can choose the
latter algebraically in terms of trace parameters: take a groupΠ∈Π with the
three primitive boundary-parallel elementsA, B, andC, and suppose that we have
already chosen circles paired byA. Draw the geodesic fromFix−A to Fix−B. This
geodesic intersects the circle paired byA which containsFix−A; this intersection
point is within the hexagon bounded byAx(A), Ax(B), and Ax(C). Lifting to
the hyperbolic convex hull boundary and projecting to the pleated surface, the

===== PAGE 30 =====
30A. ELZENAAR
intersection point lies in the interior of the flat piece uniformised byΠ. In addition,
it is defined algebraically in terms of trace data (up to quadratic extensions to
compute fixed points).
We now show that the arbitrary first choice of base point can be made in a
way that varies algebraically with trace data. Denote the first element whose
paired circles need to be defined byg (i.e. g is the boundary parallel element of an
F-peripheral group which corresponds to the unique leaf in˜T with edge oriented
outwards). Pick the circles paired byg arbitrarily for the basepointG, sayCG
and gCG. In terms of the frame{Fix−(g),I−(g),I +(g)} for Pen(g) set up by the
conformal data ofg, the pointCG is determined by a single real number: namely, the
numberx whereCG =xFix −(g)+I−(g) in the homogeneous coordinates defined by
Fix−(g) = [1 : 0],I+(g) = [0 : 1], andI−(g) = [1 : 1]). IfG deforms algebraically to
˜G, then the isometric circles ofg deform algebraically to isometric circles of˜gwhere
˜gis the image ofg under the representationG→ ˜G). We choose the circles paired
by ˜gto beC ˜G =xI +(˜g) +I−(˜g)and ˜gC˜G. This choice clearly moves algebraically
with ˜G, so we have shown that we can define the edges of our fundamental domains
to move algebraically onPΛ.
It is possible for the coarse holonomy of the compatible minimally bounded
domains to change as we move along the pleating ray; the places where this occurs
are detected by inequalities on the the positions of thegi-translates of the circles
ˆC(hi), each set corresponding to a particular choice ofδi needed to make the
fundamental domains at each end of the tree˜T meet along a nonempty arc aftergi-
translation. Within each of these semi-algebraic sets the side-pairing transformations
between ˆC(hi) and gi ˆC(hi) move algebraically and so these sets form the countably
many subsetsUj, cut out by geometric inequalities that encode the property that
the corresponding formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure actually
forms a fundamental domain.
Corollary6.8.Suppose that G is a convex cofinite manifold group admitting aΛ-
circle chain and letX be a parameter space forX(G). There exists a decomposition
ofPΛ⊂X into countably many semi-algebraic subsetsUj so that, for eachj, there
is a map fromUj into the space of finite-sided polyhedra inH3 which sends ˜G∈U j
to a fundamental polyhedron for˜G.
Proof. By taking hyperbolic convex hulls, Theorem6.7furnishes us with a funda-
mental domainDfor the action of ˜Gon
Ω( ˜G)∪(H 3\h.conv Λ( ˜G)),
i.e. on a lift of the exterior of the convex core ofH3/ ˜G; this fundamental domain
detects the real ends of the manifold and so is enough to pin down ˜G using
Theorem2.2. It can be improved to give a fundamental domain for the total
action of ˜G on H3 by a Voronoi diagram construction generalising the Dirichlet
construction [49, §IV.G]. Let ˆD be the hyperbolic convex hull ofD, and letD
be the set of ˜G-translates of ˆD. Since Stab ˜GD is trivial, we can enumerateD
irredundantly as{g ˆD:g∈ ˜G}. Intersecting these sets with∂h.conv Λ(G) gives a
tiling of a topological sphere inH3 where each tileg ˆD∩∂h.conv Λ(G) is made up of
finitely many flat hyperbolic polygons (which we will callcells) glued along angles.
For allg∈ ˜Gwe define a Voronoi region
Vg :=
{
x∈
(
H3\∪D
)
:∀ g′∈ ˜G ρ(x,g ˆD)≤ρ(x,g ′ ˆD)
}
.
whereρ is the hyperbolic metric. The setˆD∪V 1 is a fundamental set for the action
of ˜GonH 3.

===== PAGE 31 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS31
We now show thatV1 is cut out by finitely many planes inH3, i.e. it is a hyperbolic
polyhedron. Define for each cell on the hyperbolic convex hull boundary a set of
pleated geodesics that are hyperbolic bisectors of the boundary pleats. In general
these will not meet at a unique point in the cell, but they will meet at a finite set of
points within each cell. Since˜G acts discontinuously onH3 and the convex core
boundary is embedded inH3, the set of all of these points over all cells is discrete.
Use these points as seeds for a classical Voronoi diagram inH3; thenV1 is the union
of each of the Voronoi regions with seeds in the cell aboveˆD. In particular, it is cut
out by planes. SinceV1∪ ˆD is cut out by planes it is a fundamental polyhedron;
but every fundamental polyhedron for˜G is finitely sided since˜G is geometrically
finite [49, §VI.E.2] and so we have the desired result.
Remark6.9.The map of Corollary6.8is not necessarily algebraic even within
eachUj, since small movements of the parameter will in general cause new facets
of the Voronoi cells inH3 to pop into existence. We only have algebraic control
over the conformal boundaries of the domains involved. This is a manifestation
of the remarks in Section2on the relationship between the groupG globally and
its pieces Σi ‘near’ the conformal surfaces; we know what theΣi actions look like
(the conformal action) but we do not know how they glue together inH3 without
special information in particular cases. The maps will still be continuous in the
topology induced by the Hausdorff metric on closed sets [9, Vol. I, §9.11] (more
precisely, cut the polyhedra up into two pieces along the convex core boundary; the
boundary neighbourhood piece exterior to the convex core moves continuously by
Theorem6.7, and the convex piece moves continuously by the continuity of Voronoi
regions with respect to the Hausdorff metric [4, §9.1.2]).
Example6.10(The case ofk-punctured sphere groups with a single end).Specialise
to the case thatM=H 3/G has a single conformal end,S. Suppose that the
conformal structure onS is ak-punctured sphere, so the laminationΛ consists ofk
loops of length0 together, completed to a maximal lamination arbitrarily; then the
dual graph to the non-zero-length loops is a tree. Use this dual graph to produce
the surfaceS∗, which is again ak-punctured sphere.
Suppose thath1 and h2 are elements corresponding to boundary components
of S∗, so both are parabolic. In this special case, the arcsC(hi) can be chosen
to be degenerate, consisting of exactly the fixed point of the parabolic. Thus the
fundamental domain described in Theorem6.7does not have any edges beyond those
coming from the F-peripheral groups ofG, and in particular there is no interaction
of holonomy with the fundamental domain: we do not need to replace the elements
h1 and h2 with twisted elements. Another way of seeing this is to observe that the
conjugating element does not represent a loop on the surfaceS, and socannotbe
visible from the image of the fundamental group ofSinG.
Since Λ was arbitrary, this shows that all convex cofinite manifold groupsG on
any Λ-pleating variety such thatΩ(G)/G is ak-punctured sphere can be given a
combinatorially consistent fundamental domain that depends algebraically on the
parameterisation of the pleating variety. This includes, as a special case, Example1.3.
6.3.Deformations off pleating varieties via twisting.We wish to extend the
map of Theorem6.7to give fundamental domains of groups in open neighbourhoods
of the setsUj. The naïve picture is that we replace F-peripheral groups with
quasi-Fuchsian peripheral groups, and consider pullbacks ofSΛ underχΛ instead of
only pullbacks ofSΛ(R). The problem is that it is not possible to semi-algebraically
detect when a ‘quasi-circle chain’ ceases to model the convex core boundary, since
there is no analogue of Proposition4.10.

===== PAGE 32 =====
32A. ELZENAAR
To get around this problem, we work directly with algebraic families of formal
curvilinear polygons with side-pairing structures. Given a small motion of the
parametersin X offapleatingvariety, wedefine(purelyformally)asmalldeformation
of the corresponding fundamental domain as constructed in the previous section in
such a way that the result is still a fundamental domain within a computable semi-
algebraic set inX (defined in terms of incidence geometry in the formal curvilinear
polygon). The procedure is analogous to a construction in our earlier joint work on
the Riley slice with Martin and Schillewaert [23, §5.3], but has additional difficulties
which could be ignored in that paper where only a single class of well-understood
groups was studied.
We will continue with the notation we have been using throughout the paper:
let G≤PSL(2,C) be a convex cofinite manifold group which admits aΛ-circle
chain Π for some maximal rational laminationΛ. Let T be the corresponding
maximal forest in Γ(Λ), whose vertices and edges we associate with elements of
Π and their intersections; and letS∗ be the (possibly disconnected) subsurface of
S= ⋃n
i=1Si = Ω(G)/G corresponding to the deletion of all leaves ofΛ that do
not intersect an arc ofT. In addition, letG(t) be a family of representations in
Hom(G,PSL(2,C)) that depends algebraically ont∈X for some parameter space
X⊆C N, so thatG(0) =G.
Construction6.11.Let D0 be a choice of grafted fundamental domain (Theo-
rem6.7) for G(0): it is a formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure,
which also happens to satisfy sufficient incidence conditions to guarantee that it
is a fundamental domain for the action ofG(0) on ˆC. LetU⊆P Λ⊂X be the
semi-algebraic set defined in Theorem6.7which containsG(0) and within which we
have a family{Dt :t∈U} of algebraically varying fundamental domains forG(t).
We will construct an extension of this family indexed byXrather thanU.
Step6.11(a) (Definitions for the side-pairing maps).Each edge inT corresponds to a
single cyclic group with primitive generator in one of the groupsπ1(Si) representing
a leaf ofΛi. This gives a family of elements{fe(0) :e∈E(T)} where each element
is a primitive hyperbolic or parabolic element ofG(0); all thefe(0) are the images
in G of pairwise non-conjugate elements in the surface fundamental groups. For
generalt∈X , definefe(t) fore∈E(T) to be the image offe(0) under the canonical
mapG→G(t).
For each boundary component or non-paired puncture ofS∗ (there are two for each
leaf ofT), we can choose a corresponding primitive hyperbolic or parabolic element
of G. These primitive elements come inG-projections of conjugate pairs in the
surface fundamental groupsπ1(Si). Arbitrarily choose one conjugacy representative
hj(0) from each pair, and letgj(0) be the corresponding stable element of the HNN
extension so thathj(0)gj(0) represents the second element. We have chosen elements
h1(0),...,h m(0) and g1(0),...,g m(0) in G(0), and we can defineh1(t),...,h m(t)
and g1(t),...,g m(t) in G(t) to be their images under the canonical mapG→G(t) .
Step6.11(b) (Deforming the skew-hexagon domains of peripheral groups).The proof
of Theorem6.7gives us, for eachj∈{1,...,m} (resp. e∈E(T) ) and allt∈U , a
pair of circles inPen(hj(t)) (resp. Pen(fe(t))) that are paired byhj(t) (resp. fe(t)).
These circles were defined inductively and completely algebraically. Note that the
inductive step for an element in some peripheral groupΠ involves finding a certain
circle that is orthogonal to∆(Π) at two points. Replacing ‘orthogonal to∆(Π)’
with ‘orthogonal to the circle through the three fixed pointsFix+A,Fix +B,Fix +C’
(where A,B, andC are primitive elements representing the three boundary com-
ponents of ∆(Π)/Π), the circles obtained can be viewed as algebraically varying
with parameters inX rather than just parameters onPΛ. In addition, so long as

===== PAGE 33 =====
PERIPHERAL SUBGROUPS OF KLEINIAN GROUPS33
Fj′,1 Fj,1 Fj′,2 Fj,2
w
z L
˜L
w′
Figure10.The ‘twisted’ line that comes in two segments paired
bygj(t)hj(t)δ and gj(t)hj(t)δ+1; the endpoints of˜L on the circles
Fj,1 and Fj,2 are correctly paired byhj. We also showFj′,1 and
Fj′,2, the inverse images undergj of the circles paired bygjhjg−1
j .
the six circles for eachΠ∈Π do not change their incidence structure (i.e. they
continue to form a skew-hexagon inP3), the sum of the angles at the three points
of intersction will remain constant at2π. This is because the sum of the angles is
an analytic function (not algebraic, since it involvesarccos) in the parametersX
which is constant on the uncountable setU, so is constant in the entire connected
component of its domain that containsU.
Step6.11(c) (Deforming the arcs paired by the HNN extensions).In addition to
the circles just defined, the fundamental domainsDt contain certain circles paired
by the stable elementsgj(t) (possibly twisted byhj(t)). We recall that there was,
in the proof of Theorem6.7, a choice involved here: namely, we needed to choose
a circle ˆC(hj(t)) in the pencil of circles through the fixed points ofhj(t) (i.e. the
orthogonal pencil toPen(hj(t))). We will take the particular choice thatˆC(hj(t))
is the Euclidean line through the fixed points (soC(hj(t)) is the Euclidean segment
joining the fixed points). This obviously moves algebraically witht∈U ; we need to
define a family of circles parameterised byt∈X which specialises to this choice
onU and which continues to satisfy the relevant holonomy conditions from the
definition of a fundamental domain. Concretely, fort∈X and for eachj, we define
(analogously to [23]) a twisted line that joins the two adjacent circles paired by
hj(t); the procedure is illustrated in Figure10:
(i) Let Fj,1 and Fj,2 be the two circles paired byhj(t); letF′
j,1 and F′
j,2 be the
circles paired bygj(t)hj(t)g−1
j (t). Let δj∈Z be the coarse holonomy of
gj(t)—by definition ofUthis is a constant, independent oft.
(ii) Let L be the (Euclidean) line through the fixed points of hj(t). The
coordinates in P3 of this line can be determined algebraically in terms of
the fixed points by Lemma5.5.
(iii) Let w and w′ be the intersection points ofL with Fj,1 and Fj,2 respectively.
This involves solving a quadratic equation in one variable.
(iv) Compute the square root of the rotational part ofhj(t): change coordinates
so that the fixed points ofhj(t) are 0 and∞, andhj(t)(z) =λ 2z for λ∈C
(which will be an eigenvalue ofhj(t) as a 2×2 matrix), then the desired
map isϕ(z) =λ/|λ|z ; this isR-algebraic in the coefficients ofhj(t), modulo
a single square root. Define ˜Lj(t) to be the Euclidean segment through
ϕ−1(w)andϕ(w ′).
(v) The circle hj(t)δj(gj(t)−1(F′
j,1)) is algebraically determined by part (ii)
Lemma5.5, i.e. it is the image under gj(t)−1 of the circle through the
intersection points ofF′
j,1 with another circle in the same minimally bounded
domain and with the boundary of the peripheral disc it is orthogonal to.
Letzbe the intersection of ˜Lj(t)withh j(t)δj(gj(t)−1(F′
j,1)).

===== PAGE 34 =====
34A. ELZENAAR
Step6.11(d) (Synthesis).The formal curvilinear polygon with side-pairing structure
Dt for allt∈Xis now defined. Its sides and side-pairings are:
• The circles paired by the elementsgj(t) and fe(t), defined by a simple
extension of defining polynomials fromUtoX.
• For each boundary component ofS∗, the segment[z,w′]⊂ ˜Lj(t) and its
image undergj(t)hj(t)δj, paired by the latter.
• For each boundary component ofS∗, the segment [w,z]⊂ ˜Lj(t) and its
image undergj(t)hj(t)δj+1, paired by the latter. (This will be a segment of
a circle tangent togj(t)hj(t)δj[z,w′].)
The regions defined byDt are not necessarily fundamental domains forG(t) when
tis sufficiently far fromU, so the construction alone does not certify discreteness.
Theorem6.12(Main Theorem B).Let G≤PSL(2,C) be a convex cofinite manifold
group which admits aΛ-circle chain for some maximal rational laminationΛ. Let
G(t) be a family of representations inHom(G,PSL(2,C)) that depends algebraically
on t∈X for some parameter spaceX, so thatG(0) =G . There exists an open,
nontrivial, full-dimensional semi-algebraic neighbourhoodY of G in QH(G)⊂X .
Further, there is a countable open cover ofQH(G) consisting of sets of this form,
indexed by the product of the set of maximal rational laminations withZN for some
largeNdepending onG.
Proof. The setY will simply be a semi-algebraic set of pointst∈X such that
Construction6.11‘works’. It is clear that this set will be full-dimensional and
nontrivial since it contains an open ball (with respect to the Teichmüller topology)
around points close toG on the Λ-pleating variety (the domain in Construction6.11
is combinatorially stable under small movements oftin any direction inQH(G)).
We can form a fundamental domain for the deformed element so long as (i) all the
peripheral groups are still discrete, and (ii) the domains of the individual peripheral
groups have not started to overlap. All the circles defined in Construction6.11are
algebraically defined in terms oft and the initial choice ofG, modulo extraction of
some square roots; these root extractions can be replaced by dummy variables, as
we did in Example2.7, to keep the problem algebraic. The necessary conditions are:
(1)Local conditions. For each peripheral groupΠi(t)in the circle chain:
L1. The three pairs of incident circles in the domain forΠi(t) in ∆i(t) must
be mutually disjoint;
L2. Each line ˜Lj(t) must meet the two incident circles (the paired circles at
its ends) at an angle in(0,π/2), which is an algebraic condition using
the quadratic formrad2 [9, Vol. II, Proposition20.4.2], and must not
hit any other parameterised circle between these two incidence points.
(2)Global conditions.
G1. For alli,j, if the closures of the curvilinear domains forΠi(0) and
Πj(0) are disjoint, then the closures of the curvilinear domains for
Πi(t) and Πj(t) must be disjoint; that is, the total grafted fundamental
domain must be without self-overlap. By Lemma5.7, this amounts to
a semi-algebraic condition.
G2. Additional inequalities coming from [6, Theorem5.21] must be added
to cut out the connected component of the semi-algebraic set that
containsG.
IfY is the semi-algebraic subset cut out by these inequalities andt∈Y , then the
formal curvilinear polygon produced by Construction6.11is an actual non-empty
subset, locally cut out by circles paired by the putative side-pairing elements in
the correct combinatorial arrangement, with the correct angle sums; in particular

===== PAGE 35 =====
REFERENCES35
it defines a fundamental domain forG(t) as desired, varying algebraically witht.
There are two subtle points connected with the two global conditions.
First,a priorijust having a fundamental domain for the conformal action of a
subgroup ofPSL(2,C) on the complex plane which satisfies the angle-sum conditions
around vertices is not enough to guarantee discreteness: for example, the group
could be a cone-manifold holonomy group with a cone angle along a closed loop
that is not a sub-multiple ofπ, so the cone singularity is not visible from the
conformal structure on the boundary (c.f. Example5.12). It is here that (G2), i.e.
that we restrict to the connected component containing the known discrete and
geometrically finite base-pointG, is necessary: this rules out such degeneracies since,
by the standard theorems about the boundary ofQH(G), any path which starts at
G and ends at an indiscrete group must pass through a pointG(t)∈∂QH(G) and
for every such point either a boundary-parallel element ofG(t) is parabolic that
was not parabolic inG (i.e. G(t) is a cusp point) or a component ofΩ(G) vanishes
in Ω(G(t)) (i.e. G(t) has a geometrically infinite end); both of these are detected by
the conformal structures ofG(t) and so the conditions we have given are sufficient
to ensure thatG(t)is in fact discrete.
Second, in the usual formulations of polyhedron theorems it is necessary for
translates of the fundamental domain under all elements of the group to be pairwise
disjoint, while in (G1) we only require the domain to not overlap with itself. This is in
fact sufficient, by the following short argument: if the polygon does not self-overlap
and if the angle-sums around vertices add up to2π, then the side pairings define
a complex structure on the correct union of surfaces, and the holonomy groups of
these complex structures are the groups generated by the corresponding peripheral
subgroups. By the argument in the previous paragraph again, any parabolics or
arbitrarily short elements appearing in the global groupG(t) must be visible in the
pinching or vanishing of the complex structure of one of these surfaces, i.e. in the
group generated by the peripheral subgroupsΠi(t), so until the point of overlap
(where we no longer have a well-defined conformal surface obtained from the side
pairings) we still have a correct fundamental domain so long as the local conditions
(L1) and (L2) hold.
From these inequalities, we obtain a countable family of semi-algebraic sets
coveringPΛ, one for each covering setUj as explained in Theorem6.7, and the
union of these countably many sets for allΛ fill QH(G) since pleating rays for
maximal rational laminations are dense inQH(G)(see Observation6.1).
Remark6.13.Markowitz [48] has given an algorithm for discreteness inSL(2,R)
which involves the recognition of peripheral structures inH2: the peripheral discs
are arcs onS1, and a group is indiscrete if parts of the Cayley graph which ‘should’
lead to the endpoints of such a peripheral structure (‘leftmost paths’) overlap in the
interior of H2. The obstruction to extending this algorithm toH3 is that peripheral
structures can collapse without such overlaps occuring detectably. Theorem6.12
is based on a similar idea: it starts with groups which are known to not have any
overlaps (i.e. they have provably non-empty peripheral structures) and then deforms
them slightly so that these structures do not self-intersect.
References
[1] Ian Agol.Tameness of hyperbolic3-manifolds.2004. arXiv: math/0405568
[math.GT](cit. on p.1).
[2] Hirotaka Akiyoshi, Makoto Sakuma, Masaaki Wada, and Yasushi Yamashita.
Punctured torus groups and2-bridge knot groups I. Lecture Notes in Math.
1909. Springer,2007.doi:10.1007/978-3-540-71807-9(cit. on pp.3,5).

===== PAGE 36 =====
36REFERENCES
[3] Matthias Aschenbrenner, Stefan Friedl, and Henry Wilton.3-manifold groups.
EMS Ser. Lect. Math. European Mathematical Society,2015(cit. on p.9).
[4] Franz Aurenhammer, Rolf Klein, and Ter-Tsai Lee.Voronoi diagrams and
Delaunay triangulations. World Scientific,2013(cit. on p.31).
[5] Shinpei Baba and Ken’ichi Ohshika. “Realisation of bending measured lami-
nations by Kleinian surface groups”. In:Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN(2023),
pp.16674–16707.doi:10.1093/imrn/rnac357(cit. on p.11).
[6] Saugata Basu, Richard Pollack, and Marie-Françoise Roy.Algorithms in real
algebraic geometry. Algorithms Comput. Math.10. Springer,2006(cit. on
pp.2,19,21,34).
[7] Alan F. Beardon.The geometry of discrete groups. Grad. Texts in Math.91.
Springer-Verlag,1983(cit. on pp.14,15).
[8] Michael Ben-Zvi, Jiayi Lou, and Genevieve S. Walsh.Hyperbolic boundaries
vs. hyperbolic groups.2022. arXiv:2201.12443[math.GR](cit. on p.10).
[9] Marcel Berger.Geometry. Trans. by M. Cole and S. Levy. Corrected fourth
printing. Universitext. Two volumes. Springer,1987(cit. on pp.20,31,34).
[10] Francis Bonahon and Jean-Pierre Otal. “Laminations measurées de plissage
des variétés hyperboliques de dimension3”. In:Ann. Math. (2)160(2004),
pp.1013–1055.doi:10.4007/annals.2004.160.1013(cit. on p.11).
[11] Brian H. Bowditch. “Peripheral splittings of groups”. In:Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc.353(2001), pp.4057–4082.doi: 10.1090/S0002-9947-01-02835-5
(cit. on p.10).
[12] Jeffrey F. Brock, Richard D. Canary, and Yair N. Minsky. “The classification
of Kleinian surface groups, II: The ending lamination conjecture”. In:Ann.
Math. (2)176(2012), pp.1–149.doi: 10.4007/annals.2012.176.1.1. arXiv:
math/0412006[math.GT](cit. on p.1).
[13] Kenneth Bromberg. “The space of Kleinian punctured torus groups is not
locally connected”. In:Duke Math. J.156(2011), pp.387–427.doi: 10.1215/
00127094-2010-215(cit. on p.2).
[14] Danny Calegari and David Gabai. “Shrinkwrapping and the taming of hy-
perbolic 3-manifolds”. In:J. Amer. Math. Soc.19(2006), pp.385–446.doi:
10.1090/ S0894-0347-05-00513-8 . arXiv: math /0407161[math.GT]
(cit. on p.1).
[15] Young-Eun Choi and Caroline Series. “Lengths are coordinates for convex
structures”. In:J. Differential Geom.73(2006), pp.75–117.doi: 10.4310/
jdg/1146680513(cit. on pp.11,15).
[16] George E. Collins and Hoon Hong. “Partial Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposi-
tion for quantifier elimination”. In:J. Symbolic Comput.12(1991), pp.299–
328.doi:10.1016/S0747-7171(08)80152-6(cit. on p.22).
[17] Warren Dicks and M.J. Dunwoody.Groups acting on graphs. Cambridge Stud.
Adv. Math.17. Cambridge University Press,1989(cit. on p.11).
[18] Bruno Dular.Bending parameterization of one-sided degenerated Kleinian
surface groups.2025. arXiv:2504.19891[math.GT](cit. on p.11).
[19] Bruno Dular and Jean-Marc Schlenker.Convex co-compact hyperbolic mani-
folds are determined by their pleating lamination.2024. arXiv:2403.10090
[math.GT](cit. on p.11).
[20] Alex Elzenaar.Changing topological type of compression bodies through cone
manifolds.2024. arXiv:2411.17940[math.GT](cit. on pp.2,23,27).
[21] Alex Elzenaar.From disc patterns in the plane to character varieties of knot
groups.2025. arXiv:2503.13829[math.GT](cit. on pp.9,12).

===== PAGE 37 =====
REFERENCES37
[22] Alex Elzenaar, Jianhua Gong, Gaven J. Martin, and Jeroen Schillewaert.
Bounding deformation spaces of Kleinian groups with two generators.2024.
arXiv:2405.15970[math.CV](cit. on p.2).
[23] Alex Elzenaar, Gaven J. Martin, and Jeroen Schillewaert. “Approximations
of the Riley slice”. In:Expo. Math.41(1 2023), pp.20–54.doi: 10.1016/j.
exmath.2022.12.002. arXiv: 2111.03230[math.GT] (cit. on pp.2,4,32,
33).
[24] D. B. A. Epstein and R. C. Penner. “Euclidean decompositions of noncompact
hyperbolic manifolds”. In:J. Differential Geom.27(1988), pp.67–80.doi:
10.4310/jdg/1214441650(cit. on pp.3,5).
[25] Lester R. Ford.Automorphic forms.2nd ed. Chelsea Publishing Company,
1951(cit. on p.3).
[26] Mikio Furokawa. “Ford domains of fuchsian once-punctured Klein bottle
groups”. In:Topology Appl.196(2015), pp.431–437.doi: 10.1016/j.topol.
2015.05.017(cit. on p.3).
[27] Jane Gilman. “Computability models: algebraic, topological and geometric
algorithms”. In:Computational aspects of discrete subgroups of Lie groups.
Ed. by Alla Detinko, Michael Kapovich, Alex Kontorovich, Peter Sarnak, and
Richard Schwartz. Contemp. Math.783.2023, pp.57–68.doi: 10.1090/
conm/783/15733(cit. on p.6).
[28] Peter Haïssinsky, Luisa Paoluzzi, and Genevieve Walsh. “Boundaries of
Kleinian groups”. In:Illinois J. Math.60(2016), pp.353–364.doi: 10.
1215/ijm/1498032035(cit. on p.10).
[29] Udo Hertrich-Jeromin.Introduction to Möbius differential geometry. London
Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.300. Cambridge University Press,2003(cit. on
p.24).
[30] Hoon Hong, Christopher W. Brown, et al.QEPCAD: Quantifier Elimination
by Partial Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition. Software.2018.url:https:
//www.usna.edu/Users/cs/wcbrown/qepcad/B/QEPCAD.html (cit. on
p.22).
[31] Stefan Johansson. “On fundamental domains of arithmetic Fuchsian groups”.
In:Math. Comput.69(2000), pp.339–349.doi: 10.1090/S0025-5718-99-
01167-9(cit. on p.3).
[32] Troels Jørgensen. “On pairs of once-punctured tori”. In:Kleinian groups
and hyperbolic3-manifolds. Ed. by Y. Komori, V. Markovic, and C. Series.
London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.299. Cambridge University Press,2003,
pp.183–297.doi:10.1017/CBO9780511542817.010(cit. on pp.3,5).
[33] Yuichi Kabaya. “Parametrization of PSL(2,C)-representations of surface
groups”. In:Geom. Dedicata170(2014), pp.9–62.doi: 10.1007/s10711-
013-9866-x. arXiv:1110.6674[math.GT](cit. on p.8).
[34] Michael Kapovich. “Discreteness is undecidable”. In:Internat. J. Algebra
Comput.26(2016), pp.467–472.doi: 10.1142/S0218196716500193 (cit.
on p.6).
[35] Michael Kapovich. “Geometric algorithms for discreteness and faithfulness”. In:
Computational aspects of discrete subgroups of Lie groups. Ed. by Alla Detinko,
Michael Kapovich, Alex Kontorovich, Peter Sarnak, and Richard Schwartz.
Contemp. Math.783.2023, pp.87–112.doi: 10.1090/conm/783/15736
(cit. on p.6).
[36] Linda Keen. “A correction to “On Fricke moduli””. In:Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc.40(1973), pp.60–62.doi:10.2307/2038632(cit. on p.17).
[37] Linda Keen. “On Fricke moduli”. In:Advances in the theory of Riemann
surfaces. Proceedings of the1969Stony Brook Conference. Ed. by Lars V.

===== PAGE 38 =====
38REFERENCES
Ahlfors, Lipman Bers, Hershel M. Farkas, Robert C. Gunning, Irwin Kra, and
Harry E. Rauch. Ann. of Math. Stud.66. Princeton University Press,1971,
pp.205–224.doi:10.1515/9781400822492-015(cit. on p.17).
[38] Linda Keen and Caroline Series. “Continuity of convex hull boundaries”. In:
Pacific J. Math.168.1(1995), pp.183–206.doi: 10.2140/pjm.1995.168.183
(cit. on p.19).
[39] Linda Keen and Caroline Series. “Pleating coordinates for the Maskit em-
bedding of the Teichmüller space of punctured tori”. In:Topology32(1993),
pp.719–749.doi:10.1016/0040-9383(93)90048-z(cit. on pp.2,10,12).
[40] Linda Keen and Caroline Series. “The Riley slice of Schottky space”. In:Proc.
Lond. Math. Soc. (3)69(1994), pp.72–90.doi: 10.1112/plms/s3-69.1.72
(cit. on pp.2,10,12,13,19).
[41] Yohei Komori. “Semialgebraic description of Teichmüller space”. In:Publ. Res.
Inst. Math. Sci.33(1997), pp.527–571.doi: 10.2977/prims/1195145147
(cit. on p.17).
[42] Yohei Komori and Caroline Series. “The Riley slice revisited”. In:The Epstein
birthday schrift. Ed. by Igor Rivin, Colin Rourke, and Caroline Series. Monogr.
Geom. Topology1. Mathematical Sciences Publishers,1998, pp.303–316.
doi: 10.2140/gtm.1998.1.303 . arXiv: math/9810194[math.GT] (cit. on
p.19).
[43] Irwin Kra. “Horocyclic coordinates for Riemann surfaces and moduli spaces,
I. Teichmüller and Riemann spaces of Kleinian groups”. In:J. Amer. Math.
Soc.3(1990), pp.499–578.doi:10.2307/1990927(cit. on p.9).
[44] Marc Lackenby and Jessica S. Purcell. “Geodesics and compression bodies”. In:
Exp. Math.23(2014), pp.218–240.doi: 10.1080/10586458.2013.870503.
arXiv:1302.3652[math.GT](cit. on pp.2,3).
[45] Sara Maloni and Caroline Series. “Top terms of polynomial traces in Kra’s
plumbing construction”. In:Algebr. Geom. Topol.10(2010), pp.1565–1607.
doi: 10.2140/agt.2010.10.1565. arXiv: 1001.2515[math.GN] (cit. on p.9).
[46] Jason Manning. “Algorithmic detection and description of hyperbolic struc-
tures on closed3-manifolds with solvable word problem”. In:Geom. Topol.
6(2002), pp.1–26.doi: 10.2140/ gt .2002.6.1 . arXiv: math /0102154
[math.GT](cit. on p.3).
[47] Albert Marden. “The geometry of finitely generated Kleinian groups”. In:
Ann. Math. (2)99(1974), pp.383–462.doi: 10.2307/1971059 (cit. on p.7).
[48] AriMarkowitz.Recognition and constructive membership for discrete subgroups
ofSL 2(R).2024. arXiv:2410.18315[math.GR](cit. on p.35).
[49] Bernard Maskit.Kleinian groups. Grundlehren Math. Wiss.287. Springer-
Verlag,1987(cit. on pp.3,6,7,22,26,30,31).
[50] Katsuhiko Matsuzaki and Masahiko Taniguchi.Hyperbolic manifolds and
Kleinian groups. Oxford University Press,1998(cit. on pp.6,7,11).
[51] Yair N. Minsky. “The classification of Kleinian surface groups, I: Models and
bounds”. In:Ann. Math. (2)171(2010), pp.1–107.doi: 10.4007/annals.
2010.171.1. arXiv:math/0302208[math.GT](cit. on pp.1,5).
[52] Yair N. Minsky. “The classification of punctured-torus groups”. In:Ann. Math.
(2)171(1999), pp.559–626.doi: 10.2307/120976. arXiv: math/9807001
[math.GT](cit. on p.5).
[53] Hideki Miyachi. “Cusps in complex boundaries of one-dimensional Teichmüller
space”. In:Conform. Geom. Dyn.7(2003), pp.103–151.doi: 10.1090/S1088-
4173-03-00065-1(cit. on p.11).

===== PAGE 39 =====
REFERENCES39
[54] Hossein Namazi and Juan Souto. “Non-realizability and ending laminations:
proof of the density conjecture”. In:Acta Math.209(2012), pp.323–395.
doi:10.1007/s11511-012-0088-0(cit. on p.1).
[55] Ken’ichi Ohshika. “Divergence, exotic convergence and self-bumping in quasi-
Fuchsian spaces”. In:Ann. Fac. Sci. Toulouse Math. (6)29(2020), pp.805–
895.doi: 10.5802/afst.1647. arXiv: 1010.0070v4[math.GT] (cit. on p.2).
[56] Ken’ichi Ohshika. “Realising end invariants by limits of minimally parabolic,
geometrically finite groups”. In:Geom. Topol.15(2011), pp.827–890.doi:
10.2140/gt.2011.15.827. arXiv:math/0504546[math.GT](cit. on p.1).
[57] Ken’ichi Ohshika and Hideki Miyachi. “Uniform models for the closure of
the Riley slice”. In:In the tradition of Ahlfors-Bers, V. Ed. by Mario Bonk,
Jane Gilman, Howard Masur, Yair Minsky, and Michael Wolf. Contemp. Math.
510.2010, pp.249–306(cit. on p.5).
[58] John R. Parker and Caroline Series. “Bending formulae for convex hull bound-
aries”. In:J. Anal. Math.67(1995), pp.165–198.doi: 10.1007/BF02787788
(cit. on pp.18,28).
[59] Henri Poincaré. “Mémoire sur les groupes Kleinéens”. In:Acta Math.3(1883),
pp.49–92.doi:10.1007/BF02422441(cit. on p.1).
[60] Robert Riley. “Seven excellent knots”. In:Low-dimensional topology. Con-
ference on Topology in Low Dimension (University College of North Wales,
Bangor,1979). Ed. by R. Brown and T.L. Thickstun. London Math. Soc.
Lecture Note Ser.48. Cambridge University Press,1982, pp.81–151.doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511758935.009(cit. on p.3).
[61] Kyoji Saito. “Algebraic representation of the Teichmüller spaces”. In:The
Grothendieck theory of dessins d’enfants. Ed. by Leila Schneps. London Math.
Soc. Lecture Note Ser.200. Cambridge University Press,1994, pp.255–288
(cit. on p.17).
[62] Caroline Series. “Thurston’s bending measure conjecture for once punc-
tured torus groups”. In:Spaces of Kleinian groups. Ed. by Yair N. Min-
sky, Makoto Sakuma, and Caroline Series. London Math. Soc. Lecture Note
Ser.329. Cambridge University Press,2006, pp.75–89.doi: 10.1017/
CBO9781139106993.005(cit. on p.11).
[63] William P. Thurston. “Three dimensional manifolds, Kleinian groups, and
hyperbolic geometry”. In:Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.)6(1982), pp.357–
381.doi:10.1090/s0273-0979-1982-15003-0(cit. on p.1).
[64] Pekka Tukia. “On isomorphisms of geometrically finite groups”. In:Inst.
Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math.61(1985), pp.171–214.url: http://www.
numdam.org/item/PMIHES_1985__61__171_0/(cit. on p.7).
