===== PAGE 1 =====
The quantum world reveals reality is made of
relations, not objects
Deleuze’s metaphysics can make sense of quantum weirdness
19th February 2026
 cite
George Webster | Stipendiary Lecturer in Philosophy at Worcester College, University of Oxford. 1,983 words
Read time: approx. 10 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
We assume that objects are more fundamental than the relationships between those
objects. However, philosopher George Webster argues that quantum mechanics
upends this common-sense picture. In the quantum world, relations like symmetry are
more real than the particles themselves. But neither our everyday language, nor the
language of logic favored by philosophers, can make sense of this. Webster suggests
that we turn to the weird and wonderful language of Gilles Deleuze to truly
comprehend the quantum picture of reality.
 
The everyday picture: a world of objects
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
New theory
argues quantum
physics must
abandon irrational
numbers and the
continuum
Spacetime does
not emerge from
quantum physics
Schrödinger’s
blunder created
the quantum
measurement
problem
The universe is
fine-tuned for
technology, not
just life
Related Videos:
Time's great
mystery
We ordinarily think of the world as a collection of things or individual objects: tables,
trees, planets, particles, people.
This way of thinking is not only intuitive but also tremendously useful. Whether
crossing a busy street or hunting prey, we survive by tracking the motions of objects—
judging their distances, anticipating their paths, and timing our actions accordingly.
Evolutionarily speaking, this is a worldview to which humanity owes its continued
existence.
But it is also a worldview motivated by a very specific practical context. We occupy an
extremely limited perspective on the world, and we have little reason to believe that
that perspective (i.e., an observational window ranging from millimetres to miles and
from milliseconds to a century or so) accurately represents the universe at its
grandest quantum and cosmological scales.
Indeed, not only do we have little reason to suppose that our practically motivated
model of the world accurately reflects reality, but we also have positive reason to
believe that it fails to do so. This is because science—and recent philosophical
reflection on the sciences—suggests an alternative account. That is, one according to
which not objects but relations are the ultimate constituents of reality.
___
What is fundamentally real are not particles as such, but
rather the laws and symmetries (such as permutation
invariance) that govern their behaviour.
___
But this is a strange thought. Relations such as “being in love with” or “standing taller
than” or “moving faster than” all seem to presuppose the objects between which they
obtain. Relations, in other words, seem to depend upon objects for their existence. So
why invert this picture? And how does a figure seemingly irrelevant to contemporary
philosophy of science (the twentieth-century “post-modern” French philosopher, Gilles
Deleuze) help us to make sense of this inversion?
 
Quantum theory and why objects are not fundamental
Cause for a relations-based worldview can be found in quantum theory (or, more
specifically, quantum statistics).
Two coins flipped simultaneously will produce one of four outcomes—each occurring
with equal frequency when the experiment is repeated continuously. Two elementary
particles (in this case bosons), on the other hand, fired through an appropriate
experimental setup designed to measure analogous properties (e.g., spin-up and
spin-down), will produce three outcomes—each occurring with equal frequency.

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
Our future
theories of the
universe
Physics has
misunderstood
time
The trouble with
string theory
In the case of the coins, the fourfold probability distribution is explained partly by the
fact that we can count a mixed result in two distinct ways: one coin displaying heads
and the other displaying tails, and vice versa. Even though the coins may be the same
denomination (e.g., both fifty-pence pieces), they are distinct objects and so
exchanging them counts as a different physical state.
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too

===== PAGE 4 =====
22 February 2026
Reply 
Bjarte Rundereim
Perhaps it could be said - with equal right - that models in quantum physics show the truth of models in quantum physics?
What other proof is there? Quantum measurements? Quantum theories? Quantum calculations? Quantum "truth"?
What is truth? Which truth is IT?
Real truth is for members only.
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
