===== PAGE 1 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
1 
 
A Tale of Two Substrates: The Luminiferous Aether and 
the Ubiquitous Field of Consciousness 
Henry Silcock 
Independent Researcher 
henrysilcock@gmail.com 
Abstract 
For two centuries, light needed a medium. Physicists treated the “luminiferous aether” as 
indispensable, patching it with auxiliary models like the Lorentz–FitzGerald contraction 
before Einsteinian relativity rendered mechanical substrates obsolete. Today, critics dismiss 
the Ubiquitous Field of Consciousness (UFC) —posited by neo -idealist and panpsychist 
frameworks to address the hard problem of consciousness—using the exact same 
vocabulary: undetectable, unfalsiﬁable, redundant. Applying the Duhem -Quine 
underdetermination thesis reveals that this historical dismissal is epistemically ﬂawed. The 
mechanical aether was abandoned only when special relativity offered a mathematically 
simpler replacement that resolved its physical anomalies. In contrast, physicalist models of 
mind have failed to bridge the explanatory gap, leaving the UFC underdetermined rather than 
refuted. Grounding the UFC in the zero -point ﬁeld (ZPF) of quantum electrodynamics turns 
an abstract metaphysical posture into testable biophysical predictions, as seen in recent 
stochastic resonance and QED superposition experiments. Far from disproving invisible 
media, the history of the aether warns against premature theoretical closure when assessing 
non-local models of mind. 
Keywords 
Luminiferous Aether; Ubiquitous Field of Consciousness; Underdetermination; Duhem –
Quine Thesis; Zero-Point Field; Philosophy of Mind. 
1 Introduction 
The history of the “luminiferous aether” is familiar, often told in popular science  books to 
introduce the theory of relativity, and cited by historians of science as a classic case of a bad 
theory replaced by a better one. For two centuries, from Newton to Maxwell, the aether was 
the invisible, all-pervading medium through which light traveled . In the nineteenth century 
this was mainstream science, embedded in a  robust theoretical framework (Maxwell’s 
electromagnetic theory) and supported by compelling , though indirect, evidence. Then in

===== PAGE 2 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
2 
 
1887 Michelson and Morley conducted a classic experiment to detect the motion of the 
earth through the aether and found nothing (Michelson and Morley, 1887). But it took almost 
twenty years before the aether was ﬁnally abandoned,  replaced by Einstein’s special 
relativity which explained the same phenomena without it. 
Although the story is often told as a triumph of experiment over theory , the philosophical 
lesson is not so straightforward. The aether was not in fact refuted by the Michelson-Morley 
experiment. First, it was rescued by adding an auxiliary hypothesis , the Lorentz-Fitzgerald 
contraction, which explained the null result by proposing  that material objects contract in 
the direction of their motion through the aether , by an amount  that precisely offsets the 
expected effect. This was mathematically sophisticated and actually predicted results that 
were experimentally conﬁrmed. In the end the aether was not falsiﬁed but  abandoned 
because a better theory arrived. 
The history of the aether provides an int riguing parallel to the contemporary debate about 
another invisible all-pervading substrate, the Ubiquitous Field of Consciousness, postulated 
as a possible solution to the hard problem of consciousness. The UFC hypothesis says that 
consciousness is not generated by individual brains but is a fundamental feature of the 
universe - a ﬁeld that brains interact with, rather than produce. The UFC arises in several 
recent variants of panpsychist and neo-idealist philosophies of mind, and is often dismissed 
in terms that echo the demise of the aether – it is undetectable, unfalsiﬁable and 
unnecessary. 
This paper demonstrates that the structural parallel is instructive  but does not render the 
UFC untenable. Indeed, when examined in the light of established scientiﬁc methodology , 
the UFC occupies an epistemic position comparable to, and in certain respects more 
defensible than, the aether hypothesis in 1905 . We begin by examining the nineteenth-
century crises of the aether  to highlight their precise  epistemological lessons, before 
describing the theoretical motivation s behind the UFC. After mapping the structural 
similarities and differences, we  evaluate each hypothesis in light of the Du hem-Quine 
underdetermination thesis and show how modern quantum ﬁeld theory  can rehabilitate 
substrates for both physics and philosophy. 
2 The Rise and Fall of the Luminiferous Aether 
2.1 The Medium and the Motivation 
The aether was proposed to solve a speciﬁc physical problem – waves require a medium . 
Ocean waves propagate through water, sound waves propagate through air, and since light

===== PAGE 3 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
3 
 
propagates like a wave  it seemed to require a medium  as well. This was the aether – a 
substance that ﬁlled all of space and through which electromagnetic waves travelled. 
Newton described ‘…this Medium (as) exceedingly more rare and subtile (sic)  than the Air, 
and exceedingly more elastic and active… And doth it not readily pervade all bodies? And is 
it not (by its elastic force) expanded through all the Heavens?’ (Newton, 1718, Query 18). 
At ﬁrst the aether hypothesis provided a compelling conceptual framework , u nifying the 
physics of water, sound and light waves, and the medium  was thought of as a  kind of ﬂuid. 
But in 1821 Fresnel showed that light propagation must be transverse to explain polarization 
effects, and so the medium could not be a ﬂuid  (Fresnel, 1821). To transmit waves at light 
speed it must be extremely rigid and elastic, yet since the planets move through it without 
slowing it must also be more ethereal than air. In 1848 Stokes proposed a compromise: ‘…we 
may conceive the aether to be a ﬂuid as regards the motion of the earth and planets through 
it, (and) an elastic solid as regards the small vibrations which constitute light.’ (Stokes, 1848) 
Despite these apparent implausibilities, the aether hypothesis was not considered radical. 
It had a sound theoretical background, Maxwell’s electromagnetic ﬁeld theory, and it made 
speciﬁc testable predictions that were experimentally conﬁrmed . Since the physical 
properties of the medium  (such as density  and viscosity) determine the speed of wave 
propagation, so the properties of the aether should det ermine the speed of light . This had 
been accurately estimated from astronomical observations  over a century earlier (Rømer, 
1676), and the ﬁrst rigorous terrestrial measurements were made by Fizeau in 1849, resulting 
in a measured value of approximately 315300 km/s (Fizeau, 1849). 
The most important prediction was that the motion of the earth through the aether should 
produce a n “aether wind”, detectable as a d ifference in the speed of light  measured in 
different directions. Assuming the aether is at rest (relative to the distant ﬁxed stars) the 
earth should experience a “headwind” of about 30 km/s in the direction of its motion, and a 
“tailwind” in the opposite direction, resulting in a measurable difference in the speed of light. 
Another possibility suggested by Stokes was  that the earth might drag some of the aether 
along its orbital trajectory , but this was inconsistent with astronomical obse rvations of 
stellar aberration (Stokes, 1845). 
2.2 Michelson-Morley and the Aftermath 
So in 1887 Michelson and Morley set out to measure the aether wind, using a high-precision 
optical interferomet er. The instrument was set up to split a beam of light  into two 
perpendicular rays, reﬂect each ray from a mirror and recombine them . If the earth was 
subject to an aether wind, t he inter ference pattern generated would shift as the 
experimental apparatus was rotated.

===== PAGE 4 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
4 
 
No such shift was detected. The initial response was to look for experimental error s, but 
extreme precautions had been taken to avoid them.  To eliminate environmental vibrations, 
for example, the entire apparatus was mounted on a massive optical bench carved from 
sandstone and ﬂoated on a pool of liquid mercury.  No experimental problems were found , 
and the size of the expected shift was well within the sensitivity of the instrument. Perhaps 
even more puzzling than the null shift  was the implication that the  velocity of light was 
independent of the earth’s changing velocity as it orbited the sun (through the aether) . 
Various attempts then ensued to explain the null result  consistent with Maxwell’s 
electrodynamic theory, but without abandoning the aether.  
Prominent late-nineteenth-century physicists actively engaged with this crisis. Maxwell had 
postulated the existence of charge carriers, but he died in 1879 and did not live to witness 
Thomson’s discovery of the electron in 1897. The  proposed Lorentz-Fitzgerald contraction 
was not an ad hoc ﬁx but was based on Heaviside’s solution of Maxwell’s equations for a 
moving charge. If electrons were a spherical ball of charge when at rest, they would naturally 
deform into oblate spheroids  when moving though the aether . In fact,  these “Lorentz 
electrons” would shrink by a velocity-dependent factor that  would account exactly for the 
null result and provide a plausible electrodynamic explanation for the contraction in length.  
Lorentz’s theory successfully predicted the v elocity-dependence of mass , which was 
intensively investigated by Kaufmann and others in the early years of the new century and 
deﬁnitively established by Alfred Bucherer ( Bucherer, 1908). But the “elastic deformable 
electron” model was inherently unstable. Electrical repulsive forces would tear it apart. To 
ﬁx this problem, Poincaré proposed additional hypothetical non-electromagnetic “Poincaré 
stress” forces which would prevent the electron from exploding (Poincaré, 1906). 
In the end, t hese attempts to salvage a mechanical aether  became increasingly elaborate 
and artiﬁcial, setting the stage for Einstein to abandon mechanical models entirely and treat 
length contraction as an inherent property of space -time geometry.  But, modiﬁed 
accordingly, the aether survived the Michelson-Morley experiment for almost twenty years. 
2.3 Einstein’s New Theory 
What ﬁnally discredited the aether was not another experiment but a new theoretical insight. 
In 1905 Einstein showed that the phenomena mechanical models had difficulty explaining, 
including length contraction and time dilation, could all be resolved  by his “p rinciple of 
relativity” - the laws of physics in general , and the speed of light in particular, must be the 
same in all inertial (unaccelerated) frames of reference . Einstein spent the next 15 years 
developing general relativity , which extend ed this principle to accelerated frames of 
reference.

===== PAGE 5 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
5 
 
So the aether was not refuted by experiment – it simply became superﬂuous. And in physics, 
as in philosophy, redundant entities are eventually discarded by the principle of parsimony. 
3 The Ubiquitous Field of Consciousness 
3.1 The Hard Problem as Motivation 
The UFC hypothesis is motivated by the “hard problem” of consciousness. Chalmers (1995) 
distinguished between “easy problems ”, such as understanding mental processes like 
memory or attention, and the hard problem – why any physical process is accompanied by 
subjective experience  at all . Easy problems are tractable in principle using  established 
neuroscientiﬁc and cognitive  science methods, often by observing “neural correlates  of 
consciousness” (NCCs) . The hard problem is  not so tractable , since no functional or 
computational description can capture the existence of qualia and the felt quality of 
experience (Nagel 1974). 
The hard problem is therefore not merely a gap in our knowledge but  represents a 
fundamental limitation of the scientiﬁc method. As Goff characterizes it in Galileo’s Error, a 
consensus methodological framework was adopted to describe the world using 
mathematics and measurable quantitative properties such as mass, charge, position or ﬁeld 
strength (Goff, 2019) . This was both a  pragmatic decision and perhaps at least partly  a 
political one . After  all, this was an era where it was prudent to avoid conﬂict with 
ecclesiastical authorities and lifetime house arrest, like Galileo himself.  
However, it was not a metaphysical discovery , and it created the explanatory gap that has 
haunted the philosophy of mind ever since. In this sense, this hard problem represents the 
return of the repressed – the qualitative properties excluded from physics are the ones that 
consciousness science must now explain. 
The need to bridge the explanatory gap, therefore, is analogous to the perceived motivation 
for the aether. Both represent theoretical gaps that seem to require  a substrate. However, 
there is one important difference:  the aether hypothesis was contingent on Maxwell’s 
electromagnetic theory, which was replaced by Einstein’s better theory. By contrast, the UFC 
is not derived from one particular theory of consciousness. It shows up in several variants of 
neo-idealist theories of mind, as discussed below, but it is essentially a structural feature of 
the relationship between physics and phenomena. 
3.2 The UFC in Neo-Idealist Philosophy 
Since Chalmers there has been a renewed interest in neo-idealist theories of mind, driven 
both by the perceived limitations of the physicalist approach, and recently  by a more

===== PAGE 6 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
6 
 
pressing problem - the advent of frontier AI systems such as ChatGPT and Claude. If 
advanced AI systems are conscious (in some sense), then urgent ethical issues and practical 
legal matters need to be resolved (Gunkel, 2018; Sebo and Long, 2023). 
The theories of mind are variously characterized as analytic idealism (Kastrup, 2019), 
cosmopsychism (Shani and Keppler, 2018) and several types  of panpsychism (e.g. 
Chalmers, 2016; Goff, 2017). The UFC takes somewhat different  forms across these 
variants, but all share the basis that phenomenal properties are a fundamental feature of the 
universe and not a by-product of increased physical complexity. They may be compared with 
non-reductionist naturalis t approaches suc h as Nagel ’s, which maintains that 
consciousness cannot be eliminated or reduced to physics, though it may be an “emergent” 
property of complex systems (Nagel, 2012). 
The most radical position is Kastrup’s analytic idealism which maintains that consciousness 
is fundamental  (Kastrup, 2019) . The physical world is mind-independent but exists as a 
representation in a universal consciousness substrate. The UFC is the universal mi nd and 
individual minds are dissociated “alters”, streams of experience separated from the UFC . 
Kastrup gives a suggestive analogy – alters are like the distinct personalities that occupy a 
single brai n in cases of dissociative identity disorder (DID).  The brain does not generate 
consciousness, but  localizes and constrains it, acting somewhat like a reducing valve to 
ﬁlter individual experience from the UFC. Huxley propounded a similar idea in The Doors of 
Perception to explain psychedelic drug experiences (Huxley, 1954). 
In the spectrum of panpsychist theories, Kastrup’s position might be considered as a type of 
cosmopsychism, or “top -down” panpsychism. Alternative “bottom-up” approaches have 
been suggested  by Goff , Chalmers and others . In these theories , “fundamental material 
entities” are presumed to be “micro-conscious” (Goff, 2017) and higher consciousness 
arises as a combination of these entities (Chalmers, 2016). The UFC is then the phenomenal 
aspect of the quantum ﬁelds that  constitute physical reality. Goff argues that the 
combination problem is no more serious than that faced by physicalist theories which claim 
that consciousness emerges in sufficiently complex and well-organized systems. 
In Mind and Cosmos, Thomas Nagel sets out a non-reductionist naturalism, whereby  
consciousness inherently cannot be explained by the materialist Darwinian framework of 
science. Although this is not an idealist position, Nagel emphasizes that any adequate form 
of naturalism must accommodate the irreducibly subjective nature of experience (Nagel, 
1974, 2012).  In this analysis, the UFC may be  considered as a “natural kind”  that any 
complete physics must accommodate.

===== PAGE 7 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
7 
 
3.3 The Quantum Field Grounding 
The most scientiﬁcally tractable formulation of the UFC identiﬁes it with the zero-point ﬁeld 
(ZPF) of quantum electrodynamics. In QED the vacuum is not empty, but a seething mass of 
virtual-pair particles and ﬁeld variations which exist even if there is no matter or radiation 
present. Since the ZPF is homogenous and isotropic, it makes a natural candidate for a 
universal substrate. 
The most detailed version of this has been developed by Keppler (2013, 2021) who suggests 
that each normal mode of the ZPF represents a basic mode of consciousness, or a primitive 
phenomenal quality. The brain then acts as a resonant oscillator that couples to ZPF modes 
and thereby trans duces an individual stream of consciousness from the universal 
phenomenal ﬁeld.  This idea is based on stochastic electrodynamics (SED), a semi-classical 
framework that models the ZPF  as a real, random electromagnetic ﬁeld rather than an  
abstract operator concept (Boyer, 1975; de la Peña and Cetto, 1996). While standard QED 
remains the mainstream paradigm, SED demonstrates that  linear systems interacting with 
classical zero -point noise can replicate fundamental quantum phenomena such as the 
Casimir effect (Boyer, 1975), and in principle offers testable empirical predictions. 
The ZPF is therefore not just a postulate but a mathematical consequence of quantum ﬁeld 
theory, and identifying the UFC with the ZPF  provides an explanation based on established 
theory. Once a gain, modern physics has rehabilitated the aether concept , this time  as 
ubiquitous quantum ﬁelds. As Wilczek (2008) characterizes it, modern physics conceives of 
the quantum vacuum not as empty space, but as a dynamic ocean of energy boiling beneath 
observable reality.  The UFC hypothesis extends this to the consciousness domain by 
suggesting that the quantum vacuum may also carry phenomenal properties. 
4 Comparisons and Contrasts 
4.1 Comparisons 
The structural parallels between the two cases are striking (Table 1). Both hypotheses were 
proposed to ﬁll a theoretical gap, where some form of universal substrate seemed necessary 
to address phenomena that current theory could not  explain. Neither is directly observed; 
their existence is inferred from indirect evide nce. Both have been augmented by auxiliary 
hypotheses, based on apparent limitations. And, unsurprisingly, critics have dismissed both 
as redundant, since the phenomena they address can putatively be explained without them, 
and ripe for elimination under Ockham’s razor.

===== PAGE 8 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
8 
 
Feature Luminiferous Aether Ubiquitous Field of 
Consciousness 
Ontological status Invisible all-pervading physical 
medium 
Invisible all-pervading 
phenomenal substrate 
Primary function Medium for electromagnetic 
wave propagation 
Substrate for consciousness 
and qualia 
Motivating anomaly  Light waves require a medium Qualia inexplicable by 
physicalist theories 
Detection Not directly observed, inferred 
from wave nature of light 
Not directly observed, inferred 
from hard problem 
Theoretical 
ﬂexibility 
Properties modiﬁed ad hoc to 
match experiment 
Properties remain untested by 
experiment 
Modern successor Space-time metric,  
quantum vacuum ZPF consciousness models 
Objections Undetectable 
Superseded by relativity 
Unfalsiﬁable 
Unnecessary (parsimony)  
Table 1 
4.2 Contrasts 
There are also important differences between the two hypotheses. The aether was proposed 
to explain light propagation in vacuo, a phenomenon that relativity explained without it. The 
UFC is posited to explain the existence of subjective phenomena, which no physicalist 
theory has yet explained. If the hard problem represents a conceptual limitation of 
physicalist frameworks, then the nature of the explanatory gap widens further. But the 
analogy is imprecise, since the requirement for a wave medium disappeared with special 
relativity, whereas the hard problem has resisted the best efforts of physicalist approaches 
to date. 
Another crucial distinction concerns falsiﬁability. The  purely metaphysical thesis of a 
universal phenomenal substrate, proposed to bridge the explanatory gap, is protected from 
direct physical refutation as an abstract undetectable medium. However, when the UFC is 
formulated through speciﬁc biophysical models , such as Keppler’s TRAZE model (Keppler, 
2024) or Neven’s QED superposition (Neven et al., 2024), it becomes empirically  testable. 
Thus, while the general philosophical  posture of the UFC is not falsiﬁable, its physical 
implementations yield concrete, testable predictions.

===== PAGE 9 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
9 
 
The two hypotheses also differ in their relationship to established theories. The aether 
postulate was logically independent of Maxwell’s electromagnetics and played no explicit 
part in the equations. The UFC, by contrast, is  based on the established formalism of 
quantum electrodynamics. The ZPF is not a speculative add- on but a mathematical 
consequence of quantum ﬁeld theory. From this perspective the UFC hypothesis has a more 
secure physical foundation than the aether ever had. 
5 The Epistemology of Invisible Substrates 
It may be instructive to evaluate invisible substrates in view of the Duhem -Quine 
underdetermination principle, which holds that  scientiﬁc truths  do not exist  in isolation  
(Quine, 1951). Instead, they form an interconnected “web of belief”, and observational data 
arriving at the periphery can force  adjustments across the theoretical interior  (Quine and 
Ullian, 1970). If unexpected data arrives, we are free to reconﬁgure internal assumptions to 
save the core. As Quine famously argued, even the foundational principles of logic or 
geometry are subject to revision in an emergency. 
5.1 Underdetermination and the Aether 
The history of theories about the aether is a case study  of underdetermination in action. As 
new and more precise experiments  were conducted  about light propagation, the aether 
hypothesis was repeatedly modiﬁed to accommodate the new empirical results. The theory 
was not abandoned on a purely empirical basis, but rather because a superior theory 
became available. 
The Michelson -Morley experiment was consistent with both the aether  hypothesis, as 
modiﬁed to accommodate the Lorentz contraction , and also with special relativity. The 
choice between them was based on theoretical virtues  like parsimony, elegance and 
explanatory power. As Quine and others have shown, this is a familiar pattern in the evolution 
of scientiﬁc theories. 
5.2 Underdetermination and the UFC 
The UFC faces a different kind of underdetermination problem. In the case of the aether, a 
competing physical theory was available , and special relativity was judged superior based 
on its conceptual power and simplicity . In the phenomenal  domain, no competing theory 
has yet provided a satisfactory account of the existence of qualia. 
Physicalist theories of consciousness are not empirically superior to the UFC in this respect. 
These theories may explain the functional organization of systems which exhibit behavior 
considered characteristic of consciousness, but they do not  (and perhaps cannot) explain

===== PAGE 10 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
10 
 
why th is functionality is  accompanied by subjective experience . The explanatory gap 
remains, and the available evidence does not rule out non-physicalist theories. 
In this sense underdetermination highlights that the UFC  cannot be rejected on purely 
empirical grounds. While the aether was underdetermined by the evidence and  replaced 
when a mathematically simpler theory  resolved the physical anomalies, the UFC remains 
underdetermined in a domain where physicalist alternatives have yet to bridge the 
explanatory gap, Consequently, the epistemic grounds for dismissing the UFC  outright are 
far less decisive than the history of the aether might suggest. 
Of course, this does not mean that the UFC is true. However, it suggests that epistemological 
grounds for rejecting  it are weaker than they may appear. It cannot be dismissed in the 
absence of a convincing alternative explanation for subjective experienc e. The UFC 
occupies a similar position to the aether before special relativity – it ﬁlls an explanatory gap, 
it has not been falsiﬁed, and it can be grounded in established physical theories. 
6 The Evolution of the Quantum Vacuum 
6.1 The Rehabilitation of the Aether 
In 1920, two years before he received the Nobel Prize (for his explanation of the photoelectric 
effect), Einstein was invited to give an address at the University of Leiden. His chosen topic 
was “Ether and the Theory of Relativity. ” Having been the principal architect of the aether’s 
demise, he now suggested that general relativity effectively re-introduced something similar, 
in the form of the space -time metric: ‘According to the general theory of relativity, space 
without ether (sic) is unthinkable; for in such space there not only would be no propagation 
of light, but also no possibility of existence for standards of space and time.’ (Einstein, 1920, 
p. 16). 
The old mechanical aether was a material substance  with a deﬁ ned state of rest  which 
carried electromagnetic waves . The new relativistic aether  was the space -time metric, 
which carried gravitational waves. Although it has geometrical properties - it can be curved 
and locally distorted by nearby masses  – it has  no deﬁnite state of rest and no material 
constitution. Although the old aether was discarded, the idea that space was not truly empty 
persisted. 
In the quantum ﬁeld theories developed starting in the mid -20th century, the quantum 
vacuum is considered not as empty space but as the ground state of the quantum ﬁelds. The 
ZPF has non-zero energy density because of  the Heisenberg uncertainty principle . 
Empirically, the Casimir effect, a measurable attractive force between two uncharged metal 
plates in vacuo, provides direct experimental evidence for the existence of the ZPF (Casimir

===== PAGE 11 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
11 
 
1948). In this formulation , the quantum vacuum  again becomes the modern successor to 
the aether – an invisible all -pervading medium with real physical properties , inferred from 
theoretical considerations and with predictions conﬁrmed by experiment. 
 
6.2 The ZPF as Phenomenal Substrate 
In Keppler’s account the ZPF is not only a physical substrate but also a phenomenal one. In 
this model c oupling between the  ZPF and the  brain is controlled by neurotransmitter 
concentrations, determining which modes of the ﬁeld  are ampliﬁed and which are 
suppressed (Keppler, 2021). The state of the brain determines how it is coupled to the ZPF  
and the modes of the ZPF determine the phenomenal content, so consciou s states have 
neural correlates  which can be mediated by neurochemi cal effects.  Since the ZP F is a 
uniﬁed global ﬁeld, the brain’s interface to it naturally produces a stream of consciousness 
rather than a series of isolated events. This also explains why consciousness is continuous 
across sleep and anesthesia – the ZPF is “always on” but the way the brain couples to it varies 
– and why it is disrupted in various ways by psychoactive drugs. 
Keppler has proposed experimental tests of his TRAZE (Theory of Resonant Ampliﬁcation of 
Zero-Point Energy). Speciﬁcally, if ZPF coupling is a function of glutamate concentrations, 
then it should be possible  to modify the concent rations pharmacologically and thereby 
disrupt speciﬁc sensory perceptions (Keppler, 2024). Also, the brain’s background gamma 
wave oscillations ( around 40 Hz ) are theorized to exhibit speciﬁ c non-linear spectral 
characteristics. Keppler cites r ecent experimental work on the non -linear nature of 
neurodynamic ﬁelds  (Freeman, 2004, 2005)  and speciﬁc ﬁndings that  gamma waves 
resemble ﬁltered stochastic noise rather than narrowband sinusoidal signals (Canolty et al., 
2006). 
Some other approaches to the connection between consciousness and quantum processes 
may be amenable  to empirical exploration. The standard objection that decoherence 
prevents room temperature quantum effects is refuted by demonstrated examples in living 
tissue. For example, bird and insect navigation is known to depend on quantum effects to 
sense the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld  (Xu et al., 2021) , and plant photosynthesis depends on 
exciton quantum coherence (Engel et al., 2007) . Penrose’s “ Orchestrated Objective 
Reduction” (Orch-OR) suggests that conscious experience is a result of the  collapse of the 
quantum wavefunction  in the brain (Hameroff and Penrose, 2014) . Neven et al ( 2024) 
suggest that a conscious experience occurs when a quantum superposition forms. 
Recent experiments on anesthesia provide some direct evidence for quantum effects . The 
results show that using different isotopes of the gas xenon produces different effects. 
Isotopes with non -zero nuclear spin were 30% less effective  in inducing anesthesia than

===== PAGE 12 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
12 
 
isotopes with zero spin. Since this cannot be explained by chemistry or any classical 
mechanism it implies that nuclear spin, a quantum -mechanical property, is involved in the 
operation of anesthesia. Neven’s group is continuing experimental investigations. 
7 Objections and Limitations 
7.1 Objections 
The most common objection to the UFC hypothesis is that it is unfalsiﬁable . Since the UFC 
is an omnipresent phenomenal ﬁeld,  no conceivable experiment  could in principle  
demonstrate its absence.  But the same problem applies to other theoretical entities in 
physics. T he quantum vacuum is not directly observed , but its existence is inferred from 
evidence such as the Casimir effect. Although the spacetime metric is not observable in 
principle, its existence is inferred from the behavior of matter and light in gravitational ﬁelds. 
Epistemologically the UFC is in the same position as these well-known entities. 
The second objection is parsimony . The UFC is considered  unnecessary because the 
phenomena it claims  to explain – subjective experience - can be adequately explained by 
physical theories. But this begs the question. Physical theories are limited to easy problems, 
describing the functional organization of systems which exhibit behavior associated with 
consciousness. Since they cannot explain the existence of qualia, the explanatory gap 
remains. 
A third objection relates to the formation of mental compositions. On the one hand, bottom-
up micro -panpsychist theories face the classic “combination problem” , explaining how  
micro-phenomenal ﬁeld excitations aggregate into macroscopic uniﬁed human minds. On 
the other hand, top -down cosmopsychist and idealist theories face the inverse 
“decombination problem”, explaining how a single continuous cosmic ﬁeld dissociates into 
distinct bounded individual observers.  In Kastrup’s analytic idealism, decombination  is 
addressed by the concept of dissociated alters , whereas in Keppler’s resonant QED model  
macro-experience is formed via selective frequency coupling between cortical 
microcolumns and the ZPF . 
In any case the combination problem is not unique to the UFC. Physicalist theories have an 
analogous problem explaining how non- phenomenal qualities  combine to produce 
phenomenal properties – the hard problem itself. If anything, the combination problem  for 
physicalist theories is more acute than for panpsychist theories, since the latter at least start 
with phenomenal properties at the fundamental lev el, and have no need for what Jaegwon 
Kim (1998) famously critiqued as an unexplained "miracle" at the bottom micro-level.

===== PAGE 13 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
13 
 
7.2 Limitations 
The analogy between the aether hypothesis and the UFC, while perhaps instructive, has 
some limitations.  The aether was proposed as a physical medium , whereas the UFC is 
posited as a phenomenal substrate. Accordingly, conventional methods of physics are well-
suited to investigate a new physical medium but  may not be so useful for  the UFC  
hypothesis. The history of the aether is a story about physics. The history of the UFC , if it 
proves to have one, is still in its earliest stages. 
The analogy may also suggest that the UFC hypothesis could  one day be superseded by a 
superior theory, as the aether was by special relativity. Philosophers of science warn about 
“pessimistic meta-induction” – since so many scientiﬁc theories have been proved wrong in 
the past, one should assume by default that current theories will be too.  However, the 
intuition that space is not empty has survived the demise of the aether, and even if the hard 
problem is genuinely intractable because of the methodological limitations  of physics, this 
does not mean that consciousness itself is forever mysterious. In that case the UFC may be 
integrated into some broader scientiﬁc framework where phenomenal properties are 
fundamental.  
8 Conclusions  
To dismiss the Ubiquitous Field of Consciousness as a mere contemporary echo of a failed 
nineteenth-century medium misinterprets both history and epistemology. While the aether 
and the UFC share clear structural similarities - both being invisible all-pervading substrates 
posited to resolve theoretical anomalies – the analogy does not necessarily extend to their 
possible fates, since the differences are both physically and philosophically signiﬁcant. 
The aether was abandoned when a superior theory became available . So far, the UFC has 
not been superseded  by a physicalist theory that solves the hard proble m. Keeping the 
underdetermination problem in mind, the UFC  should be abandoned only when an 
alternative theory explains qualia without positing an underlying phenomenal substrate . 
Furthermore, the new theory should be superior in terms of elegance, simplicity or 
explanatory power. No such theory is currently available. 
The aether’s modern successor, the quantum vacuum, provides a plausible physical  basis 
for the UFC . The zero-point ﬁeld  is not speculative but a mathematical consequence of 
quantum ﬁeld theory , so Keppler’s proposal that it carries phenomenal properties is 
grounded in established physics in a way that the aether never was. Neven’s xenon isotope 
anesthesia experiments are a ﬁrst step in testing the connection between quantum 
processes and consciousness, and establishing such a link would be consistent with UFC  
theories.

===== PAGE 14 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
14 
 
The conclusion of this paper is not that the UFC is true. It is that the arguments used to 
dismiss it are weaker than they appear, and that the history of the aether is a cautionary tale 
about premature theoretical closure. The intuitions that originally motivated a discarded 
hypothesis can be rehabilitated rather than abandoned. The intuition that space is not empty 
has been vindicated by the quantum vacuum , and the UFC intuition that consciousness is 
not local may yet be vindicated by 22nd-century physics. 
Declarations 
AI Compliance Declaration: In compliance with the publisher’s policy, the author declares 
that generative AI tools were used solely for literature search, proofreading, formatting, and 
text polishing. All substantive content, conceptual frameworks, and conclusions were 
produced and veriﬁed independently by the author, who assumes full responsibility for the 
manuscript.  
Funding: The author declares that no funds, grants, or other support were received during 
the preparation of this manuscript. 
Competing Interests:  The author has no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to 
disclose. 
Ethics Approval: Not applicable. 
Data Availability: Not applicable. 
Acknowledgements: Not applicable. 
References 
Boyer, T. H. (1975). Random electrodynamics: The theory of classical electrodynamics with 
classical electromagnetic zero -point radiation. Physical Review D, 11(4), 790–808. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.11.790 
Bucherer, A. H. (1908). Messungen an Becquerelstrahlen. Die experimentelle Bestätigung 
der Lorentz-Einsteinschen Theorie. Physikalische Zeitschrift, 9, 755–762. 
Canolty, R. T., Edwards, E., Dalal, S. S., Soltani, M., Nagarajan, S. S., Kirsch, H. E., Berger, M. 
S., Barbaro, N. M., and Knight, R. T. (2006). High gamma power is phase -locked to theta 
oscillations in human neocortex. Science, 313(5793), 1626– 1628. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1128115 
Casimir, H. B. G. (1948). On the attraction between two perfectly conducting plates. 
Proceedings of the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, 51, 793–795. 
Chalmers, D. J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of 
Consciousness Studies, 2(3), 200–219.

===== PAGE 15 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
15 
 
Chalmers, D. J. (2016). The combination problem for panpsychism. In G. Bruntrup and L. 
Jaskolla (Eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives (pp. 179–214). Oxford University 
Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780109778238.003.0008 
de la Peña, L., and Cetto, A. M. (1996). The Quantum Dice: An Introduction to Stochastic 
Electrodynamics. Kluwer Academic Publishers. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-015-8723-5 
Einstein, A. (1920). Ether and the Theory of Relativity. Address delivered May 5, 1920, at the 
University of Leiden. (G. B. Jeffery and W. Perrett, Trans., 1922). Methuen and Co. 
https://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Extras/Einstein_ether/ 
Engel, G. S., Calhoun, T. R., Read, E. L., Ahn, T. K., Mančal, T., Yuan, Y . C., Fleming, G. R., and 
Fleming, G. R. (2007). Evidence for wavelike energy transfer through quantum coherence in 
photosynthetic systems. Nature, 446(7137), 782–786. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05678 
Fizeau, H. (1849). Sur une expérience relative à la vitesse de propagation de la lumière. 
Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences, 29, 90–92. 
Freeman, W. J. (2004). Origin, structure, and role of background EEG activity. Part 1. Analytic 
amplitude. Clinical Neurophysiology , 115(9), 2077–2088. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2004.02.029 
Freeman, W. J. (2005). Origin, structure, and role of background EEG activity. Part 3. Neural 
frame classiﬁcation. Clinical Neurophysiology, 116(5), 1118– 1129. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2004.12.023 
Fresnel, A.-J. (1821). Mémoire sur la diffraction de la lumière. Annales de Chimie et de 
Physique, 17, 190–207. 
Goff, P . (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality . Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/eso/9780190677015.001.0001 
Goff, P . (2019). Galileo's Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness . Rider / 
Penguin Random House. 
Gunkel, D. J. (2018). Robot Rights. MIT Press. 
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/11453.001.0001 
Hameroff, S., and Penrose, R. (2014). Consciousness in the universe: A review of the 'Orch 
OR' theory. Physics of Life Reviews, 11(1), 39– 78. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2013.08.002 
Huxley, A. (1954). The Doors of Perception. Harper and Brothers.

===== PAGE 16 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
16 
 
Kastrup, B. (2019). The Idea of the World: A multi-disciplinary argument for the mental nature 
of reality. John Hunt Publishing. 
Keppler, J. (2013). A new perspective on the functioning of the brain and the mechanisms 
behind conscious processes. Frontiers in Psychology , 4, Article 242. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00242 
Keppler, J. (2021). Building blocks for the development of a self-consistent electromagnetic 
ﬁeld theory of consciousness. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 15, Article 723415. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2021.723415 
Keppler, J. (2024). Laying the foundations for a theory of consciousness: The signiﬁcance of 
critical brain dynamics for the formation of conscious states. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 18, Article 1379191. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2024.1379191 
Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a Physical World: An Essay on the Mind-Body Problem and Mental 
Causation. MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/4629.001.0001 
Michelson, A. A., and Morley, E. W. (1887). On the relative motion of the Earth and the 
luminiferous aether. American Journal of Science , 34(203), 333–345. 
https://doi.org/10.2475/ajs.s3-34.203.333 
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? The Philosophical Review, 83(4), 435– 450. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2183914 
Nagel, T. (2012). Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo -Darwinian Conception of 
Nature is Almost Certainly False . Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199919758.001.0001 
Neven, H., Read, P ., Kosik, K. S., van der Molen, T., Bouwmeester, D., Bodnia, E., Turin, L., 
and Koch, C. (2024). Testing the conjecture that quantum processes create conscious 
experience. Entropy, 26(6), Article 460. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26060460 
Newton, I. (1718). Opticks: or, a Treatise of the Reﬂections, Refractions, Inﬂections and 
Colours of Light (2nd ed.). W. and J. Innys. 
Poincaré, H. (1906). Sur la dynamique de l'électron. Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di 
Palermo, 21, 129–175. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03013466 
Quine, W. V . O. (1951). Two dogmas of empiricism. The Philosophical Review, 60(1), 20–43. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2181906 
Quine, W. V . O., and Ullian, J. S. (1970). The Web of Belief. Random House.

===== PAGE 17 =====
A Tale of Two Substrates  preprint sep 26 
 
17 
 
Rømer, O. (1676). Démonstration touchant le mouvement de la lumière trouvé par M. 
Roemer de l'Académie Royale des Sciences. Journal des Sçavans, 233–236. 
Sebo, J., and Long, R. (2023). Moral consideration for AI systems by 2030. AI and Ethics , 1–
13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00388-3 
Shani, I. and Keppler, J. (2018) 'Beyond combination: How cosmic consciousness grounds 
ordinary experience' , Journal of the American Philosophical Association, 4(3), pp. 390–410. 
Stokes, G. G. (1845). On the aberration of light. Philosophical Magazine , 27(177), 9– 15. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14786444508645215 
Stokes, G. G. (1848). On the constitution of the aether. Philosophical Magazine , 32(215), 
343–356. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786444808646004 
Wilczek, F . (2008). The Lightness of Being: Mass, Ether, and the Uniﬁcation of Forces. Basic 
Books. 
Xu, J., Jarocha, L. E., Zollitsch, T., Konowaloff, M., Chau, L. A., Hore, P . J., and Mouritsen, H. 
(2021). Magnetic sensitivity of an avian cryptochrome. Nature , 594(7864), 535–540. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03618-9
