===== PAGE 1 =====
Lecture #2: Background 
READINGS AND FIGURES 
Readings: Instructor notes on boundary conditions 
Frisk, Chapter 3, sections 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 (up to Eq. 3.38.) 
--------------------------------------------------------- 
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES 
 Having the basic wave equation for ocean acoustics in hand, we now need to put together the 
rest of the pieces needed to solve for the acoustic field. This means looking at: 1) observables (not just 
pressure), 2) boundary conditions, and 3) some ancillary quantities (such as impedances, reflection 
coefficients, etc.) This material will be familiar to those who have had either a basic underwater 
acoustics course or a wave theory course that included some acoustics.  However, even for those who 
have this background, a definition of terms and usages is needed, and so we will go through some 
further “basics” here, just for completeness.  
 The first part of the lecture, presented in my inimitable, sloppy handwriting, is a discussion of 
the acoustic field observables and potentials for them. In addition to a hydrophone sensing pressure, an 
accelerometer can sense (obviously!) accelerations, which once integrated over time gives velocity and 
twice integrated gives displacement. So pressure, velocity, and displacement are all very useful 
observables.  Also, due to tangential stresses not affecting a fluid, all we need to worry about is the 
normal (longitudinal) wave component motions.  
 The first thing we see from the notes is that the pressure, displacement potential, and velocity 
potential are all proportional for fluids. So we can, if we are careful about the proportionality constants, 
talk about all these three quantities rather interchangeably.  
  The next handwritten notes section, “Boundary conditions”, discusses the fluid-fluid planar 
interface BC, which is needed for the layered medium treatment that is the usual first order 
approximation in ocean acoustics. The math, and the physical underpinnings of the boundary 
conditions, are all rather straightforward in this section. Following this , there is some discussion of the 
(pressure) reflection and transmission coefficients, which are also useful, and can be used as boundary 
conditions for some calculations. The discussion in this section of notes loosely follows from Clay and 
Medwin’s “Acoustical Oceanography.” (Reference in separate attachment.) 
 The next small class notes section concerns the “specific acoustic impedance.” In direct analogy 
to Ohm’s law, E=I*R, the resistance of the acoustic medium to fluid flow (particle velocity) caused by the 
pressure perturbation is its resistance, or as a fully complex quantity, impedance. It is found that the 
impedance is simply ρc for a plane wave moving through a fluid. Sound doesn’t travel easily between 
media with a large “impedance mismatch” (difference), with air and water being a prime example.  
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
The last part of Lecture #2 is taken from Frisk, Chapter 3, Sections 1,2,and 3 (partial) up to Eq. 
3.38. This chapter, entitled “Plane wave reflection from planar boundaries”, gives the rest of the 
boundary conditions we need, albeit restricted to the (very important) case of a plane wave. (We will 
see that reflection from other types of waves can be expressed as an expansion in plane waves, so this IS 
the most basic case.) The planar boundary is typical of the (smooth) sea surface, and a flat and 
horizontally stratified seabed, so again, this is an important case.  Some discussion of the reflection 
coefficients is also included in this important section.  
 In section 3.2.1, Fr isk states the “soft”, or pressure-release boundary condition, p=0, which is 
the appropriate one for the sea surface. Strictly speaking, this implies that there is a hard vacuum above 
the water, but it is not a bad approximation – our measly 15 PSI of air pressure is trivial compared to 
water overburden pressures! 
 In section 3.2.2, Frisk states the “hard bottom” BC, for which the derivative of the pressure 
normal to the boundary vanishes. This is a rather crude, limiting case approximation to the water-
sediment or sediment-basement BC’s, but it is also an incredibly useful one for approximate calculations 
due to its simplicity. 
 One can also pose a boundary condition that is “intermediate” to the two above, called a 
“mixed” or impedance BC. Frisk shows this type in section 3.2.3. This type of BC is actually capable of 
representing reflection from a complex, fully layered medium, and finds wide use in ocean acoustics.  
 The above three boundary conditions are well known mathematically as the Dirichlet, Neumann, 
and Cauchy boundary conditions respectively. 
 The above BC’s tell us what we need to know in the vertical (z-direction) for a horizontally 
layered medium. Now let’s look in the horizontal direction. 
 Frisk’s section 3.2.4, on the Sommerfeld radiation conditions, is one of the nicest, most concise 
descriptions of the BC at infinity that I have seen. 
 As to the source BC (the other boundary condition we need in the horizontal), it will be 
discussed in the next lecture, as it fits most naturally in the context of Green functions.  
 Section 3.3 of Frisk is a discussion of the simple law of reflection, familiar to all. Section 3.3.1 
and 3.3.2 (R=-1 for a soft boundary and R=1 for a hard boundary) should be noted as simple, but very 
useful, results.  
 Section 3 .3.3 starts by deriving another standard result, Snell’s Law, and then transits to the 
Rayleigh reflection coefficient. Both are  simple, but necessary, results to remember for what will follow. 
 
 
 
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
2.682 Acoustical Oceanography
Spring 2012
 
 
 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
