===== PAGE 1 =====
Prepared for submission to JINST
Real-time Signal Detection for Cyclotron Radiation
Emission Spectroscopy Measurements using Antenna
Arrays
The Project 8 collaboration
A. Ashtari Esfahani𝑎 S. Böser𝑏 N. Buzinsky𝑎 M. C. Carmona-Benitez𝑐 C. Claessens𝑎
L. de Viveiros𝑐 M. Fertl𝑏 J. A. Formaggio𝑑 B. T. Foust𝑒 J. K. Gaison𝑒 M. Grando𝑒
J. Hartse𝑎 K. M. Heeger 𝑓 X. Huyan𝑒 A. M. Jones𝑒 B. J. P . Jones𝑔 K. Kazkazℎ
B. H. LaRoque𝑒 M. Li𝑑 A. Lindman𝑏 A. Marsteller𝑎 C. Matthé𝑏 R. Mohiuddin𝑖 B. Monreal𝑖
B. Mucogllava𝑏 R. Mueller𝑐 A. Negi𝑔 J. A. Nikkel 𝑓 E. Novitski𝑎 N. S. Oblath𝑒 M. Oueslati𝑗
J. I. Peña𝑑 W. Pettus𝑗 R. Reimann𝑏 R. G. H. Robertson𝑎 G. Rybka𝑎 L. Saldaña𝑓
P . L. Slocum𝑓 J. Stachurska𝑑 Y.-H. Sun𝑖 P . T. Surukuchi𝑓 J. R. Tedeschi𝑒 A. B. Telles𝑓
F. Thomas𝑏 L. A. Thorne𝑏 T. Thümmler𝑘 W. Van De Pontseele𝑑 B. A. VanDevender𝑒,𝑎
T. E. Weiss𝑓 T. Wendler𝑐 A. Ziegler, 𝑐,1
𝑎Center for Experimental Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics and Department of Physics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
𝑏Institute for Physics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany
𝑐Department of Physics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
𝑑Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
𝑒Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99354, USA
𝑓Wright Laboratory, Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
𝑔Department of Physics, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
ℎLawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
𝑖Department of Physics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
𝑗CenterforExplorationofEnergyandMatterandDepartmentofPhysics,IndianaUniversity,Bloomington,
IN 47405, USA
𝑘Institute for Astroparticle Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
E-mail: ziegler@psu.edu
1Corresponding author.
arXiv:2310.02112v1  [physics.ins-det]  3 Oct 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
Abstract: Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy (CRES) is a technique for precision
measurement of the energies of charged particles, which is being developed by the Project 8
Collaboration to measure the neutrino mass using tritium beta-decay spectroscopy. Project 8 seeks
to use the CRES technique to measure the neutrino mass with a sensitivity of 40 meV, requiring
a large supply of tritium atoms stored in a multi-cubic meter detector volume. Antenna arrays
are one potential technology compatible with an experiment of this scale, but the capability of an
antenna-based CRES experiment to measure the neutrino mass depends on the efficiency of the
signal detection algorithms. In this paper, we develop efficiency models for three signal detection
algorithmsandcomparethemusingsimulationsfromaprototypeantenna-basedCRESexperiment
as a case-study. The algorithms include a power threshold, a matched filter template bank, and
a neural network based machine learning approach, which are analyzed in terms of their average
detection efficiency and relative computational cost. It is found that significant improvements in
detection efficiency and, therefore, neutrino mass sensitivity are achievable, with only a moderate
increase in computation cost, by utilizing either the matched filter or machine learning approach in
placeofapowerthreshold,whichisthebaselinesignaldetectionalgorithmusedinpreviousCRES
experiments by Project 8.
Keywords: Triggerconceptsandsystems(hardwareandsoftware),Triggeralgorithms,Spectrom-
eters, Microwave Antennas

===== PAGE 3 =====
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Signal Detection with Antenna Array CRES 2
2.1 Antenna Array and Data Rate Estimates 2
2.2 Real-time Signal Detection 4
3 Signal Detection Algorithms 7
3.1 Power Threshold 8
3.2 Matched Filtering 9
3.3 Machine Learning 12
4 Methods 13
4.1 Data Generation 13
4.2 Ensemble Averaging of Distributions 14
4.3 Template Bank Mean Match Estimation 14
4.4 CNN Training and Data Augmentation 15
5 Results and Discussion 17
5.1 Trigger Classification Performance 17
5.2 Computational Cost and Hardware Requirements 18
6 Conclusion 20
A Derivation of the Matched Filter Score PDF 21
1 Introduction
Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy (CRES) is a technique for measuring the kinetic
energies of charged particles by observing the frequency of the cyclotron radiation that is emitted
as they travel through a magnetic field [1, 2]. The Project 8 Collaboration is developing the CRES
technique as a next-generation approach to tritium beta-decay endpoint spectroscopy for neutrino
mass measurement. Recently, Project 8 has performed the first CRES-based measurement of the
tritium beta-decay energy spectrum and neutrino mass [3, 4].
PreviousCRESmeasurementshaveutilizedrelativelysmallvolumesofradiationsourcegasthat
aredirectlyintegratedwithawaveguidetransmissionline,whichpropagatesthecyclotronradiation
emitted by magnetically trapped electrons to a cryogenic amplifier. While this technology has had
demonstrable success, it is not a feasible option for scaling up to larger measurement volumes. In
particular, the goal of the Project 8 Collaboration is to use CRES combined with atomic tritium to
measure the neutrino mass with a 40 meV sensitivity. Achieving this sensitivity goal will require
– 1 –

===== PAGE 4 =====
a multi-cubic-meter scale measurement volume to obtain the required event statistics in the tritium
beta-spectrum endpoint region; hence, there is a need for new techniques to enable large volume
CRES measurements for future experiments.
Oneapproachistouseantennastocollectaportionofthecyclotronradiationemittedbytrapped
electrons [5, 6]. A promising design is an inward-facing uniform circular array that surrounds a
cylindricalcontainmentvolume. Increasingthesizeoftheantennaarraybyaddingadditionalrings
ofantennasalongthelongitudinalaxis,allowsonetogrowtheexperimentvolumeuntilasufficient
amount of tritium gas can be observed by the array. A challenging aspect of this approach is that
the total radiated power emitted by an electron near the tritium spectrum endpoint is on the order
of 1 fW or less in a 1 T magnetic field. Because the CRES signal power and information is spread
across the antenna array, detecting the presence of a CRES signal and determining the electron’s
kinetic energy requires reconstructing the entire array output over the duration of the event, posing
a significant data acquisition and signal reconstruction challenge.
Previous measurements with the CRES technique have utilized a threshold on the frequency
spectrum formed from a segment of time-series data. This algorithm relies on the detection of a
frequencypeakabovethethermalnoisebackground,whichlimitsthekinematicparameterspaceof
electrons available for reconstruction (see Section 2.2). Although a trigger based on the amplitude
ofthefrequencyspectrumwasadequateforpreviousProject8experiments, thisapproachdoesnot
provide sufficient detection efficiency for future CRES-based measurements of the neutrino mass.
Better efficiency is possible by taking advantage of the deterministic CRES signal structure with
a matched filter or machine learning based classifier [7]. In order to evaluate the relative gains in
efficiencythatcomefromutilizingthesealgorithmsforantennas,analyticalmodelsthatdescribethe
detectionperformanceofapowerthresholdandmatchedfilterclassifieraredeveloped. Inaddition,
a basic convolutional neural network (CNN) is implemented and tested as a first step towards the
development of neural-network based classifiers for antenna array based CRES measurements.
These results allow for a comparison between the estimated detection efficiencies of each of these
methods, which are weighed against the associated computational costs for real-time applications.
The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 is an overview of a prototype antenna
array CRES experiment, and describes the approach to real-time signal identification. Section 3
develops models for the power threshold and matched filter algorithms and introduces the machine
learning approach and CNN architecture. Section 4 describes the process for generating simulated
CRES signal data and the details of training the CNN. Finally, Section 5 compares the signal
classification accuracy for the three approaches and discusses the relevant trade-offs in terms of
detection efficiency and computational cost.
2 Signal Detection with Antenna Array CRES
2.1 Antenna Array and Data Rate Estimates
InordertoexplorethepotentialofantennaarrayCRESforneutrinomassmeasurement,theProject
8CollaborationhasdevelopedaconceptualdesignforaprototypeantennaarrayCRESexperiment
[5,8],calledtheFree-spaceCRESDemonstratororFSCD(seeFigure1). TheFSCDdesignconsists
of a single ring of antennas, which is the simplest form of a uniform circular array configuration,
– 2 –

===== PAGE 5 =====
(a) Top-down view.
 (b) Side view.
Figure 1: An illustration of the conceptual design for the FSCD. The antenna array geometry
consistsofa20cminteriordiameterwith60independentantennachannelsarrangedevenlyaround
the circumference. The nominal antenna design is sensitive to radiation in the frequency range
of 25-26 GHz, which corresponds to the cyclotron frequency of electrons emitted near the tritium
beta-spectrumendpointina0.96Tmagneticfield. Thearrayislocatedatthecenterofthemagnetic
trap produced by a set of current-carrying coils.
to surround a radio-frequency (RF) transparent tritium gas vessel. A stand-alone version of this
antenna array has been built and tested by the Project 8 collaboration [9] to validate simulations
of the array radiation pattern and beamforming algorithms [10]. In the FSCD the antenna array is
positioned at the center of the magnetic trap formed by a set of electromagnetic coils, which create
a local minimum in the magnetic field with a flat central region and steep walls in the radial and
axial directions. The multi-coil trap design produces a trap with a larger volume than a two-coil
bathtub trap or the single-coil traps used in the Project 8 Phase II experiment [3].
Whenanelectronistrappeditsmotionconsistsofthreeprimarycomponents. Thecomponent
with the highest frequency is the cyclotron orbit whose frequency is determined by the size of
the background magnetic field. The FSCD design assumes a background magnetic field value of
approximately0.96T,whichresultsincyclotronfrequenciesofapproximately26GHzforelectrons
withkineticenergiesnearthetritiumbeta-spectrumendpoint. Thecomponentwiththenexthighest
frequency is the axial oscillation experienced by electrons with pitch angles1 of less than90◦ as
they move back and forth between the trap walls [11]. Typical oscillation frequencies are on the
order of∼ 10 MHz, which results in an oscillation period that is a factor of∼ 102 smaller than
the observation time needed for precise measurement of the cyclotron frequency. Therefore, the
axial extent of the electron’s motion is unknown, and the electron is treated as if it is located in
the average axial position at the bottom of the magnetic trap. The component of motion with the
1Pitch angle is defined as the angle of the particle’s total momentum with respect to the local magnetic field.
– 3 –

===== PAGE 6 =====
smallest frequency is the grad-B drift caused by radial field gradients in the trap, producing an
orbit of the electron around the central axis of the trap with a frequency on the order of a few kHz,
dependent on the pitch angle and the radial position of the electron.
Each component of motion influences the shape of the cyclotron radiation signals received
by the antenna array, therefore, the data acquisition (DAQ) system must be properly designed in
order to resolve the effects of the cyclotron, pitch angle, and grad-B motions on the signal shape.
Frequencydown-conversionallowsforsamplingoftheCRESsignalswithabandwidthof200MHz,
which must be large enough to contain all sidebands produced by pitch angle modulation. The
noise temperature for the FSCD can be estimated using RF link-budget analysis, which depends
upon the physical temperature of the experiment as well as the noise temperature of the cyrogenic
amplifiers. The analysis presented in this paper assumes an effective system noise temperature of
≈ 10 K, which is achievable with cyrogenic temperatures and low-noise commercially-available
HEMT amplifiers.
Figure 2: A block diagram illustration of the real-time signal detection algorithm proposed for
antenna array CRES reconstruction.
A design goal for the FSCD DAQ system is to enable a significant portion of the CRES event
reconstructiontooccurinreal-time. TheestimateddatavolumegeneratedbytheFSCDis1exabyte
of raw data per year of operation, with the nominal array size of 60 antennas sampled at 200 MHz,
which would be prohibitive to store for offline processing. Therefore, it is ideal to perform some
CRES event reconstruction in real-time so that it is possible to save a reduced form of the data for
offline analysis.
The first step of the real-time reconstruction would be a real-time signal detection algorithm,
which is the focus of this paper. The basic approach consists of three operations performed on
the time-series data blocks including digital beamforming, a short-time Fourier transform (STFT),
and a binary classification algorithm to distinguish between data that consists of signal plus noise
(Signal) and data that is purely noise (see Figure 2).
2.2 Real-time Signal Detection
The first step in the real-time detection algorithm is digital beamforming, which is a phased
summation of the signals received by the array (see Figure 3). The phase shifts correspond to
the path length differences between a spatial beamforming position and each antenna such that,
when there is an electron located at the beamforming position, all the signals received by the array
constructively interfere. Since one does not know a priori where an electron will be produced in
thedetector, agridofbeamformingpositionsisdesignedtocovertheentireazimuthalplanewhere
electronscanbetrapped. Thephasedsummationisperformedforallpointsinthegridateachtime
– 4 –

===== PAGE 7 =====
Figure 3: An illustration of the digital beamforming procedure. The blue arrow indicates the
distance from the beamforming position to the antenna. In the configuration depicted the actual
position of the electron matches the beamforming position, therefore, one expects constructive
interference when the phase shifted signals are summed. To prevent the electron’s grad-B motion
from moving the electron off of the beamforming position, the beamforming phases include time-
dependence to follow the trajectory of the electron in the magnetic trap.
step. As discussed in Section 2.1, the axial oscillation of the electrons prevents one from resolving
itspositionalongthez-axis,therefore,thebeamforminggridneedonlycoverthepossiblepositions
of the electron in the two-dimensional plane defined by the antenna array.
Mathematically, digital beamforming can be expressed as
𝑦𝑖[𝑛]=
𝑁ant∑︁
𝑗=1
Φ𝑖𝑗[𝑛]𝑥𝑗[𝑛], (2.1)
where𝑥𝑗[𝑛] isthevoltagesampledatantenna 𝑗 attime 𝑛,Φ𝑖𝑗[𝑛] isamatrixelementfromthetime-
dependent beamforming phase shift matrix, and𝑦𝑖[𝑛] is the summed time-series for beamforming
position𝑖. The elements of the beamforming phase shift matrix can be expressed as a weighted
complex exponential
Φ𝑖𝑗[𝑛]= 𝐴𝑖𝑗[𝑛] exp  𝑖𝜙𝑖𝑗[𝑛], (2.2)
where the weight𝐴𝑖𝑗 accounts for the relative power increase for antennas that are closer to the
position of the electron, and𝜙𝑖𝑗 is the total beamforming phase shift for the𝑗-th antenna and the
𝑖-th beamforming position.
– 5 –

===== PAGE 8 =====
The beamforming phase shift is a sum of two terms
𝜙𝑖𝑗[𝑛]= 2𝜋𝑑𝑖𝑗[𝑛]
𝜆 +𝜃𝑖𝑗[𝑛], (2.3)
where the first term is the phase shift originating from the path length difference (𝑑𝑖𝑗[𝑛]) between
thebeamformingandantennapositions,whicharerepresentedbythevectors (𝑟𝑗,𝜃 𝑗)and(𝑟𝑖,𝜃𝑖[𝑛])
(see Figure 3), and the second term is the angular separation (𝜃𝑖𝑗[𝑛]) of the two positions. The
angular separation enters into the beamforming phase due to an effect caused by the circular
cyclotron orbit of the electron that produces radiation whose phase is linearly dependent on the
relative azimuthal position of the antenna [12, 13]. The time-dependence of the beamforming
phases corrects for the effects of the grad-B drift, which cause the guiding centers of electrons to
orbitthecenterofthemagnetictrap. Thecorrectionaddsalineartime-dependencetotheazimuthal
beamforming position,
𝜃𝑖𝑗[𝑛]=𝜃𝑗−𝜃𝑖[𝑛]=𝜃𝑗−𝜔∇𝐵𝑡[𝑛]+ 𝜃𝑖[0], (2.4)
where𝜃𝑗 is the fixed azimuthal position of antenna𝑗,𝜃𝑖[0] is the starting azimuthal coordinate of
the beamforming position,𝑡[𝑛] is the time vector, and𝜔∇𝐵 is the grad-B drift frequency, which
allows the beamforming phases to track the XY-position of the guiding center. Predicting accurate
values of𝜔∇𝐵 for a specific trap and set of kinematic parameters can be done with simulations,
which are performed using the Locust software package [14] developed by Project 8.
Figure4: FrequencyspectraofsimulatedCRESeventsintheFSCDmagnetictrapafterbeamform-
ing. The depicted frequency range has been down-converted using a local oscillator frequency of
25.86GHz. Thesignalofa 90◦ electronconsistsofasinglefrequencycomponentthatisclearlyde-
tectableusingapowerthresholdonthefrequencyspectrum. Thispowerthresholdremainseffective
for signals with relatively large pitch angles such as89.0◦, which are composed of a main carrier
and a few small sidebands. Signals with smaller pitch angles, below about88.5◦, are dominated
by sidebands such that no single frequency component can be distinguished from the noise with
sufficient statistical confidence using a power threshold.
– 6 –

===== PAGE 9 =====
After digital beamforming, a STFT is applied to the summed time-series to obtain the signal
frequencyspectrum(seeFigure4). ThesparsenessofCRESsignalsinthefrequencydomainmakes
this representation better than the time domain for the purposes of signal detection. The frequency
spectraofCRESsignalsarewell-approximatedbyafrequencyandamplitudemodulatedsinusoidal
whose carrier frequency increases as a linear chirp [11]. The modulation is caused by the axial
oscillationoftheelectroninthemagnetictrap,andthelinearchirpiscausedbytheenergylossdue
to cyclotron radiation, which results in a relatively slow increase in the frequency components of
theCRESsignalovertime. AtypicalCRESsignalincreasesinfrequencybyapproximately15kHz
duringthestandardFourieranalysiswindowof40.96 𝜇sec,whichissmallerthanthefrequencybin
width for a 200 MHz sample rate. Therefore, when considering a single frequency spectrum it is
justifiable to neglect the effects of the linear frequency chirp.
The majority of the CRES signal power for electrons in the FSCD trap is contained in a single
frequency component when the electron has a pitch angle≳ 88.5◦. The remaining signal power
is distributed between a small number of sidebands with amplitudes proportional to the electron’s
axial modulation (see Figure 4). Signal detection for these pitch angles is straightforward using a
simple power threshold on the STFT, since the amplitude of the main signal peak is well above the
thermal noise spectrum. However, as the pitch angle of the electron is decreased below88.5◦, the
maximum amplitude of the frequency spectrum becomes comparable to typical noise fluctuations.
At this point, the power threshold trigger is no longer able to distinguish between signal and noise
leadingtoareductionindetectionefficiency,whichisdirectlylinkedtotheneutrinomasssensitivity
of the FSCD. Because the distribution of electron pitch angles is effectively uniform, utilizing a
signal detection algorithm that can improve efficiency for pitch angles less than88.5◦ can lead to
improvements in the neutrino mass sensitivity of the FSCD.
3 Signal Detection Algorithms
Modeling detection performance requires one to pose the signal detection problem in a consistent
manner. The approach taken here uses the frequency spectra obtained from a STFT applied to
beamformed time-series from the FSCD to perform a binary hypothesis test. Mathematically, this
is expressed as,
H0 :𝑦[𝑛]=𝜈[𝑛] (3.1)
H1 :𝑦[𝑛]=𝑥[𝑛]+ 𝜈[𝑛]. (3.2)
Under hypothesisH0 the vector representing the frequency spectrum (𝑦[𝑛]) is composed only of
complex white Gaussian noise (cWGN,𝜈[𝑛]) with total variance𝜏, and under hypothesisH1 the
frequency spectrum is composed of a CRES signal (𝑥[𝑛]) with added cWGN. The dominant noise
source for the FSCD is expected to be thermal Nyquist-Johnson noise, which is well approximated
by a cWGN distribution. The hypothesis test is performed by calculating the ratio between the
log-likelihood probability distributions for the classifier underH1 andH0, which is the standard
Neyman-Pearson approach to hypothesis testing [15]. The output of the log-likelihood ratio test is
called the test statistic, which is used to assign the data as belonging to the noise or signal classes
using a decision threshold on the test statistic value.
– 7 –

===== PAGE 10 =====
In practice, the decision threshold is selected by finding the value of the test statistic that
guarantees a tolerable rate of false positives. Given this false positive rate (FPR), one attempts to
find a classifier that maximizes the true positive rate (TPR), which is the probability of correctly
identifying if a piece of data contains a signal. Because FSCD signal classifiers will be used to
evaluate the spectra of𝑂(102) beamforming positions every 40.96𝜇sec, there is a requirement
that the signal classifiers with FPR significantly smaller than 1% to minimize the number of false
positives that must be filtered out in later stages of the CRES signal reconstruction chain.
3.1 Power Threshold
The power threshold detection algorithm uses the maximum amplitude of the frequency spectrum
as the detection test statistic. Consider theH0 hypothesis where the signal is pure cWGN. The
performanceofthepowerthresholdcanbemodeledbyfirstanalyzingasinglebininthefrequency
spectrum. The probability that the amplitude of a frequency bin falls below the decision threshold
is given by the Rayleigh cumulative distribution function (CDF),
Ray(|𝑧|;𝜏)= 1− exp

−|𝑧|2/𝜏

, (3.3)
where|𝑧| represents the value of the decision threshold on the spectrum amplitude, and𝜏 is the
cWGN variance (defined below, Equation 3.5). Because the noise samples are independent and
identically distributed (IID), the probability that all bins in the frequency spectrum fall below the
threshold is the joint CDF formed by the product of each individual frequency bin CDF,
𝐹0(|𝑧|;𝜏,𝑁 bin)= Ray(|𝑧|;𝜏)𝑁bin. (3.4)
Finally, the PDF for the power threshold classifier can be obtained by differentiating Equation 3.4.
The noise of a beamformed frequency spectrum is a summation of all the noise samples from
the array channels. The received Nyquist-Johnson noise power for a single antenna is given by
𝑘𝐵𝑇Δ𝑓,where 𝑘𝐵 isBoltzmann’sconstant, 𝑇 isthesystemnoisetemperature,and Δ𝑓 isthesample
rate. The beamformed noise variance is increased by a factor of𝑁ch, where𝑁ch is the number
of antennas, caused by the summation of incoherent noise samples, however, the noise variance
per frequency bin is decreased by a factor equal to the number of samples in the STFT (𝑁FFT).
The amplitude weights applied during beamforming also affect the noise variance in a position
dependent way, since the analysis presented in this work focuses on only a single spatial position
(see Section 4), it was decided to weigh the signal in each channel equally, which results in the
same noise variance for all beamforming positions. The final expression for the noise variance that
describes a beamformed frequency spectrum is given by
𝜏=𝑘𝐵𝑇Δ𝑓𝑁 ch𝑅/𝑁FFT, (3.5)
where the system impedance (𝑅) has been used to convert from power to voltage-squared.
Similar toH0, the power threshold classifier distribution underH1 is calculated by combining
thedistributionsofindividualfrequencybins; however, thefrequencybinsthatcontainsignalmust
be treated separately. The probability that the amplitude of a frequency bin which contains both
signal and noise is below the decision threshold is described by a Rician CDF [15]
Rice(|𝑧|;𝜏,|𝑥𝑘|) = 1−
∫ ∞
|𝑧|
𝑑| ˜𝑧| 2| ˜𝑧|
𝜏 exp

−| ˜𝑧|2+|𝑥𝑘|2
𝜏

I0
 2| ˜𝑧||𝑥𝑘|
𝜏

, (3.6)
– 8 –

===== PAGE 11 =====
Figure 5: PDFs of the power threshold test statistic for CRES signals with various pitch angles as
wellasthePDFforthenoise-only( H0)case. Asthepitchangleisdecreasedthe H1 PDFsconverge
towards the noise PDF, which indicates that the power threshold is unable to distinguish between
signal and noise.
where|𝑥𝑘| defines the amplitude of the𝑘-th component of the signal frequency spectrum. The
CDFthatdescribestheprobabilitythattheentirespectrumfallsbelowthedecisionthresholdisthe
product of both signal and noise CDFs,
𝐹1(|𝑧|;𝜏, x𝑠,𝑁 bin,𝑁𝑠)= Ray(|𝑧|;𝜏)𝑁bin−𝑁𝑠
𝑁𝑠Ö
𝑘=1
Rice(|𝑧|;𝜏,|x𝑠[𝑘]|). (3.7)
ThefirsthalfofEquation3.7isthecontributionfromthebinsinthefrequencyspectrumthatcontain
onlynoise,andthesecondhalfistheproductoftheRicianCDFsforthefrequencybinsthatcontain
signalpeakswithnoise-freeamplitudesof x𝑠 =

𝑥1,...,𝑥 𝑁𝑠

,where 𝑁𝑠 isthenumberofnon-zero
frequency peaks in the CRES signal spectrum. Figure 5 shows plots of example PDFs underH1
andH0.
3.2 Matched Filtering
TheshapeofaCRESsignalbetweenrandomscatteringeventswiththebackgroundgasiscompletely
determinedbytheinitialconditionsoftheelectron,whichimpliesthatitispossibletoapplymatched
filteringasasignaldetectionalgorithm. Amatchedfilterusestheshapeoftheknownsignal,which
is called a template, to filter the incoming data by computing the convolution between the signal
andthedata[15]. Thematchedfilteristheoptimaldetector,whichmeansitachievesthemaximum
TPR for a particular FPR, under the assumption that the signal is perfectly known and the noise
is Gaussian distributed. Since CRES signals have an unknown shape but are deterministic, the
matched filter can be applied by using simulations to generate a large number of signal templates,
called a "template bank", which spans the parameter space of possible signals. Then at detection
time, the template bank is used to identify signals by performing the matched filter convolution for
each template in an exhaustive search.
– 9 –

===== PAGE 12 =====
CRES signals are highly periodic in nature. In such cases, it is advantageous to utilize
the convolution theorem to replace the matched filter convolution with an inner product in the
frequency-domain. Using the convolution theorem, the matched filter test statistic is given by
T = max
𝑚

𝑁bin∑︁
𝑛=0
ℎ†
𝑚[𝑛]𝑦[𝑛]
, (3.8)
where ℎ†
𝑚[𝑛] is the complex conjugate of the𝑚-th signal template and𝑦[𝑛] is the frequency
spectrum of the beamformed time-series.
Single Template
TheapproachtoderivingPDFsthatdescribethematchedfiltertemplatebankwillbetofirstderive
PDFs forH0 andH1 in the case of a single template and use these solutions to create PDFs that
describe the multi-template case. In the case when the template bank consists of only a single
template it is possible to derive an exact analytical form for the PDF. Consider theH1 case, where
the equation describing the matched filter test statistic, also known as the matched filter score,
becomes
T =

𝑁bin∑︁
𝑛=0
ℎ†[𝑛]𝑦[𝑛]
. (3.9)
Each noisy frequency bin is a sum of signal and cWGN, which means𝑦[𝑛] is also a Gaussian
distributed variable. Therefore, the value of the inner product between the template and the data is
also a complex Gaussian variable; and, since the matched filter score is the magnitude of this inner
product, it must follow a Rician distribution.
In Appendix A the exact form of the matched filter score PDF is derived. The solution is
𝑃1(𝑤;T0)= 2𝑤 exp

−

𝑤2+T 2
0

𝐼0(2𝑤T0), (3.10)
where 𝐼0 is the zeroth-order modified Bessel function of the first kind and𝑤 is the value of
the matched filter score decision threshold. The shape of the matched filter score distribution is
controlled by the parameterT0, which is effectively the value of the matched filter score if the data
contained no noise. Without noise, the data vector reduces to the signal,x, in which case Equation
3.9 becomes the magnitude of an inner product between two vectors. The magnitude of an inner
productcanbeexpressedintermsofthemagnitudesofthevectorsandaconstantthatdescribesthe
degree of orthogonality between them. Applying this to Equation 3.9, one obtains
T0=
h†· x
=|h|| x|Γ, (3.11)
whereΓ is a number that ranges from 0 to 1 and describes the orthogonality betweenh and x. Γ
effectively quantifies how well the template matches the unknown signal in the data.
The matched filter score PDF underH0 is readily obtained from Equation 3.10 by setting the
value ofT0 to zero, since the data contains no signal in the noise case. Doing this, one obtains a
Rayleigh distribution,
𝑃0(𝑤)= 2𝑤 exp

−𝑤2

. (3.12)
– 10 –

===== PAGE 13 =====
Multi-template
Equations 3.10 and 3.12 describe the behavior of the matched filter test statistic underH0 andH1
for a single template. However, defining a PDF that describes the matched filter test statistic in
the case of multiple templates is in general a mathematically intractable problem, since there is no
guaranteeoforthogonalitybetweenmatchedfiltertemplates. Thisleadstocorrelationsbetweenthe
matched filter scores of different templates, because only one sample of noise is used to compute
the matched filter scores of the template bank.
In order to proceed, it is assumed that the matched filter scores for all templates are IID
variables, which allows one to ignore correlations between templates. The overall effect of this
will be an underestimate of the performance of the matched filter by over-estimating the required
number of templates and the magnitude of the statistical trials penalty. The magnitude of this
underestimation,whileitcannotbepredictedinadvance,canbequantifiedusingMonte-Carlotests
of the matched filter templates and randomly generated test signals.
Figure 6: Example PDFs that describe the matched filter template bank test statistic for CRES
signalswithvariouspitchangles,aswellastheestimatedPDFforthenoise-onlycase. 105 matched
filter templates and perfect match between signal and template, i.e.Γ =1, is assumed. One can
observethatthereisgreaterseparationbetweenthesignalPDFsandthenoisePDFforthematched
filtertemplatebankcomparedtothepowerthreshold. Therefore,oneexpectsthatthematchedfilter
will have generally better detection efficiency than the power threshold.
Theprobabilitythatthematchedfilterscorefallsbelowthedecisionthresholdunder H0isagain
givenbytheCDF.Becauseoftheassumptionthatmatchedfilterscoresfromdifferenttemplatesare
independent, the probability that the matched filter score for all templates falls below the threshold
value is simply the joint CDF, which is
𝐹0(𝑤)=

1−𝑒−𝑤2𝑁𝑡
, (3.13)
where𝑤 isthematchedfilterscorethresholdand 𝑁𝑡 isthenumberoftemplates. Oneshouldexpect
that the distribution describing the maximum score of the matched filter template bank depends on
– 11 –

===== PAGE 14 =====
𝑁𝑡,becausewithmoretemplatesthereisagreaterchanceofarandommatchbetweenthetemplate
and noise data.
TheCDFthatdescribes H1 isderivedbystartingwiththeCDFofthebestmatchingtemplate.
The best matching template is simply the template that yields the largest matched filter score. The
score of the best template is defined by
Tbest= max
𝑚
(|h𝑚|| x|Γ𝑚)=|hbest|| x|Γbest. (3.14)
wherevariables hbestandΓbestarethetemplateandcorrespondingmatchofthebest-fittingtemplate.
A key performance parameter for a matched filter template bank is the mean value ofΓbest over the
parameter space covered by the template bank. A higher density of matched filter templates will
result in a higherΓbest and lead to better detection efficiency at the cost of a larger template bank.
ThefinalformoftheCDFunder H1isthejointdistributionbetweenthebestmatchingtemplate
CDF and the CDFs of all other templates. By the orthogonality assumption described above, the
matched filter scores for all other templates are treated as negligible (T0≈ 0). Therefore, the CDF
for the matched filter template bank underH1 is simply
𝐹1(𝑤;Tbest)=𝐹best(𝑤;Tbest)

1−𝑒−𝑤2𝑁𝑡
. (3.15)
Figure 6 shows plots of the matched filter template bank PDFs underH0 andH1.
3.3 Machine Learning
In this paper we specifically focus on the potential of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) as
machine learning based signal classifiers at the trigger level. CNNs are constructed using a series
ofconvolutionallayers,eachcomposedofasetoffiltersthatareconvolvedwiththeinputdata. The
individual convolutional filters can be viewed heuristically as matched filter templates [16] that are
learnedfromasetofsimulateddataratherthanbeingdirectlygenerated. Thisopensthepossibility
offindingamoreefficientrepresentationofthematchedfiltertemplatesduringthetrainingprocess
that can potentially reduce computational cost at inference time while retaining good classification
performance.
The machine learning approach is distinct from the power threshold and matched filtering in
that there is no attempt to manually engineer a test statistic that can be computed from the input
data. Instead, a test statistic is calculated by constructing a differentiable function that maps the
complex frequency series to a binary classification as signal or noise. The differentiable function
is trained using supervised learning to correctly perform this mapping. The test statistic for the
machine learning classifier is expressed mathematically as
T =𝐺(y; 𝛀), (3.16)
where y is the noisy data vector and𝐺(y; 𝛀) is the machine learning model parameterized by the
weights 𝛀.
The CNN architecture used for this work is summarized by Table 1. No strategic hyper-
parameter optimization approach was implemented beyond the manual testing of different CNN
architecture variations, so this particular model is best viewed as a proof-of-concept rather than
– 12 –

===== PAGE 15 =====
Table1: AsummaryoftheCNNmodellayersandparameters. Theoutputofeach1D-Convolution
and Fully Connected layer is passed through a LeakyReLU activation function and re-normalized
using batch normalization before being passed to the next layer in the model. The output of the
final Fully Connected layer in the model is left without activation so that the model outputs can be
directlypassedtotheBinaryCross-entropylossfunctionusedduringtraining. Thefirstlayerinthe
network has two input channels for the real and imaginary components of the spectrum.
Layer Type Input Channels Output Channels Parameters
1 1D-Convolution 2 15 ( 𝑁kernel= 4,𝑁stride= 1)
2 Maximum Pooling 15 15 ( 𝑁kernel= 4,𝑁stride= 4)
3 1D-Convolution 15 20 ( 𝑁kernel= 4,𝑁stride= 1)
4 Maximum Pooling 20 20 ( 𝑁kernel= 4,𝑁stride= 4)
5 1D-Convolution 20 25 ( 𝑁kernel= 4,𝑁stride= 1)
6 Maximum Pooling 25 25 ( 𝑁kernel= 4,𝑁stride= 4)
7 Fully Connected 3200 512 NA
8 Fully Connected 512 64 NA
9 Fully Connected 64 2 NA
a rigorously optimized design. Numerous model variations were tested, some with significantly
more layers and convolutions filters per layer, as well as others that were even smaller than the
architecture in Table 1. Ultimately, the model architecture choice was driven by the motivation to
findthe minimalmodelwhose classificationperformancewas stillcomparableto thelargerCNN’s
tested, because of the importance of minimizing computational cost in real-time applications. It
is possible that more sophisticated machine learning models could improve upon the classification
results achieved here, but this investigation is left for future work.
4 Methods
4.1 Data Generation
Simulated CRES signals were generated using the Locust simulations package [12, 14]. Locust
uses the separately developed Kassiopeia package [17] to calculate the magnetic fields produced
by a user-specified set of current carrying coils along with any specified background magnetic
fields, resulting in a magnetic trap. Next, Kassiopeia calculates the trajectory of an electron in this
magneticfieldstartingfromasetofuserspecifiedinitialconditions. TheLocustsoftwarethenuses
the electron trajectories from Kassiopeia to calculate the resulting electromagnetic fields using the
Liénard-Wiechert equations, and determines the voltages generated in the antenna array with the
antenna transfer function. Locust then simulates the down-conversion, filtering, and digitization
steps resulting in the simulated CRES signals for an electron.
The shape of the received CRES signal is determined by the initial kinematic parameters,
including the starting position of the electron, the starting kinetic energy of the electron, and the
pitch angle. The studies performed here are constrained to a single initial electron position located
– 13 –

===== PAGE 16 =====
at(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧 ) =(5, 0, 0) mm. Two datasets are generated using this starting position by varying the
initial kinetic energy and pitch angle.
The first dataset consists of a two-dimensional square grid spanning an energy range from
18575-18580 eV with a spacing of 0.1 eV, and pitch angles from85.5-88.5◦ with a spacing of
0.001◦, resulting in 153051 signals with a unique energy-pitch angle combination. This dataset is
intended to represent a matched filter template bank. The upper range of pitch angles is limited
becauseofthegreaterrelativedetectionefficiencyofthematchedfilterandneuralnetworkclassifiers
in this pitch angle range.
The second dataset was generated by randomly sampling uniform probability distributions
coveringthesameparameterspacetoproduceapproximately50000signalsrandomlyparameterized
in energy and pitch angle. This dataset provides the training and test data for the machine learning
approach,andactsasarepresentativesampleofsignalstoevaluatetheperformanceofthematched
filter template bank.
Each signal was simulated for a duration of40.96𝜇s or 8192 samples starting at time𝑡 = 0 s.
This duration represents a single frequency spectrum generated by the STFT. The FSCD antenna
array has sixty channels, and the output of the Locust simulations are a matrix of array snapshots
with a size given by the number of channels times the event length (𝑁ch×𝑁sample). The raw data
from Locust is first summed using digital beamforming and converted to frequency spectra using a
Fourier transform. The beamforming procedure uses the exact position and grad-B drift correction
to simplify the comparison between trigger algorithms. Many beamforming positions would be
usedinpracticeandpotentiallyseveralestimatesofatypical 𝜔∇𝐵 dependingonthevariationofthe
grad-B drift frequency with pitch angle.
4.2 Ensemble Averaging of Distributions
As described above (see Section 4.1), the parameter region of interest spans a 2-dimensional grid
in energy and pitch angle, and the quantity of interest is the classifier’s overall detection efficiency
acrossthisrange. Equations3.15and3.7werederivedundertheassumptionthataparticularsignal
was present in the data. Therefore, in order to describe the overall efficiency of the classifiers, we
perform an ensemble average of the distributions, given by Equations 3.15 and 3.7, that describe
detection probabilities for individual electrons in the dataset. From this set of distributions, we
can obtain a single distribution the describes the overall detection efficiency of the classifier by
performing an ensemble average. This averaging is performed (see Section 5) using the second
dataset described in Section 4.1, which is randomly parameterized in energy and pitch angle.
4.3 Template Bank Mean Match Estimation
Insection3.2,weintroduced Γbestasafigure-of-meritforamatchedfiltertemplatebank. Generally,
as the number and density of the matched filter templates is increased towards infinityΓbest→ 1,
sinceitbecomesincreasinglylikelythatthesignalwillmatchatleastonetemplate. Intheopposite
extreme, where the template bank contains only one template, thenΓbest≈ 0, since it is unlikely
thatanyparticulartemplatewillmatcharandomsignalfromtheexperiment. Thesizeofamatched
filter template bank will always be limited based on practical constraints such as the availability of
computational resources; therefore, it’s undesirable to use more templates than what is required to
achieve aΓbest that is close to one.
– 14 –

===== PAGE 17 =====
Figure7: Themeanmatchofthematchedfiltertemplatebanktoatestsetofrandomlyparameterized
signals as a function of the number of templates. The parameter space includes pitch angles from
85.5− 88.5◦ and energies from18575− 18580eV.
Inthisworkweelectedtoevaluatethedetectionefficiencyofatemplatebankwhere Γbest= 0.95.
The number of templates required to achieve this value of mean match was determined by Monte-
Carlo studies using template banks of different sizes, which were obtained by decimating the
regularlyspaceddataset(seeSection4.1)withseriesofintegerfactors. Therandomlyparameterized
signals were used as test signals to calculate the mean match of the template bank by evaluating
Γbest= 1
𝑁𝑠
𝑁𝑠∑︁
𝑙=1
Tbest
T𝑙
, (4.1)
where𝑁𝑠 isthenumberoftestsignalsand T𝑙 istheidealmatchedfilterscorefortestsignal 𝑙,which
is obtained if there is perfect match between signal and template.
The results of these calculations are summarized by Figure 7, which showsΓbest as a function
of the number of templates (𝑁𝑡). The linear trend ofΓbest as a function of the logarithm of𝑁𝑡
indicates that match scales exponentially with the size of the template bank, although this trend
breaks down at large𝑁𝑡 when match begins to saturate close to unity. Using linear interpolation
betweenthedatapoints, weidentify ≈ 105 asthenumberof templatesconsistentwith Γbest= 0.95.
4.4 CNN Training and Data Augmentation
Therandomdatasetissplitinhalftocreatedistincttrainingandtestdatasetsfortrainingthemodel.
A randomly selected 20% of the training data is isolated for use as a validation set during the
training loop. The size of the training, validation, and test datasets are tripled by appending two
additional copies of the data to increase the sample size of the dataset after data augmentation. A
different sample of noise is added to the simulation data during the training loop, which prevents
the model from overtraining on noise features. The training and test datasets contain an equal split
between signal and noise data, which are randomly shuffled after each training epoch.
– 15 –

===== PAGE 18 =====
The Locust simulation data was augmented to make the datasets more representative of actual
experiment data. As the signals are loaded for training a unique random phase shift is applied.
Since the simulations are generated using the same initial axial position and cyclotron orbit phase,
the randomization is an attempt to prevent overtraining on these features. During each training
epoch the data is randomly shuffled and split into batches of 2500 signals. Each batch of signals
is then circularly shifted by a random number of frequency bins to simulate a kinetic energy shift
from−75 to 20 eV, which imitates a dataset with a larger energy range. Next, a sample of cWGN,
consistent with 10 K Nyquist-Johnson noise, is generated and added to the signal, which prevents
overtraining on noise features. As a final step, the data is renormalized by the standard deviation
of the noise so that the range of values in the data is close to[−1, 1], which ensures well-behaved
back-propagation.
Figure 8: Histograms of the trained CNN model output from the test dataset. The blue histogram
shows the model outputs for signal data. The oddly shaped peak near the end is the result of the
softmax function mapping the long tail of the raw output distribution to the range[0, 1].
The Binary Cross-entropy loss function is used to compute the loss for each batch of data, and
the model weights are updated using the ADAM optimizer with a learning rate of5× 10−3. After
each training epoch, the loss and classification accuracy of the validation dataset are computed to
monitor for overtraining. It was noticed that because of the relatively high noise power and the
fact that a new sample of noise was used for each batch, it was nearly impossible to over-train the
model. Typically, the loss and classification accuracy of the model converged after a few hundred
training epochs, but the training loop was extended to 3000 epochs to attempt to achieve the best
possible performance. The training procedure generally took about 24 hrs using a single NVIDIA
V100 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) [18].
After training the model, it was used classify the test dataset and generate histograms of the
model outputs for both classes of data. The data augmentation procedure for the evaluation of the
test data mirrors the training procedure without the validation split. Since a random circular shift
and a new sample of WGN is added to each batch, the testing evaluation loop is run for 100 epochs
to get a representative sample of noise and circular shifts. The model outputs are passed through a
– 16 –

===== PAGE 19 =====
softmax activation and then combined into histograms (see Figure 8).
5 Results and Discussion
5.1 Trigger Classification Performance
Figure 9: ROC curves describing the true positive rate (detection efficiency) for the three signal
classification algorithms examined in this paper. The matched filter and power threshold curves
are computed analytically using the distribution functions introduced in Section 3, and the CNN
curveiscomputednumericallyusingtheclassificationresultsonthetestdataset. Thepercentmatch
indicated in the legend refers to the value ofΓbest for the template bank.
Thedetectionperformanceofthesignalclassifierscanbecomparedbycomputingthereceiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves (see Figure 9). A single ROC curve is obtained for the
matched filter and power threshold classifiers by averaging over the distributions for individual
CRES signals as described in Section 4.2. ROC curves are calculated for the matched filter using
template banks of two different sizes corresponding to mean matches of 95% and 83%. The ROC
curve describing the CNN is obtained numerically from the histograms of the model outputs for
each signal class.
The true positive rates of the signal classifiers are equivalent to detection efficiency, and
one sees that for the population of signals with pitch angles< 88.5◦ the power threshold has a
consistently lower detection efficiency than the CNN and the matched filter. This result might have
beenpredictedfromthevisualizationofsignalspectrainFigure4,whereitcanbeseenthatanoise
peak and a signal peak cannot be distinguished with high-confidence at small pitch angles. The
CNN offers a significant and consistent increase in detection efficiency over the power threshold
approach.
If one compares the CNN to the matched filter, it can be seen that the performance of the
tested network is roughly equivalent to a matched filter detector with a mean match of about 83%,
which uses approximately2× 104 matched filter templates. The overall best detection efficiency is
achieved by the matched filter classifier if a large enough template bank is used. The plot displays
– 17 –

===== PAGE 20 =====
the ROC curve for a matched filter template bank with 95% mean match, which is achieved with
approximately 105 templates. Since the matched filter is known to be statistically optimal for
detecting a known signal in WGN, it is unsurprising that this algorithm has the highest detection
efficiency.
AnimportantdifferencebetweenthematchedfilterandCNNalgorithmsisthattheCNNrelies
upon convolutions as its fundamental calculation mechanism, whereas our implementation of a
matched filter utilizes an inner product. Since convolution is a translation invariant operation, the
detection performance of CNN can be extended to a wider range of CRES event kinetic energies
withlesscostthanthematchedfilter,afeaturethatisexploitedduringtheCNNtrainingbyincluding
circular translations of the CRES frequency spectra in the training loop. Increasing the range of
detectable kinetic energies with a matched filter requires a proportional increase in the number
of templates, which directly translates into increased computational and hardware costs. From
a practical perspective, the detection algorithm is always limited by the available computational
hardware, so estimating the relative costs is a key factor in determining their feasibility. A more
detailed analysis of the relative costs of each of the detection algorithms is performed below.
5.2 Computational Cost and Hardware Requirements
Thetrade-offbetweenbetterdetectionefficiencyandcomputationalcostiscommontomanysignal
detection problems and the FSCD is no exception. Computational costs can be related to actual
hardware costs by calculating the theoretical amount of computer hardware required to implement
the signal classifiers for real-time detection. The approach taken here utilizes order of magnitude
estimates of the theoretical peak performance values for currently available GPUs as a metric.
This approach underestimates the amount of required hardware, since it is unlikely that any CRES
detection algorithm could reach the theoretical peak performance of the hardware.
Since the signal detection algorithms are designed to work using beamformed frequency
spectra, the computational cost of beamforming combined with a fast Fourier transform (FFT) is
constantforallclassifiers. Thebeamforminggridisassumedtocontain 𝑁bf beamformingpositions,
each of which will produce a frequency spectrum containing𝑁bin after the FFT.
Considering the power threshold classifier, this results in𝑁bin𝑁b frequency bins that must
be checked every𝑁bin/𝑓s seconds. The 20 cm diameter FSCD array requires𝑁bf≈ 𝑂(102) for
sufficient coverage and has a sampling frequency𝑓s = 200 MHz with a Fourier analysis window
of𝑁bin= 8192samples. Therefore the power threshold requires approximately𝑂(1010) FLOPS to
check in real-time with these parameters.
Current generations of GPUs have peak theoretical performances in the range of𝑂(1013)−
𝑂(1014) FLOPS [19], dependent on the required floating-point precision of the computation.
Therefore, the entire computational needs of a real-time triggering system using a power threshold
classifier, including digital beamforming and generation of the STFT, could be met by a single
high-end GPU or a small number of less powerful GPUs. Since triggering is only one step of the
full real-time signal reconstruction approach, limiting the computational cost of this stage is ideal.
However, the power threshold classifier does not provided sufficient detection efficiency across the
entire range of possible signals, which is the primary motivation for exploring more complicated
triggering solutions.
– 18 –

===== PAGE 21 =====
As discussed, the computational cost of the matched filter approach requires counting the
number of templates that must be checked for each frequency spectra produced by the STFT.
Computing the matched filter scores requires𝑂(𝑁bf𝑁t𝑁bin) operations, since for each of the
beamforming positions one must multiply𝑁t templates with a data vector that has length𝑁bin.
The computation must be performed in a time less-than or equal to𝑁bin/𝑓s to keep up with the
data generation rate. A 5 eV range of kinetic energies required104 to 105 templates in order for
the matched filter to exceed the performance of the CNN. The number of templates is expected to
scale linearly with the total kinetic energy range of interest, therefore,105 to 106 matched filter
templates would be expected for the nominal 50 eV analysis window of the FSCD. Considering
this,theestimatedcomputationalcosttoimplementamatchedfilterinaFSCD-scaleexperimentis
between𝑂(1015) to𝑂(1016) FLOPS, which is𝑂(102) to𝑂(103) high-end GPUs .
The computational cost of the CNN can be estimated by simply summing the computational
costsoftheconvolutionsandmatrixmultiplicationsspecifiedbythenetworkarchitectureshownin
Table 1. Each convolutional layer consists of𝑁in𝑁out𝑁kernel𝐿input floating-point operations, where
𝑁in is the number of input channels,𝑁out is the number of output channels,𝑁kernel is the size of the
convolutionalkernel,and 𝐿input isthelengthoftheinputvector,andthefullyconnectedlayerseach
contribute𝑁in𝑁out operations. Summing all the neural network layers it is estimated that the CNN
requires𝑂(106) floating point operations to evaluate each frequency spectra; therefore, the total
computationalcostoftheCNNtriggerisvaluemultipliedbythenumberofbeamformingpositions
per the data acquisition time, which is𝑂(1013) FLOPS or𝑂(100) GPUs.
ComparedwiththematchedfiltertemplatebankapproachtheCNNrequires 𝑂(100)to𝑂(1000)
fewer GPUs to implement, dependent on the exact number of templates used in the template bank.
The 50 eV kinetic energy range is motivated by the application of these detection algorithms to
an FSCD-like neutrino mass measurement experiment. However, if a significantly larger range of
kineticenergiesisrequired,aCNNmaybethepreferreddetectionapproachdespitethelowermean
detection efficiency due to computational cost considerations.
Additional experiments with larger CNNs, generated by increasing the depth and width of the
neural network, were performed. It was observed that these changes provided minimal (≲ 1%)
improvement in the classification accuracy of the model. A potential reason for this could be the
sparsenatureofthesignalsinthefrequencydomainandthelowSNR,whichmakesforachallenging
datasettolearnfrom. Futureworkmightinvestigatemodificationstotheneuralnetworkarchitecture
suchassparseconvolutions,whichmayimprovetheclassificationaccuracyofthemodelorfurther
reducethecomputationalcostsofthisapproach. Alternatively,morecomplicatedCNNarchitectures
such as a ResNet [20, 21] or VGG model may provide improved classification performance over
a basic CNN. An additional promising area of investigation are recurrent neural networks, which
may be able to exploit the time-ordered features of the STFT for more accurate signal detection if
the electron signals last for multiple Fourier transform windows.
The estimate of the computational costs of the matched filter is somewhat naive if one notices
that the majority of the values that make up a noise-free CRES frequency spectrum are zero (see
Figure4). Therefore,themajorityofoperationsinthematchedfilterinnerproductareunnecessary,
andonecouldinsteadevaluatethematchedfilterinnerproductusingonlythe ≲ 10frequencypeaks
thatmakeuptheCRESsignal. Thisoptimizationreducesthenumberofoperationsrequiredtocheck
each template by a factor of𝑂(100) to𝑂(1000), which brings the estimated computational cost of
– 19 –

===== PAGE 22 =====
the matched filter in line with the CNN. Although this level of sparsity results in a multiplication
with very low arithmetic complexity, the resulting sparse matched filter algorithm is still likely to
be constrained by memory access speed rather than compute speed. Ultimately, the comparison of
the relative computational and hardware costs between the matched filter and CNN will depend on
the efficiency of the software implementation and hardware support for neural network and sparse
matrix calculations, which will need to be determined using real-world benchmarks.
6 Conclusion
Increasing the detection efficiency and overall event rate represents a key developmental path
towardsnewscientificresultsandbroaderapplicationsoftheCREStechnique. Itiswhatmotivates
both the antenna array detection approach and the development of real-time signal reconstruction
algorithms. The work presented here demonstrates that gains in detection efficiency are achievable
byutilizingtriggeringalgorithmsthataccountforthespecificshapeofCRESsignalsinthedetector.
ThesealgorithmsemphasizetheneedforaccurateandfastmethodsforCRESsimulation,sincethey
directlycontributetothesuccessofmatchedfiltermethodsbyprovidingawaytogenerateexpected
signal templates and also serve as a source of training data for machine learning approaches.
The down-side of more advanced approaches to signal detection and reconstruction is of-
tentimes the increase in computational resources required to implement them. However, it was
shown that a CNN of minimal size was able to significantly improve detection performance above
the baseline power threshold trigger algorithm with a theoretical computational cost of only𝑂(1)
high-end GPU. This algorithm improves on detection performance while requiring at least a factor
𝑂(102) less in computer relative to a matched filter template bank, which would be the classical
approach to signal detection in Gaussian noise. Future work that obtains real-life benchmarks of
the CNN and matched filter algorithms are required to support these conclusions, but this study
has indicated that a real-time signal detection algorithm for an antenna array CRES experiment is
computationally feasible without an extraordinary increase in resources.
Itisworthemphasizingthat,whilethisreal-timesignaldetectionalgorithmhasbeendeveloped
specifically for the FSCD experiment, which uses a 60-channel array of antennas, this approach
allows one to combine the signals from an array with an arbitrary number of receiving elements.
Therefore, this general procedure could be implemented to perform signal reconstruction with
close to optimal efficiency, especially if a matched filter classifier is used, for significantly larger
antenna-based CRES experiments.
While this work has focused on the real-time detection of CRES signals from antenna arrays,
these same signal classifiers could be used in CRES experiments utilizing different detector tech-
nologies, since the same principles of signal detection will apply. For example, previous CRES
measurements by the Project 8 collaboration that utilized a waveguide gas cell, could in principle
increase detection efficiency by employing a matched filter or neural network classifier to identify
trappedelectronswithpitchanglesthataretoosmalltobedetectedbythepowerthresholdapproach.
Furthermore, alternative CRES detector technologies such as resonant cavities [5] could also see
similarimprovementsindetectionefficiency,whichisofcrucialimportancetofutureeffortsbythe
Project 8 collaboration to utilize CRES to measure the neutrino mass.
– 20 –

===== PAGE 23 =====
A Derivation of the Matched Filter Score PDF
The matched filter templateh is a simulated signal (xℎ) with a normalization factor
h= xℎ√︁
𝜏|xℎ|2
, (A.1)
where 𝜏 is the noise variance. Inserting this into Equation 3.8 and expressing the data as a sum
between a signal and a cWGN vector yields,
T = 1√︁
𝜏|xℎ|2

𝑁bin∑︁
𝑛=1
𝑥†
ℎ[𝑛]𝑥[𝑛]+
𝑁bin∑︁
𝑛=1
𝑥†
ℎ[𝑛]𝜈[𝑛]
. (A.2)
The first term is a scalar product between the signal and template vectors and the second term
is a complex Gaussian distributed variable with variance one. For the purposes of identifying the
statistical distribution, it is useful to rewrite the summation describing an inner product
𝑁bin∑︁
𝑛=1
𝑥†
ℎ[𝑛]𝑥[𝑛]= xℎ· x=|xℎ· x|𝑒𝑖𝜗≤| xℎ|| x|𝑒𝑖𝜗, (A.3)
the last step utilizes the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, where equality is guaranteed whenx = xℎ.
Instead of the inequality it is useful to define a quantity called "match" such that
|xℎ· x|𝑒𝑖𝜗 =|xℎ|| x|Γ𝑒𝑖𝜗, (A.4)
where the match factorΓ∈[ 0, 1]. The match factor quantifies how well the template matches the
signal.
The fact that the second term in Equation A.2 is a random complex Gaussian variable with
unity variance can be seen by noting that each of the noise samples are drawn from the complex
Gaussian distribution,N( 0,𝜏). Therefore,
𝑥†
ℎ[𝑛]
√︁
𝜏|xℎ|2
𝜈[𝑛]∼N
 
0,
𝑥†
ℎ[𝑛]𝑥ℎ[𝑛]
|xℎ|2
!
, (A.5)
𝑛=
𝑁bin∑︁
𝑛=1
𝑥ℎ[𝑛]√︁
𝜏|xℎ|2
𝜈[𝑛]∼N
 
0,
˝𝑁bin
𝑛=1 𝑥†
ℎ[𝑛]𝑥ℎ[𝑛]
|xℎ|2
!
=N( 0, 1). (A.6)
Equation A.2 can now be simplified
T =
|h|| x|Γ𝑒𝑖𝜗+𝑛
, (A.7)
whereEquationA.1hasbeenusedtoredefinetheinnerproductterm. Thequantity |h|| x|Γ isareal
number,whichisthematchedfilterscorethatonewouldexpectifthedatacontainednonoise. Since
h and x can potentially be mismatched,Γ is not necessarily equal to 1. The final simplification is
to defineT0=|h|| x|Γ, from which one obtains
T =|T0𝑒𝑖𝜗+𝑛|. (A.8)
FromEquationA.8oncanseethat T issimplythemagnitudeofacomplexnumberwithadded
cWGN of variance 1, which follows the Rician distribution
Rice(𝑥;T0, 1/2)= 2𝑥 exp

−

𝑥2+T 2
0

𝐼0(2𝑥T0). (A.9)
– 21 –

===== PAGE 24 =====
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the following sources: the U.S. Department of
Energy Office of Science, Office of Nuclear Physics, under Award No. DE-SC0020433 to Case
Western Reserve University (CWRU), under Award No. DE-SC0011091 to the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), under Field Work Proposal Number 73006 at the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory (PNNL), a multiprogram national laboratory operated by Battelle for the
U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-76RL01830, under Early Career Award
No. DE-SC0019088 to Pennsylvania State University, under Award No. DE-FG02-97ER41020
to the University of Washington, and under Award No. DE-SC0012654 to Yale University; the
National Science Foundation under Award No. PHY-2209530 to Indiana University, and under
Award No. PHY-2110569 to MIT; the Cluster of Excellence "Precision Physics, Fundamental
Interactions, and Structure of Matter" (PRISMA+ EXC 2118/1) funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) within the German Excellence Strategy (Project ID 39083149); the Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology (KIT) Center Elementary Particle and Astroparticle Physics (KCETA);
LaboratoryDirectedResearchandDevelopment(LDRD)18-ERD-028and20-LW-056atLawrence
LivermoreNationalLaboratory(LLNL),preparedbyLLNLunderContractDE-AC52-07NA27344,
LLNL-JRNL-840701;theLDRDProgramatPNNL;andYaleUniversity. Aportionoftheresearch
was performed using the HPC cluster at the Yale Center for Research Computing. Additionally, a
portionofthecomputationsforthisresearchwereperformedonthePennsylvaniaStateUniversity’s
Institute for Computational and Data Sciences’ Roar supercomputer, and was supported by the
National Science Foundation Award No. PHY-2018280 to Pennsylvania State University.
References
[1] B. Monreal and J.A. Formaggio,Relativistic cyclotron radiation detection of tritium decay electrons
as a new technique for measuring the neutrino mass, Phys. Rev. D80(2009) 051301.
[2] Project 8 collaboration, Single electron detection and spectroscopy via relativistic cyclotron
radiation,Phys. Rev. Lett.114 (2015) 162501 [1408.5362].
[3] Project 8 collaboration, Tritium Beta Spectrum Measurement and Neutrino Mass Limit from
Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy,Phys. Rev. Lett.131 (2023) 102502 [2212.05048].
[4] Project 8 collaboration, Cyclotron radiation emission spectroscopy of electrons from tritium beta
decay and83mkr internal conversion, 2303.12055.
[5] Project 8 collaboration, The project 8 neutrino mass experiment, 2203.07349.
[6] Project 8 collaboration, Determining the neutrino mass with cyclotron radiation emission
spectroscopy—Project 8,J. Phys. G44(2017) 054004 [1703.02037].
[7] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al.,Cyclotron radiation emission spectroscopy signal classification with
machine learning in project 8, New J. Phys.22 (2020) 033004 [1909.08115].
[8] Project 8 collaboration, Project 8: R&D for a next-generation neutrino mass experiment,PoS
PANIC2021(2022) 283.
[9] Project 8 collaboration, Antenna arrays for physics measurements with large-scale cres detectors, In
preparation(2024) .
– 22 –

===== PAGE 25 =====
[10] C.A. Balanis,Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 4th Edition, Wiley (2016).
[11] The Project 8 collaboration, Electron radiated power in cyclotron radiation emission spectroscopy
experiments,Phys. Rev. C99(2019) 055501.
[12] N. Buzinsky,Statistical Signal Processing and Detector Optimization in Project 8, Ph.D. thesis,
Massachusetts Institue of Technology2021.
[13] A.A. Esfahani, S. Böser, N. Buzinsky, M. Carmona-Benitez, C. Claessens, L. de Viveiros et al.,
Synca: A synthetic cyclotron antenna for the project 8 collaboration,Journal of Instrumentation18
(2023) P01034.
[14] Project 8 collaboration, Locust: C++ software for simulation of RF detection, New J. Phys.21
(2019) 113051 [1907.11124].
[15] S. Kay,Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Detection Theory, Volume II, Pearson (1998).
[16] L. Stanković and D. Mandic,Convolutional neural networks demystified: A matched filtering
perspective-based tutorial,IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems53(2023)
3614.
[17] D. Furse et al.,Kassiopeia: a modern, extensible C++ particle tracking package,New Journal of
Physics19 (2017) 053012.
[18] https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/v100/.
[19] https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/h100/.
[20] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren and J. Sun,Deep residual learning for image recognition, in2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–7782016, DOI.
[21] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman,Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition,
in 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May
7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, eds.2015,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
– 23 –
