===== PAGE 1 =====
Nature | www.nature.com | 1
Article
Infrared absorption spectroscopy of a single 
polyatomic molecular ion
Zhenlin Wu1, Tim Duka1, Mariano Isaza-Monsalve1, Miriam Kautzky1, Vojtěch Švarc2, 
Andrea Turci1, René Nardi1, Marcin Gronowski3, Michał Tomza3, Brandon J. Furey1 & 
Philipp Schindler1,2 ✉
Absorption spectroscopy is a fundamental tool for probing molecular structure1. 
However, performing absorption spectroscopy on individual molecules is challenging 
because of the low signal-to-noise ratio 2,3. Here we report on non-destructive 
absorption spectroscopy on a mid-infrared vibrational transition in a single molecular 
ion that is co-trapped with an atomic ion. The absorption of a single photon is detected 
by the momentum transfer from the absorbed photon onto the molecule. This recoil 
signal is amplified using a non-classical state of motion of the two-ion crystal and 
subsequently read out by the atomic ion4. We characterize the recoil detection 
method and use it to investigate the interaction between femtosecond laser pulses 
and the O–H stretching vibration in individual CaOH+ molecular ions. Furthermore, 
we present the spectrum obtained for the vibrational transition with single-photon 
sensitivity. This method can provide a way of performing non-destructive state 
detection of complex polyatomic molecules, for preparation and measurement of the 
quantum state of a wide range of molecular species.
Absorption spectroscopy is one of the most fundamental methods 
to investigate light–matter interaction and has long been accepted 
as a standard method1. Usually, the fraction of the transmitted light is 
measured, which reveals quantities such as the absolute absorption 
cross section5,6. Measuring the fraction of absorbed light becomes 
difficult when investigating a single atom or molecule, as fluctua -
tions and the inherent quantum noise of light often dominate the 
signal2,3. Nevertheless, there have been several demonstrations of 
detecting the absorption of light in a single atom or molecule with 
visible light7–9. These experiments are performed with a large number 
of photons being absorbed by the atom or molecule to produce a suf-
ficient absorption signal and require efficient and low-noise photon 
detectors that are not available for a large part of the electromagnetic  
spectrum.
For molecular ions that repel each other, it is difficult to obtain a dense 
sample for performing efficient absorption spectroscopy and often 
requires techniques that are applicable to single molecules. Thus, it is 
common to investigate molecular ions through the secondary actions 
that occur when the molecule absorbs light, such as photodissocia-
tion10–12, charge transfer13, fragmentation14 and inelastic collisions15,16.  
In contrast to these methods, which often perturb the molecular state or 
even destroy the molecular ions, recent efforts have been made to use 
quantum logic spectroscopy for detecting the state of the molecular ion 
by a co-trapped atomic ion in a non-destructive fashion17–20. Quantum 
logic spectroscopy enables spectroscopy on intramolecular transitions 
by monitoring the state of the system and its changes due to interaction 
with light18,21. So far, these experiments are limited to molecular species 
with relatively simple internal structure and are predominantly applied 
to diatomic molecules.
We use the same principle of quantum logic spectroscopy, probing 
the light–molecule interaction by a co-trapped atom, but we choose to 
detect photon absorption events directly using the recoil that a single 
absorbed photon exerts on the molecule. This detection technique is 
known as recoil spectroscopy and has been applied to study atomic 
transitions4,22. Similar to traditional quantum logic spectroscopy exper-
iments, the molecular ion is co-trapped with an atomic ion on which 
the recoil can be read out, as shown in Fig. 1. The recoil is transferred 
onto the atom by the Coulomb interaction, which couples the external 
motion of both trapped ions. The quantum state of the motion of the 
atom can then be mapped onto its electronic states and read out using 
quantum information processing techniques23.
Usually, the recoil of a single photon is so small that its effect on the 
motion of the atom cannot be measured straightforwardly for reason-
able experimental parameters. However, it is possible to amplify the 
signal of such a recoil by exploiting non-classical states of motion of 
both ions. For instance, it has been shown that preparing the motion 
in a so-called ‘Schrödinger cat’ state enables the detection of photon 
absorption4. A sketch of the measurement procedure is shown in Fig. 2. 
So far, this method has only been demonstrated on atomic transitions in 
which the collective recoil of multiple photon absorption and emission 
events was measured4. In this work, we demonstrate the first imple-
mentation of this method for detecting single-photon absorption on 
a molecular ion.
Photon absorption detection
T o illustrate the absorption detection method, we consider an atomic 
and a molecular ion co-trapped in a Paul trap, in which we aim to detect 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10915-8
Received: 1 December 2025
Accepted: 15 July 2026
Published online: xx xx xxxx
Open access
 Check for updates
1Universität Innsbruck, Institut für Experimentalphysik, Innsbruck, Austria. 2Department of Optics, Palacký University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. 3Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland. ✉e-mail: philipp.schindler@uibk.ac.at

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 | Nature | www.nature.com
Article
photon absorption on the molecular ion. Regardless of the nature of 
the molecular transition, the excitation is detected based on its influ-
ence on the motion of the two ions. We can thus describe the detection 
method with the internal state of the atomic ion and the combined 
motional state of the ion crystal. The internal state of the atom is mod-
elled by a two-level system with energy eigenstates |↑⟩ and |↓⟩, which 
can be manipulated and read out by applying laser pulses23. It is con-
venient to describe the motional states of the two ions by their collec-
tive motional modes that arise because of the Coulomb interaction. In 
our case, the relevant collective motion is given by a single-mode har-
monic oscillator with its general state in the Fock state basis Ψ cn=∑ |⟩zn n . 
In particular, we target the axial in-phase mode of the mixed-species 
two-ion crystal24.
We first introduce the dynamics of a single-photon absorption event 
in this system. Momentum conservation dictates that the absorption 
of a single photon not only excites a molecular transition but also 
transfers momentum from the photon onto the molecule. In an ion 
trap, this momentum transfer can be described by applying a displace-
ment operator D η(i )m  (ref. 25). The magnitude of this displacement is 
given by the corresponding Lamb–Dicke parameter of the molecular 
transition:
η ħ
Mω ke= 2 ,( 1)
z
zzm
m
,m ,m
where Mm is the molecular mass, ωz is the motional frequency of the 
in-phase mode, kz,m is the wavevector component of the light exciting 
the molecular transition along the motional axis, and ez,m is the par-
ticipation factor of the molecular ion in the in-phase mode24.
We consider first the case in which the motion is initially prepared 
in its ground state, which is displaced into a coherent state with ampli-
tude ηm due to the recoil. For molecular transitions in the optical  
and infrared regime, this displacement magnitude is usually of the 
order of 10−2. We can thus approximate the displaced motional state 
with Ψ η=| 0⟩ +i e| 1⟩z
ωt
m
−i z  as ηm ≪ 1, where t is the timing between the 
photon absorption event and the detection. The most efficient method 
for detecting this displacement directly is a phase-sensitive measure-
ment that maps the motional state onto the basis states of the atom, 
followed by a measurement in the atomic σy  basis4. When varying the 
timing of the photon absorption event, this measurement yields  
a sinusoidal signal with peak-to-peak contrast Sη η() =2direct mm . In  
practice, this signal is too small to be measured with confidence 
because of fundamental and technical noise of the experiment, such 
as quantum projection noise and imperfect motional ground state 
cooling.
A more efficient way of detecting the displacement is to prepare 
the motional state of the ion crystal in a non-classical state before 
the absorption event, as shown in Fig. 2 . This is done by applying a 
bichromatic light field to the atomic and motional ground state that 
causes a state-dependent force on the ions (see Methods, Cat-state 
engineering). It generates entanglement between the in-phase motion 
of the crystal and the atomic qubit state. The resulting state is known 
as a cat state: 
Ψα α= 1
2 (|+⟩|⟩ +| −⟩|− ⟩), (2)cat
where |±⟩ =( |↑⟩± |↓⟩)/2  and α|±⟩  is a motional coherent state of com-
plex amplitude ±α (ref. 26). Although |α| is referred to as the amplitude 
of the cat state, the argument of α can be interpreted as the phase of 
the cat state, which is controlled by the relative phase ϕ− between the 
two frequency components of the bichromatic laser field.
A single-photon absorption event then acts as a displacement on 
this cat state. This displacement can be mapped onto the electronic 
42S1/2
42P1/2
32D5/2
Fluorescence
CaOH+ Ca+
CaOH+ Ca+
Fig. 1 | Schematic of the system of a trapped two-ion mixed-species crystal 
for performing molecular spectroscopy.  The system is considered here  
to possess three degrees of freedom: a harmonic oscillator describing the 
in-phase motion of the crystal, a two-level system in the atomic ion for quantum 
logic operations and the intramolecular vibration.
Q


P
Ground-state cooling
Cat-state generation
Molecular excitation
Cat-state reversal
Detection
Fluorescence
signal
Fig. 2 | Cat-state spectroscopy for detecting the photon absorption recoil. 
Sequence diagram of the cat-state spectroscopy for detecting the photon 
absorption recoil on the molecule (left) and the evolution of the motional 
wavepacket of the ion crystal in-phase space (right). The procedure consists of 
the following steps: initial ground-state cooling of the ion motion, generation 
of the recoil-sensitive cat state, excitation of the molecular transition, reversal 
of the cat-state generation operation and the detection of the photon absorption 
recoil on the atomic ion. This process generates entanglement between the 
atomic qubit and the motion of the ion crystal, such that the signal of single- 
photon absorption recoil is amplified and transformed into a geometric phase 
shown by the shaded area. This is then mapped to the state of the atomic ion, 
which can be detected by fluorescence.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Nature | www.nature.com | 3
state of the atom by inverting the dynamics of the cat-state generation 
process, which is implemented by altering the phases of bichromatic 
light. The state after the displacement and the inverse cat-state dynam-
ics becomes 
Ψη
ΦΦ η
′= 1
2 (| +⟩e+ |− ⟩e )⊗ |i ⟩
=( |↑⟩cos +| ↓⟩sin) ⊗| i⟩ ,
(3)
ΦΦi− i
m
m
where the rotation angle of the atomic electronic state Φ = 2ηmRe(α) 
reflects the amplification of the recoil. The amplification depends 
on Re(α), which is determined by the phase difference between the 
cat state and the displacement operator from the photon absorption 
recoil. The phase of the cat state is controlled by ϕ−, whereas the phase 
of the displacement operator is determined by the relative timing of 
the photon absorption event and the generation of the cat state. In our 
experiment, we chose to vary Re(α) between −|α| and |α| by changing ϕ−, 
while keeping the timing of the photon absorption fixed (see Methods, 
‘Experimental imperfections’).
Overall, an experimental sequence consists of cat-state generation, 
photon absorption and the reversal of cat-state generation. After this 
sequence, the displacement from the absorption event can be related 
to an atomic excitation to |↓⟩, which can be detected with a maximum 
probability of ηαsin(2| |)m
2. In the regime of ηmRe(α) ≪ 1, it is advanta-
geous to evaluate the atomic excitation in the σy basis by adding an 
extra R (π/2)x  operation on the atom before detection. We define the 
measured signal in this case to be the peak-to-peak amplitude in the 
atomic excitation as we vary ϕ−: 
∣∣ηη α() =s in(4 ), (4)mm
which is the expected signal from a noiseless experiment.
We implemented this technique experimentally on a two-ion crystal 
of one 40Ca+ ion and one 40CaOH+ ion, which is generated by leaking in 
water vapour27,28, as described in Methods, ‘Molecule generation’ .  
To analyse the effect of imperfections in the experiment on this method 
(mainly due to atomic and motional decoherence), we emulate the 
absorption event by a displacement caused by an electric force on the 
ion crystal. To implement a displacement with a controlled magnitude, 
we apply a series of nkick short electric kick pulses. They are temporally 
separated by the oscillation period of the in-phase motion of the ion cry-
stal such that they add up coherently to a displacement D ηn η(= )kkick   
on the motional state of the crystal. Here, ηk is the displacement mag-
nitude from a single kick pulse, which is set to 0.0193(2) to be compa-
rable with the expected recoil of a mid-infrared photon absorption 
event.
The sensitivity of the generated cat states can then be tested with 
these electric impulses by varying the phase ϕ − and measuring the 
atomic excitation in the σy  basis. This yields a sinusoidal signal as shown 
in Fig. 3a, which shows the measured signals for a cat-state amplitude 
of |α| = 6.5(7) when applying a single kick and applying no kick. The 
signal is smaller than what is expected from equation ( 4) because of 
experimental imperfections. We quantify the effect of the imperfec-
tions on the achievable signal for various cat-state amplitudes |α | as 
shown in Fig. 3b. In a noiseless experiment, the signal should increase 
with larger |α| according to equation (4), but the actual signal measured 
at large |α| is limited by atomic and motional decoherence. This behav-
iour is expected as the experiment duration and the sensitivity to noise 
increase with the amplitude of the cat state, as shown in simulations 
of the experiment detailed in Methods, ‘Experimental imperfections’ . 
T o reach the maximum detection efficiency, we operate our spectros-
copy measurements with |α| = 6.5(7). We model experimental imper-
fections by introducing a correction factor max  that reduces the 
measured signal expected from equation (4): 
Sη Sη α() =s in(4 || ), (5)max
where Fig. 3c shows results for  =0 .52(3)max , which will be used in the 
following analysis.
The measured contrast can be directly converted to a value that is 
relevant for absorption spectroscopy: the photon absorption probabil-
ity. For probing typical molecular vibrational transitions, we assume 
that the molecule absorbs no more than one photon throughout the 
sequence and that no spontaneous decay occurs during this period. 
0 2/uni03C0 4/uni03C0
 –
6/uni03C0
0.4
0.5
0.6Mean excitation
a
2 3 4 5 6 7
||
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35b
0 0.02 0.04

0.06 0.08 0.10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
c
SignalSignal
Fig. 3 | Characterization of the cat-state spectroscopy on an electric-kick-  
induced displacement.  a, Measured atomic excitation signal as a function  
of the bichromatic light phase ϕ− with |α| = 6.5(7) on the displacement of 
ηk = 0.0193(2) for nkick = 1 (blue) as well as the background signal for n kick = 0 
(orange) due to quantum projection noise. Error bars are 1 s.d. due to quantum 
projection noise. b , Variation of the signal with respect to cat-state amplitude 
|α| for a fixed displacement, as compared with theory based on the measured 
atomic and motional coherence (purple; see Methods, ‘Experimental 
imperfections’). Error bars are 1 s.d. from the least-squares fit covariance.  
c, The signal measured with | α| = 6.5(7) for electric displacements with various 
magnitudes η, as compared with theory based on the measured atomic  
and motional coherence in purple and a simple heuristic model in blue. The 
theoretically achievable contrast from a direct measurement is indicated in 
the grey-shaded region.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 | Nature | www.nature.com
Article
With this, we can extract an effective photon absorption probability 
from the measured signal  and the signal expected from absorbing  
a photon at the probe wavelength  η() m  given by equation (5): 
∼pη =/ () . (6)absm
In the following, we demonstrate vibrational spectroscopy on the 
molecule using this effective single-photon absorption probability 
as a figure of merit.
Molecular spectroscopy
We now characterize a molecular vibrational transition in CaOH+ using 
the cat-state detection method. In particular, we address the vibrational 
transition between the ground and first excited state of the O–H stretching  
mode. This transition is predicted at ν 0 = 3,783 cm−1 and should be 
infrared active, based on ab initio calculations (details in Methods, 
‘Quantum-chemical calculations’), which corresponds to ηm ≈ 0.03. We 
expect that the equilibrium state of this internal vibration is effectively 
the ground state, as the molecule should thermalize to its ambient 
temperature29. Repeated application of the spectroscopy sequence 
should not change this equilibrium distribution as the time between 
excitation events is long compared with the radiative lifetime of the 
excited state, estimated as 2.8 ms. Owing to the rotational substructure 
within the target vibrational transition, the excitation dynamics are 
also influenced by the thermal distribution of the rotational states. 
However, the molecule is excited with a femtosecond laser that has a 
bandwidth that cannot resolve the individual rotational lines. There-
fore, our modelling of the molecule–laser interaction does not consider 
the rotational substructure and consists of only the two lowest energy 
vibrational states.
T o achieve a significant excitation probability, we apply multiple laser 
pulses in a train consisting of up to 34 pulses. Similar to the electric 
impulses described above, the timing of the laser pulses is synchronized 
with the external motion of the ion crystal. We fulfil this by setting the 
in-phase motional frequency of the ion crystal to ωz/2π = 4 ⋅ frep, where 
frep = 100 kHz is the repetition rate of the laser pulses, as shownin Fig. 4b.
At a laser centre frequency of ν = 3,703.3(2) cm−1, we achieve a photon 
absorption signal of =0 .1 2(1)  after applying n pulse = 34 pulses, as 
shown in Fig. 4c. This cat-state spectroscopy signal can then be con-
verted into an effective photon absorption probability. As shown in 
Fig. 4a, we measured the photon absorption probability at the same 
laser centre frequency as a function of the number of laser pulses. This 
allows us to compare the experimental data to a simple theoretical 
model with no free parameters, which predicts the absorption 
probability to saturate to 0.5 because of the random orientation of the 
molecule and dephasing (Methods, ‘Molecular excitation dynamics’).
A spectrum of the O–H stretching transition measured with this 
technique is shown in Fig. 4d. These measurements are performed 
by varying the centre frequency of the laser between 3,600 cm−1 and 
4,000 cm−1 and applying a train of 34 laser pulses. It is observed that 
the centre of the absorption peak is close to the value of ν0 = 3,783 cm−1 
from ab initio calculations and that the width of the simulated absorp-
tion peak matches the measured spectrum. However, the model fails 
to explain the absolute magnitude of the measured effective photon 
absorption probability.
The comparison of the experiment with the model indicates that 
the model captures the qualitative features but does not fully explain 
the observed dynamics and spectral structure. We plan to advance 
both the experimental and theoretical analysis further to develop a 
more accurate model for the obtained photon absorption spectrum. In 
particular, we aim to increase the spectroscopy laser intensity to reach 
appreciable excitation probability with a single laser pulse. This will 
facilitate a more sophisticated theoretical modelling of the coherence 
of the molecule–light interaction and will enable precise measurement 
of the transition properties.
In the presented experiments, we chose to use broadband femtosec-
ond laser pulses to drive the molecular transition to be insensitive to 
the rotational state distribution. Our implementation can be naturally 
extended to pump–probe experiments investigating intramolecular 
dynamics at ultrafast timescales30. We also expect that this method can 
be a useful tool for high-precision spectroscopy. A high spectral resolu-
tion can be reached by a pulse train originating from a narrow linewidth 
laser with the repetition period being an integer multiple of the oscil-
lation period of the ions and a pulse duration that is shorter than the 
oscillation period of the ions. This enables a coherent momentum kick 
that can be detected with the cat state while probing the transition at 
a linewidth that is limited by Fourier transform of the pulse train. This 
interaction is equivalent to a high-precision interrogation of a transi-
tion with a frequency comb, which has been demonstrated in atoms 
and molecules21. Performing high-precision spectroscopy on com-
plex molecules will require state preparation to reach an appreciable 
signal-to-noise ratio. We anticipate that recoil detection with spectrally 
shaped laser sources in combination with traditional quantum logic 
methods19 can provide powerful tools to enable this state preparation.
Our experiments demonstrate and characterize a method to detect 
single-photon absorption events on a single molecular ion, which 
is an important step towards realizing non-destructive quantum 
state detection measurements in a wide class of molecular ions. With 
large-enough amplification of the recoil signal, we can realize the 
npulse
CAT DetectionShutterState
preparation CAT–1 x(/uni03C0/2)
Experiment
Triggerba
c
0 2/uni03C0 4/uni03C0
–
6/uni03C0
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55Mean excitation
d
3,600 3,700 3,800 3,900 4,000
Wavenumber  (cm–1)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Pulse number npulse
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
~Absorption probability Pabs
~Absorption probability PabsFemtosecond
laser
Fig. 4 | Absorption spectroscopy of the O–H stretching mode of CaOH +.  
a, The effective photon absorption probability from the cat-state spectroscopy 
measured at ν  = 3,703 cm−1 with different laser pulse number n pulse  (red) and  
the results from a Monte Carlo simulation (purple). b , Schematic of the pulse 
sequence triggered on the femtosecond laser pulse train. c , An example of the 
detected atomic excitation variation ( npulse  = 34) in the measurement from 
which the peak-to-peak amplitude  is obtained. d, Absorption spectrum 
measured with cat-state spectroscopy (red dots), along with the expected 
spectrum from simulation (purple dots). The value for the transition frequency 
from ab initio theory is indicated (purple line).

===== PAGE 5 =====
Nature | www.nature.com | 5
detection of a single-photon absorption event directly as an atomic 
excitation in a single shot. Furthermore, other methods to increase 
the detection sensitivity of the photon recoil exist31–33 and might also 
be beneficial for realizing single-shot measurements. With selec -
tive single-shot measurement in an effective three-level system, the 
recoil detection can enable non-destructive measurements on two 
of the states34,35, as discussed in the Methods, ‘Non-destructive state 
detection’ . These selective single-shot measurements are also key for 
measurement-based molecular state preparation and readout, which 
are crucial ingredients in the development of quantum technologies 
with molecular ions29,36,37.
The method presented in this study can be applied to any molecular 
transition that produces a momentum kick of sufficient magnitude 
based on equation (1). With our set of parameters, the method should 
be able to detect photon absorption events on transitions with a fre-
quency down to 2,000 cm−1. The transitions considered in the discus-
sion here are limited to vibrational transitions in which the radiative 
lifetime of the excited states are much longer than time to create the 
cat state. If this is not the case, the momentum kick has also a diffusive 
part that reduces the achievable detection efficiency4, which applies 
to dipole allowed transitions in the visible and ultraviolet part of the 
spectrum.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions 
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability 
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10915-8.
1. Hollas, J. M. Modern Spectroscopy (Wiley, 2004).
2. Gaiduk, A., Yorulmaz, M., Ruijgrok, P. V. & Orrit, M. Room-temperature detection  
of a single molecule’s absorption by photothermal contrast. Science 330, 353–356 
(2010).
3. Whittaker, R. et al. Absorption spectroscopy at the ultimate quantum limit from 
single-photon states. New J. Phys. 19, 023013 (2017).
4. Hempel, C. et al. Entanglement-enhanced detection of single-photon scattering events. 
Nat. Photon. 7, 630–633 (2013).
5. Berden, G., Peeters, R. & Meijer, G. Cavity ring-down spectroscopy: experimental 
schemes and applications. Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 19, 565–607 (2000).
6. Banwell, C. N. & McCash, E. M. Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy (Mc-Graw Hill, 
2017).
7. Wineland, D. J., Itano, W. M. & Bergquist, J. C. Absorption spectroscopy at the limit: 
detection of a single atom. Opt. Lett. 12, 389–391 (1987).
8. Celebrano, M., Kukura, P., Renn, A. & Sandoghdar, V. Single-molecule imaging by optical 
absorption. Nat. Photon. 5, 95–98 (2011).
9. Streed, E. W., Jechow, A., Norton, B. G. & Kielpinski, D. Absorption imaging of a single 
atom. Nat. Commun. 3, 933 (2012).
10. Okumura, M., Yeh, L. I. & Lee, Y. T. The vibrational predissociation spectroscopy of 
hydrogen cluster ions. J. Chem. Phys. 83, 3705–3706 (1985).
11. Koelemeij, J. C. J., Roth, B., Wicht, A., Ernsting, I. & Schiller, S. Vibrational spectroscopy of 
HD+ with 2-ppb accuracy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 173002 (2007).
12. Loh, H. et al. Precision spectroscopy of polarized molecules in an ion trap. Science 342, 
1220–1222 (2013).
13. Germann, M., Tong, X. & Willitsch, S. Observation of electric-dipole-forbidden infrared 
transitions in cold molecular ions. Nat. Phys. 10, 820–824 (2014).
14. Schmid, P. C., Asvany, O., Salomon, T., Thorwirth, S. & Schlemmer, S. Leak-out spectroscopy, 
a universal method of action spectroscopy in cold ion traps. J. Phys. Chem. A 126, 8111–8117 
(2022).
15. Calvin, A. et al. Single molecule infrared spectroscopy in the gas phase. Nature 621, 
295–299 (2023).
16. Calvin, A. et al. Rotationally resolved spectroscopy of a single polyatomic molecule. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 134, 153002 (2025).
17. Wolf, F. et al. Non-destructive state detection for quantum logic spectroscopy of 
molecular ions. Nature 530, 457–460 (2016).
18. Sinhal, M., Meir, Z., Najafian, K., Hegi, G. & Willitsch, S. Quantum-nondemolition state 
detection and spectroscopy of single trapped molecules. Science 367, 1213–1218 (2020).
19. Chou, C. -W. et al. Preparation and coherent manipulation of pure quantum states of a 
single molecular ion. Nature 545, 203–207 (2017).
20. Holzapfel, D. et al. Quantum control of a single H+
2 molecular ion. Phys. Rev. X 15, 031009 
(2025).
21. Chou, C. W. et al. Frequency-comb spectroscopy on pure quantum states of a single 
molecular ion. Science 367, 1458–1461 (2020).
22. Wan, Y. et al. Precision spectroscopy by photon-recoil signal amplification. Nat. Commun. 
5, 3096 (2014).
23. Wineland, D. J. et al. Experimental issues in coherent quantum-state manipulation of 
trapped atomic ions. J. Res. Natl Inst. Stand. Technol. 103, 259–328 (1998).
24. Home, J. P. Quantum science and metrology with mixed-species ion chains. Adv. At. Mol. 
Opt. Phys. 62, 231–277 (2013).
25. Ozeri, R. et al. Errors in trapped-ion quantum gates due to spontaneous photon scattering. 
Phys. Rev. A 75, 042329 (2007).
26. Zhang, W.-M., Feng, D. H. & Gilmore, R. Coherent states: theory and some applications. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 867–927 (1990).
27. Okada, K. et al. Acceleration of the chemical reaction of trapped Ca+ ions with H2O 
molecules by laser excitation. J. Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 36, 33–46 (2003).
28. Wu, Z. et al. Photodissociation spectra of single trapped CaOH+ molecular ions. J. Chem. 
Phys. 161, 044304 (2024).
29. Liu, Y. et al. Quantum state tracking and control of a single molecular ion in a thermal 
environment. Science 385, 790–795 (2024).
30. Schindler, P. Ultrafast infrared spectroscopy with single molecular ions. New J. Phys. 21, 
083025 (2019).
31. Lo, H.-Y. et al. Spin–motion entanglement and state diagnosis with squeezed oscillator 
wavepackets. Nature 521, 336–339 (2015).
32. Burd, S. C. et al. Quantum amplification of mechanical oscillator motion. Science 364, 
1163–1165 (2019).
33. Bond, L. J., Valahu, C. H., Shankar, A., Tan, T. R. & Safavi-Naini, A. Optimal displacement 
sensing with spin-dependent squeezed states. PRX Quantum https://doi.org/10.1103/
mhvv-pr5d (2025).
34. Braginsky, V. B., Vorontsov, Y. I. & Thorne, K. S. Quantum nondemolition measurements. 
Science 209, 547–557 (1980).
35. Hume, D. B., Rosenband, T. & Wineland, D. J. High-fidelity adaptive qubit detection 
through repetitive quantum nondemolition measurements. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 120502 
(2007).
36. Shlykov, A., Roguski, M. & Willitsch, S. Optimized strategies for the quantum-state 
preparation of single trapped nitrogen molecular ions. Adv. Quantum Technol. 8, 
2300268 (2025).
37. Kim, H. J., Schmid, F., Holzapfel, D. & Kienzler, D. State-selective ionization and trapping of 
single H2
+ ions with (2+1) multiphoton ionization. Phys. Rev. A 113, 043119 (2026).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution 
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, 
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your 
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, 
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026

===== PAGE 6 =====
Article
Methods
Molecule generation
Our experiment is performed on a mixed-species two-ion crystal con-
sisting of 40Ca+ and 40CaOH+ confined in a linear Paul trap28. T o form such 
a crystal, we first load two 40Ca+ ions and then leak in water vapour with 
a leak valve from a gas chamber that contains mainly water vapour with 
a pressure of around 10−6 mbar. In the process, we apply 397 nm laser 
that drives the 42S1/2 → 42P1/2 dipole transition in 40Ca+ to cool the ion 
crystal and monitor the fluorescence from 40Ca+ ions with a camera. As 
the molecule does not fluoresce, the generation of a molecular ion leads 
to one of the ions turning dark on the camera. When this is observed, we 
switch off the leak valve and perform mass spectrometry on the dark 
ion by measuring the motional frequency of the ion crystal24 to verify 
the generation of CaOH+. In general, it takes around 5 min to form a 
molecule. After closing the valve, the pressure in the vacuum chamber 
returns to around 10−10 mbar within a few minutes.
After generating the mixed-species ion crystal, background gas 
collisions occur, leading to the atomic and molecular ions swapping 
positions on the timescale of several seconds. For cat-state spec -
troscopy measurements, we work with only one of the two-ion crys-
tal configurations because the two configurations exhibit different 
motional frequencies. This is probably due to imperfect micromotion 
compensation24. We detect the ion crystal configuration during Dop-
pler cooling before the spectroscopy sequence and attempt to alter 
the configuration randomly if the wrong configuration is detected. 
This is done by displacing the ion crystal radially from its trapping 
position. We repeat this procedure until the ions return to the correct  
configuration.
Cat-state engineering
The non-classical motional state for probing photon recoil is generated 
by a bichromatic laser beam applied to the 40Ca+ ion. The two frequency 
components of equal intensity in the bichromatic beam are detuned 
by −ωz and +ωz from the atomic quadrupole transition between |↑⟩ and 
|↓⟩, with ωz being the in-phase motional frequency of the ion crystal4. 
The Lamb–Dicke parameter of this quadrupole transition in the experi-
ment is given by 
η ħ
Mω ke= 2 ,( 7)
z
zza
a
,a ,a
where Ma is the atomic mass, kz,a is the wavevector component of the 
quadrupole transition laser along the trap axis, and ez,a is the participa-
tion factor of the atomic ion in the in-phase mode. In the Lamb–Dicke 
regime, the light–ion interaction Hamiltonian can be written as38
Hħ η Ω σa σa= 2 (e +e +h .c.), (8)ϕϕ
int a
0
+
i
+
† irb
where Ω0 is the Rabi frequency, a
†
 is the creation operator and a is the 
annihilation operator of the harmonic oscillator describing in-phase 
motion, ϕr and ϕb are the phases of the frequency components with 
detuning −ωz and +ωz, respectively, in the light field, and h.c. is Hermi-
tian conjugate. This corresponds to a spin-dependent displacement 
characterized by ϕ± = (ϕb ± ϕr)/2, given by 
 
Hħ η Ω σϕ σϕ
aa ϕa aϕ
= 2 (c os −s in )
i(−+ )sin +( +) cos.
(9)
xyint a
0
++
†
−
†
− 

Considering ϕ+ = 0, the interaction can be expressed as 
Hħ η Ω σa a= 2 (e +e ). (10)x
ϕϕ
int a
0 −i † i−−
This leads to opposite motional displacements of D α()  and D α(− )  
with αη ΩT=− ie /2ϕ
a 0
i −  for the two σx  eigenstates |±⟩ for a given pulse  
duration T.
The generated state is thus a superposition of two wavepackets 
with different atomic states shown in equation (2). By applying the 
interaction with ϕ+ = π for the same duration, the two wavepackets can 
be combined again with the inverted spin-dependent displacement. 
Momentum recoil due to photon absorption is timed to occur between 
the generation and reversal of the cat state. This leads to a geometric 
phase difference accumulated between the two wavepackets, which is 
then detected by measuring the atomic state as shown in equation (3).
Experimental imperfections
Experimental imperfections are described by a physically motivated 
model, including atomic and motional decoherence, which, in our 
case, results from fluctuations of the magnetic field and trap voltages, 
respectively. We simulate the cat-state photon absorption detection 
using Lindblad master equations, in which we include the two decoher-
ence channels as collapse operators: 
C T σC T aa= 1
2 ,= 2 (11)zspin
spin
motion
motion
†
where Tspin is the coherence time of atomic two-level system and Tmotion 
is the coherence time of a superposition of the motional ground state 
and the first excited state. We estimated T spin   =  2.8(3) ms and 
T =8 5m smotion− 35
+98 , with Ramsey experiments at the time scale of the 
measurement. The motional coherence time is much longer than the 
duration of a cat-spectroscopy experiment, which causes the large 
uncertainty on the estimated value. With these values, we can predict 
the signal produced by the experiment with various cat-state ampli-
tudes and various kick sizes, as shown in Fig. 3 . The purple-shaded 
region indicates the simulation results considering 1 s.d. of the atomic 
and motional coherence of the system. The dominating effect of these 
imperfections is a loss in signal amplitude, which we can also model 
with a simple heuristic model in equation (5) that multiplies the ideal 
contrast in equation (4) with a factor max. For a cat-state amplitude of 
|α| = 6.5(7), we determine the value of max to be 0.52(3) by fitting equa-
tion (5) to the experimental data of various kick sizes.
The value of max  shows the effect of decoherence and varies for 
different cat state amplitudes and different durations of the measure-
ment sequence. When investigating the effective photon absorption 
probability as a function of the number of femtosecond laser pulse 
npulse, as presented in Fig. 4a, the variation in npulse leads to the change 
in the time interval between the generation and the reversal of the cat 
state. This results in the variation in max as a function of npulse. We inves-
tigated this effect with the electric kick measurement and model it as 
 t() =e , (12)tτ
maxm ax
−/ d
for |α| = 6.5(7), where τd = 0.92(6) ms. We thus adjust the measured 
signals for different numbers of laser pulses accordingly.
Another potential source of imperfections besides decoherence is 
the timing jitter of the photon absorption events with respect to the ion 
crystal motion. The magnitude of the recoil-induced geometric phase 
difference Φ = 2ηmRe(α) depends on the phase difference between the 
cat state and the displacement operator from the photon absorption 
recoil. Therefore, it is influenced by the free evolution time between 
the generation of the cat state and the photon absorption event Twait. 
In our case, the photon absorption event is synchronized with the 
femtosecond laser pulses. T o achieve deterministic timing, we trigger 
the cat-state generation sequence on the periodic femtosecond laser 
pulses with a timing jitter of less than 10 ns. This jitter is considerably 
shorter than the oscillation period of the ions and ensures a constant 
free evolution time Twait during the measurement. Moreover, the values

===== PAGE 7 =====
of the trap frequency ωz and the repetition rate of the laser frep influ-
ence the phase. We set the trap frequency to be an integer multiple of 
the repetition rate ωz/2π = 4 ⋅ frep, so that we expect the same Re(α) for 
photon recoil from each of the femtosecond laser pulses. A variation of 
the trap frequency or the repetition rate, therefore, results in a varying 
phase for the signal obtained from each pulse. The variation of ωz/2π 
is measured to be around 50 Hz, and the fluctuation of frep is identified 
to be below 10 Hz. The variation in arg(α) is thus less than 3.2 × 10−2 for 
the maximum Twait and can be neglected.
Quantum-chemical calculations
The vibrational transition frequencies and intensities are calculated 
ab initio using state-of-the-art quantum-chemical methods. We focus 
on the observed O–H stretching mode, which forms the most intense 
spectral band. Initially, an accurate potential energy surface is com-
puted using electronic structure coupled-cluster methods, from which 
the harmonic frequencies and normal coordinates of the stretching 
modes are obtained. The resulting best estimate for the O–H harmonic 
frequency is 3,950 cm−1. Subsequently, we neglect couplings between 
different normal modes, reducing the multidimensional anharmonic 
vibrational problem to a set of one-dimensional anharmonic vibrational 
problems along the normal coordinates. We solve the one-dimensional 
Schrödinger equation for nuclear motion along the normal coordinate 
dominated by the O–H stretching using the discrete variable represen-
tation method39. The computed vibrational energies and wavefunctions 
give the fundamental transition frequency of 3,792 cm−1 and oscillator 
strength of 3.7 × 10−5. Finally, couplings of the fundamental O–H stretch-
ing mode with the Ca–O stretching and Ca–O–H bending modes are 
reintroduced using vibrational second-order perturbation theory 
(VPT2)40, which lowers the O–H fundamental frequency by 9.5 cm−1 
and results in its final value of 3,783 cm−1.
The electronic structure computations use the range of correlation- 
consistent polarized weighted core–valence orbital basis sets aug-
mented with diffuse functions (aug-cc-pwCVn Z-PP, n = T, Q, 5)  
(refs. 41–43). The 10 core electrons of calcium are replaced by the ECP-
10MDF effective core potential to account for relativistic effects44. The 
potential energy surface is obtained using a composite scheme in which 
the total energy is expressed as the sum of three contributions: (1) the 
Hartree–Fock mean-field energy; (2) the leading part of the correlation 
energy obtained using the coupled-cluster method restricted to single, 
double and noniterative triple excitations (CCSD(T)) 45; and (3) the 
contribution from triple excitations in CCSDT neglected by CCSD(T)46. 
The latter term is computed using a triple-ζ basis set, whereas the first 
two terms are extrapolated to the complete basis set limit using con-
secutive basis sets up to quintuple-ζ. The three-point exponential47 
and two-point 1/n3 (ref. 48) extrapolation formulas are used for the 
Hartree–Fock and correlation energies, respectively. The permanent 
electric dipole moment is calculated using the analytical-derivative 
technique at the CCSD(T)/aug-cc-pwCV5Z level. Its value for the ground 
vibrational level is 6.2 D.
The potential energy surface of linear CaOH+ is computed as a func-
tion of the Ca–O and O–H bond lengths on a uniform two-dimensional 
grid with a spacing of 0.002 bohr around the equilibrium geometry28 
and interpolated with a natural cubic spline. After determining the 
normal coordinate, 33 electronic energies are calculated along this 
coordinate. The VPT2 correction is estimated from anharmonic con-
stants obtained at the CCSD(T)/aug-cc-pwCVTZ level.
All electronic structure and VPT2 calculations are performed with 
the CFOUR v.2.1 program49.
Molecular excitation dynamics
We model the excitation dynamics of the O–H stretching vibrational 
transition of CaOH+ in the experiment as follows. The molecule is con-
sidered here as a two-level system consisting of the ground and first 
excited states, |g⟩ and |e⟩. The intensity of the laser pulses applied to 
the molecule is assumed to have a Gaussian temporal profile with a full 
width at half maximum (FWHM) pulse duration of ττ=2 2ln2σ , where 
τσ is the 1-sigma pulse duration. The molecule then experiences the 
following time-dependent electric field:
t() =e (e +c .c.), (13)tτ ωt ϕ
0
−/ 4− i( −)σ
22
EE
where ω and ϕ are the centre frequency and the phase of the laser  
and E0, and c.c. is the complex conjugate. The peak electric field 
strength can be calculated from the average laser intensity I avg as 
EI fτ c=/ (π /ln2 ⋅ϵ )0a vg rep 0 . The light–molecule interaction can then 
be described as 
Ht tμ Et θ() =− ⋅( )= () cos, (14)egm dE
where the transition dipole moment μeg can be related to the oscillator 
strength as μ fħ em ω=⋅ 3/eg eg e
2
0  and θ is the angle between the mole-
cular axis and the direction of the polarization of the light field. In the 
interaction picture under the rotating-wave approximation, the inter-
action can be described by 
Ht ħ Ωt eg ħg g() = ()
2 (| ⟩⟨ |e +h .c.) +Δ |⟩ ⟨| , (15)ϕ
m
I i
where Δ = ω − ω0 is the detuning of the laser from the transition fre-
quency ω0 and Ω(t) is the Rabi rate given by 
Ωt
μE θ
ħ() =
2c os
e. (16)eg tτ0 −/ 4 σ
22
We aim to describe the experimental results using this model with no 
free parameters with a Monte Carlo simulation of the light–molecule 
interaction expressed in equation (15). In each trial of the simulation, 
for each laser pulse in the train, we randomly assign the phase ϕ of the 
light field, which is not stabilized from pulse to pulse for our laser, and 
the angle θ, assuming that the molecule is randomly oriented in the 
experiment. The Rabi rate of a single laser pulse is calculated based 
on ab initio calculations on the transition frequency and oscillator 
strength (see section ‘Quantum-chemical calculations’) and the laser 
parameters described below.
In our setup, the femtosecond laser pulses are produced by an 
ORPHEUS-HP optical parametric amplifier (OPA) pumped by a 
CARBIDE-CB5 femtosecond laser, both produced by Light Conver-
sion. The light applied to the ions is linearly polarized in the vertical 
plane and with our magnetic field geometry, this results in an equal 
superposition of σ+ and σ− polarizations. The average intensity at the 
position of the ions is 1.1(1) × 10 4 W cm−2. The spectrum of the light 
field is measured with a Redstone OSA305 optical spectrum analyser 
to determine the centre wavelength and linewidth for each frequency 
measured in the presented absorption spectrum. We observe absorp-
tion lines because of the presence of water vapour in the beam path, 
but we assume that this does not affect the absorption spectroscopy 
experiment because of power broadening.
The measurement presented in Fig. 4 is performed with a laser centre 
frequency of ν = 3,703.3(2) cm−1 and an FWHM linewidth of 126.7(4) cm−1. 
The simulation is based on these parameters and the assumption that 
the laser pulses are Fourier-transform-limited with an FWHM pulse 
duration of 116.2(4) fs. For the absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 4d, the 
experimental results are compared with the simulation performed with 
the Fourier-transform-limited pulse durations given by the measured 
centre frequency and linewidth at each of the OPA wavelength settings.
Non-destructive state detection
Photon absorption detection can provide an effective non-destructive 
state detection acting on a specific subspace of the molecular degrees

===== PAGE 8 =====
Article
of freedom. We sketch an example of such a measurement method, 
acting on the two lowest states of a vibrational mode in a molecule. 
Consider the three lowest energy vibrational states |0⟩, |1⟩ and |2⟩. 
We assume that we have the ability to perform selective operations 
on these states that can be spectroscopically addressed because the 
anharmonicity of the molecule yields unique transition frequencies. 
The proposed technique provides a projective measurement in the 
{|0⟩, |1⟩} manifold. We assume that the system is in a superposition 
of the vibrational states, the shared motion and the atom are in their 
ground state 
ab(| 0⟩ +| 1⟩)⊗ |↓⟩⊗ |0⟩.z
We will then create the cat state using the atom–motion interaction, 
yielding the atom–motion state 
Ψα α|⟩ = 1
2 |+ ⟩| ⟩+ |− ⟩|−⟩ .zzcat
We assume that the cat-state spectroscopy is set up to completely 
flip the atomic electronic state if a photon absorption has occurred 
Re(α) = π/(4ηm). The combined state of the molecular, atomic and 
motional degrees of freedom is then 
ab Ψ(| 0⟩ +| 1⟩)⊗ |⟩ .cat
We then assume that we can perfectly transfer the population from 
the |1⟩ state to the state |2⟩ with a laser pulse that applies a displacement 
operator on the motion of the ions:
aΨ bD ηΨ|0⟩⊗ |⟩ +| 2⟩ ⊗( )| ⟩.cat m cat
After reversing the cate state generation, the state is then 
ab(| 0⟩ ⊗| ↓⟩ +| 2⟩ ⊗| ↑⟩)⊗ |0⟩,z
representing an entangled state between the molecular vibrational 
degree of freedom and the electronic state of the atom. A projective 
measurement on the atomic electronic state will thus also project the 
molecular state into either |0⟩ or |2⟩. If the state is projected into |2⟩, 
the population can be brought back to |1⟩, which concludes the method 
and provides a non-destructive state detection.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available at 
Zenodo50 (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19727569).
 
38. Leibfried, D., Blatt, R., Monroe, C. & Wineland, D. Quantum dynamics of single trapped 
ions. Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 281–324 (2003).
39. Tiesinga, E., Williams, C. J. & Julienne, P. S. Photoassociative spectroscopy of highly 
excited vibrational levels of alkali-metal dimers: green-function approach for eigenvalue 
solvers. Phys. Rev. A 57, 4257–4367 (1998).
40. Bloino, J. A VPT2 route to near-infrared spectroscopy: the role of mechanical and electrical 
anharmonicity. J. Phys. Chem. A 119, 5269–5287 (2015).
41. Hill, J. G. & Peterson, K. A. Gaussian basis sets for use in correlated molecular calculations. 
XI. Pseudopotential-based and all-electron relativistic basis sets for alkali metal (K–Fr) and 
alkaline earth (Ca–Ra) elements. J. Chem. Phys. 147, 244106 (2017).
42. Peterson, K. A. & Dunning, T. H. Jr. Accurate correlation consistent basis sets for molecular 
core–valence correlation effects: the second row atoms Al–Ar, and the first row atoms 
B–Ne revisited. J. Chem. Phys. 117, 10548–10560 (2002).
43. Kendall, R. A., Dunning, T. H. Jr. & Harrison, R. J. Electron affinities of the first-row atoms 
revisited. Systematic basis sets and wave functions. J. Chem. Phys. 96, 6796–6806 (1992).
44. Lim, I. S., Stoll, H. & Schwerdtfeger, P. Relativistic small-core energy-consistent 
pseudopotentials for the alkaline-earth elements from Ca to Ra. J. Chem. Phys. 124, 
034107 (2006).
45. Stanton, J. F. Why CCSD(T) works: a different perspective. Chem. Phys. Lett. 281, 130–134 
(1997).
46. Noga, J. & Bartlett, R. J. The full CCSDT model for molecular electronic structure.  
J. Chem. Phys. 86, 7041–7050 (1987).
47. Halkier, A., Helgaker, T., Jørgensen, P., Klopper, W. & Olsen, J. Basis-set convergence of 
the energy in molecular Hartree–Fock calculations. Chem. Phys. Lett. 302, 437–446 
(1999).
48. Helgaker, T., Klopper, W., Koch, H. & Noga, J. Basis-set convergence of correlated 
calculations on water. J. Chem. Phys. 106, 9639–9646 (1997).
49. Matthews, D. A. et al. Coupled-cluster techniques for computational chemistry:  
the CFOUR program package. J. Chem. Phys. 152, 214108 (2020).
50. Wu, Z. Repository quantum-molecules/absorption-spectroscopy: v.1.1. Zenodo https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.19727569 (2026).
Acknowledgements We thank A. Zhdanov, Z. Liu, F. Wolf and S. Willitsch for their discussions.
Author contributions Z.W., B.J.F. and P.S. designed the experiment. Z.W. and T.D. carried out the 
measurement and analysed the data. Z.W., M.I.-M., A.T., B.J.F., M.K., R.N. and P.S. contributed to 
the experimental setup. Z.W., V.Š., B.J.F. and P.S. developed the model for explaining the result. 
M.G. and M.T. performed electronic structure calculations. Z.W., T.D., B.J.F., P.S., M.G. and M.T. 
contributed to the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript. B.J.F., M.T. and P.S. 
supervised the project.
Funding statement This research was funded by Austrian science fund FWF (10.55776/COE1, 
10.55776/PIN3213524), the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) under the project 
‘HDCode’ (FO999921407), and the ERC Horizon 2020 project ERC-2020-STG 948893.  
This research is funded in part by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation through grant 
GBMF12992. V.Š. was supported by funding from the MEYS of Czech Republic under the project 
CZ.02.01.01/00/22 008/0004649. M.G. and M.T. acknowledge the National Science Centre, 
Poland (grant no. 2021/43/B/ST4/03326) for financial support and the high-performance 
computing infrastructure PLGrid of Poland (HPC centres: ACK Cyfronet AGH) for providing 
computer facilities and support (computational grant no. PLG/2024/017527). Open access 
funding provided by University of Innsbruck and Medical University of Innsbruck.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10915-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Philipp Schindler.
Peer review information Nature thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the 
peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
