===== PAGE 1 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X), X-X
doi: xxxxxxx
Journal homepage: XXXXX
Advance Access Publication Date: Day Month Year
R E V I E W A R T I C L E
A review on geometric constraint solving
Qiang Zou1,*, Zhihong Tang1, Hsi-Yung Feng2, Shuming Gao1, Chenchu Zhou3
and Yusheng Liu1
1State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China and 2Department of Mechanical
Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada and 3Xi’an Aerospace Propulsion
Institute, Xi’an, 710100, China
*Corresponding author. E-mail: john.qiangzou@gmail.com
Abstract
This paper presents a comprehensive review of geometric constraint solving in parametric computer-aided design (CAD), with
the major focus on its advances in the last 15 years. Geometric constraint solving can date back to the very first CAD prototype,
Sketchpad, in the 1960s, but serious research studies were carried out only after parametric CAD was introduced in the late
1980s. In the following 30-year history of GCS research, two development stages may be identified: (1) the first 15 years (late
1980s - mid 2000s) were primarily devoted to geometric constraint decomposition for well-constrained systems or those with
only structural constraint dependencies; and (2) the second 15 years (late 2000s - now) have seen research efforts shifted
towards classification criteria and decomposition algorithms for general constraint systems (with and without non-structural
constraint dependencies). Most existing reviews focused on the first 15 years. The problem researched in the second 15 years is,
however, equally important, considering that a manually specified constraint system usually contains under- and
over-constrained parts, and that such parts must be correctly detected and resolved before numerical solving can work. In this
regard, this review paper covers both stages and will discusses what has already been made possible for handling general
constraint systems, what developments can be expected in the near future, and which areas remain problematic.
Keywords: Computer-aided design; Parametric modeling; Geometric constraint solving; GCS classification criteria; GCS detec-
tion/decomposition algorithms
1. Introduction
Computer-aided design (CAD) has been an indispensable tool in
engineering modeling (Liu et al., 2021), analysis (Cottrell et al.,
2009), optimization (Rao, 2019), manufacturing (Zou et al., 2014)
and maintenance (Su et al., 2020). The notion of CAD may date
back to the 1960s (Coons, 1963; Coons & Mann, 1960). Neverthe-
less, it was not until the introduction of parametric CAD model-
ers in the late 1980s (Shah, 1998) that CAD was extensively rec-
ognized by the user/engineer community. The main practical
benefit of parametric CAD lies in geometry reuse, which allows
users to attain a family of geometry variants through tuning pa-
rameters embedded in the model. Parametric CAD is not a sin-
gle technique but a set of techniques, and common to all para-
metric techniques is associativity that allows local parametric
changes to propagate automatically. The associativity is often im-
plemented as a system of geometric constraints relating geomet-
ric entities in the model. By changing parameter values and then
re-evaluating this system, automatic change propagation can be
attained. This evaluation process is often referred to as geometric
constraint solving.
A geometric constraint system (GCS) involves a set of geomet-
ric entities such point, line, plane, and cylinder, as well as a set
of geometric constraints between these entities such as distance
and angle. These constraints can usually be translated to alge-
braic equations whose variables are the coordinates of the partic-
ipating geometric entities. Solving GCS refers to the process of
attaining a solution (or solutions) of the GCS. Since the solving
is understood in the context of geometry, a solution corresponds
Received: a; Revised: b; Accepted: c
1
arXiv:2202.13795v2  [cs.CG]  12 Aug 2022

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 | Geometric Constraint Solving Review
ill-constrained
well-constrained
GCS Detector
Resolver
Decomposer Solver Solutions
Figure 1: Illustration of critical tasks in geometric constraint solving
to a valid instantiation of the geometric entities such that all the
constraints are satisfied.
Solving GCS is more than just applying numerical solvers such
as the Newton’s method. The GCS given through the user’s spec-
ification could contain under- and over-constrained parts (Hoff-
mann et al., 2004; Hu et al., 2021; Zou & Feng, 2020). Such parts
must be correctly detected and then resolved before numerical
solvers can work, as shown in Fig. 1. This gives rise to the need
of generic criteria to characterize constraint states (under-, well-,
and over-constrained), as well as robust detection and resolution
algorithms to correct under-constrained and over-constrained
parts in the given GCS. Another equally important issue is that di-
rectly solving GCS is computationally challenging. In view of this,
many prefer decomposing a (well-constrained) GCS into small
subsystems, whose solutions can then be assembled to attain the
overall solution (Bettig & M Hoffmann, 2011).
All in all, there are three fundamental problems in geometric
constraint solving:
(i) GCS characterization: effective criteria for characterizing
under-, well-, and over-constraint states;
(ii) GCS detection: extraction of ill-constrained parts in a given
GCS. The essence is to extract the maximal well-constrained
parts such that all under- and over-constrained parts emerge
as isolated, decoupled constraint groups (Zou & Feng, 2020);
and
(iii) GCS decomposition: extraction of well-constrained parts in
a given well-constrained GCS. Because the overall solving effi-
ciency is governed by the largest subsystems, the essence here
is to minimize the size of the well-constrained parts (Hoffman
et al., 2001b).
The above topics have been studied for decades, and there
are several surveys made available, e.g., Bettig and M Hoffmann,
2011; Hoffman et al., 2001a, 2001b; Hoffmann and Joan-Arinyo,
2005; Jermann et al., 2006. Nevertheless, they primarily focused
on decomposition methods for well-constrained GCS or those
with only structural constraint dependencies, which was the re-
search focus from the late 1980s through the mid 2000s. Since
the mid 2000s, there have been research efforts devoted to effec-
tive/robust GCS classification criteria, detection, and decomposi-
tion algorithms for general constraint systems (with and without
non-structural constraint dependencies). This work gives a com-
prehensive review on geometric constraint solving, covering both
periods and for general GCS (with a hybrid state of under-, well-,
and over-constraint). The current progresses and remaining is-
sues will be emphasized, particularly for the recently developed
witness configuration method (WCM) (Michelucci & Foufou, 2006;
Thierry et al., 2011), a very promising method that can overcome
limitations conventional methods suffer from.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents the fundamentals of GCS and GCS solving. Sections
3-6 presents several branches of solving approaches classified
by different representation schemes of GCS; for each branch
of approaches, the representation scheme, criteria for charac-
terizing constraint states, detection, and decomposition are pre-
sented. Section 7 introduces the witness configuration method
and presents the discussions on its limitations. The last section
concludes this paper.
2. Geometric constraint systems
2.1 GCS definitions
In 2D and 3D parametric modeling, a geometric constraint system
generally declares the geometric objects that must be included in
the design model, and the geometric constraints that must be sat-
isfied by these geometric objects.
Specifically, the geometric objects are the basic geometric ele-
ments embedded at 2D or 3D Euclidean space, e.g. points, lines,
and conics in 2D, and points, lines, planes, and surfaces in 3D.
The geometric constraints describes the shape of geometric ob-
jects or the relationships among several geometric objects. The
geometric constraint can be further classified into three cate-
gories: parametric constraints, non-parametric constraints, and
algebraic constraints that relate the parameters from different
parametric constraints. The parametric constraints (e.g. distance
and angle) use parameters to define the dimensions of the model;
the parameter values need assignments for creating the model,
and need editing for modifying the shape of the model. The non-
parametric constraints (e.g. perpendicular and parallel) define
the structural relationships between two geometric objects; the
non-parametric constraints can be regarded as the parametric
constraints with parameters fixed at specific values. Algebraic
constraints describe relationships among the parameters from
different parametric constraints, e.g. d1 = 2 d2 where d1 and d2
are the parameters from two distance constraints.
To define the shape of the model, the values of the parameters
need to be assigned. The problem of geometric constraint solving
is to find the solutions to the geometric constraint system, which
are the coordinates of the geometric objects satisfying all the geo-
metric constraints. Through examining the solution(s) of the GCS,
notions of under-, well-, and over-constraint can be formally de-
fined as follows, which is the base of the discussion in this work.
Definition 1. Given a GCS and let S be its solution space. The
GCS is consistently constrained if S⁄=∅, and inconsistently con-
strained otherwise.
Definition 2. Given a GCS and let S be its solution space. The
GCS is under-constrained if the cardinality |S| is infinite.
Definition 3. Given a GCS and let S be its solution space. The
GCS is consistently over-constrained if there exists a subset of
the GCS such that the corresponding reduced equations have the
same solution space as S.
Definition 4. A GCS is over-constrained if it is inconsistently
constrained or consistently over-constrained.
Definition 5. A GCS is well-constrained if it is neither under-
constrained nor over-constrained.
The relationship among the listed constraint states are pre-
sented in Figure 2. Generally, in a GCS problem, a well-
constrained system or a consistently over-constrained system is
preferred, since there are finite number of solutions to be found.
For an under-constrained geometric constraint system, the in-
finite number of solutions cannot be obtained in a polynomial
time; and for an inconsistently over-constrained geometric con-
straint system, no solution can be obtained, which makes the sys-
tem meaningless. Therefore, it is a crucial step in the geometric
constraint solving to determine the constraint state of the system,
which is discussed in detail in Section 3.

===== PAGE 3 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X) X-X | 3
Under-constrained
Constraint states
Well-constrained Over-constrained
Consistently 
over-constrained
Inconsistently 
over-constrained
Figure 2: The illustration of the constraint states
2.2 Solving process
The process of geometric constraint solving is illustrated in Fig-
ure 1. Basically, the main components of the geometric constraint
solver include:
(i) A detector. The detector determines whether the GCS in the
current form is solvable or not.
(ii) A resolver. When the GCS is ill-constrained, the resolver pro-
vides guidance to the user for resolving the ill-constraints, or
fix the GCS automatically.
(iii) A decomposer. For well-constrained GCS, the decomposer
splits it into a set of subsystems for efficient solving.
(iv) A solver. It sequentially solves the subsystems, recombines
them, and outputs the final solution(s) of the GCS.
On this basis, the main steps of the geometric constraint solv-
ing are presented as follows:
Step 1: sketching. The user gives a sketch that declares the ge-
ometric objects and their topological relationships, and then adds
geometric constraints.
Step 2: constraint state characterization. The detector
determines the constraint state of the GCS. If the GCS is ill-
conditioned (generally under-constrained or inconsistently over-
constrained), go to Step 3; else, go to Step 4.
Step 3: repairing. The GCS is repaired automatically or by the
user.
Step 4: decomposition. The GCS is decomposed into a set of
subsystems. Also, a sequence of solving subsystems is generated,
as well as a construction plan to recombine them.
Step 5: subsystem solving. The subsystems are solved accord-
ing to the sequence, and the results are recombined as the final
solution(s).
The critical issues of the geometric constraint solving are con-
straint state characterization and the decomposition. For this, lit-
erature on addressing these two issues are reviewed in Section 2
and Section 3.
3. Algebraic approaches
3.1 Representation scheme
The algebraic approaches basically translate the geometric con-
straints into a system of equations. The equations can be either
linear or non-linear. It takes the coordinates of the geometric
objects as variables; and its roots correspond to the solutions of
the GCS. An example of the translation is given in Figure 3(a). It
shows a 2D geometric constraint system constructing a triangle.
The geometric objects include 3 points P1, P2, P3 and 2 lines L1, L2;
the geometric constraints include 3 distances with the parame-
ters d1, d2, an angle with the parameter α, and 4 point-on-line
constraints. Note that the line P1P3 is not included for simplic-
ity, since it can be directly defined once the positions ofP1 and P3
d1
P1 P2
P3
α 
C1: Distance (P1, P2) = d1
C2: Distance (P2, P3) = d2
C3: Angle (L1, L2) = α
C4: PointOnLine(P1, L1)
C5: PointOnLine(P2, L1)
C6: PointOnLine(P2, L2)
C7: PointOnLine(P3, L2)
L1
L2
Figure 3: A 2D geometric constraint system
are determined. The equation-based representation of the GCS in
Figure 3(a) is given as follows:



E1: (x2 – x1)2 + (y2 – y1)2 = d2
1 ,
E2: (x3 – x2)2 + (y3 – y2)2 = d2
2,
E3: (ϕ1 –ϕ2)2 = (π –α)2,
E4: x1 cosϕ1 – y1 cosϕ1 –ρ1 = 0,
E5: x2 cosϕ1 – y2 cosϕ1 –ρ1 = 0,
E6: x2 cosϕ2 – y2 cosϕ2 –ρ2 = 0,
E7: x3 cosϕ2 – y3 cosϕ2 –ρ2 = 0,
(1)
where the geometric objects and their coordinates are defined as
P1(x1, y1), P2(x2, y2), P3(x3, y3), L1(ϕ1,ρ1), L2(ϕ2,ρ2). The values
of the parametersd1, d2,α need to be assigned before solving, e.g.
d1 = 10, d2 = 10, and α = π
4 . Moreover, additional equations
need to be added to fix the Cartesian coordinate system with the
geometric constraint system. For example, the following fixing
equations can be added:



x1 = 0,
y1 = 0,
y2 – y1 = 0,
(2)
where the first two equations set P1 as the origin, and the third
equation takes the vector from P1 to P2 as the direction of X-axis.
Given a system of equations with parameters assigned, alge-
braic solving approaches need to be employed to attain the root
(or roots). Generally, the approaches can be classified into two
branches, numerical approaches and symbolic approaches.
3.2 Numerical approaches
The numerical approaches solve equation systems in a iterative
manner, and yield approximations of the solutions in numerical
schemes. The numerical approaches are practical in computa-
tion.
3.2.1 Constraint state characterization
The numerical approaches determine the constraint states of GCS
by analyzing Jacobian matrix of the equation system. Generally,
the Jacobian matrix expresses the variation of the geometries’
coordinates under a slight change of constraint parameters (as-
sume that the parameters are at the right side of equations). The
Jacobian matrix, denoted as J, is an (m× n) matrix that contains
partial derivatives of each constraint equation:

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 | Geometric Constraint Solving Review
d1
P1 P2
P3
(a)
P1 P2P3 (b)
Figure 4: A 2D geometric constraint system and a configuration with singular
Jacobian: (a) the geometric constraint system, and (b) the configuration with sin-
gular Jacobian.
J =


f11 f12 ... f1n
f21 f22 ... f2n
...
...
. . .
...
fm1 fm2 ... fmn


m×n
where fij = ∂F
∂xij
.
A necessary and sufficient condition of a well-constrained
GCS proposed by Light and Gossard (Light & Gossard, 1982) is that
the the Jacobian has full rank at the solutions. On this basis, the
constraint state criterion is carried out as follows:
Criterion Given the equation system of a GCS:
(1) If the number of equations is less than the number of vari-
ables, the GCS is under-constrained;
(2) If the Jacobian at the solutions is non-singular, and the
number of equations is equal to the number of variables, the GCS
is well-constrained;
(3) If the Jacobian at the solutions is non-singular, and the GCS
is not under-constrained, the GCS is over-constrained.
However, since the solutions are unknown beforehand, the cri-
terion can hardly be applied directly. For this, several alternatives
are proposed, which are introduced in the next subsection.
3.2.2 Constraint state detection
An alternative is to valuate and analyze Jacobian at random con-
figurations instead, but singular configurations may be encoun-
tered where rank deficiency happens to the Jacobian.
For example, Figure 4(a) presents a geometric constraint sys-
tem with 3 points P1(x1, y1), P2(x2, y2), P3(x3, y3) and 3 distances
d1 = 10, d2 = 10, d3 = 10 between the points. The equation system
can be obtained as follows:



x1 = 0,
y1 = 0,
y2 – y1 = 0,
(x2 – x1)2 + (y2 – y1)2 = 102,
(x3 – x2)2 + (y3 – y2)2 = 102,
(x1 – x3)2 + (y1 – y3)2 = 102.
(3)
The Jacobian is presented in Table 1. A root of the equation
system is given as P1(0, 0), P2(20, 0), P3(10, 0). The Jacobian evalu-
ated at the root is given in Table 2 with full rank; However, when
evaluating the Jacobian at the configuration in Figure 4(b), the
result becomes singular, presented in Table 3.
Therefore, the difficulty lies in finding the non-singular con-
figurations where the Jacobian has the same structures as that at
solutions. To achieve this, several methods has been proposed.
1. Sampling-based method
The basic idea of sampling-based method is to increase the
probability of finding non-singular configurations by increasing
the number of sampling configurations. Since most of configura-
tions are non-singular except for some certain points within the
variable space, this method performs well practically. If a non-
singular sampling configuration is find, then the GCS is deter-
mined as well-constrained.
Haug et al. (Haug, 1989) presented a perturbation method to
deal with singular configurations. It obtains more configurations
for valuation of Jacobian matrix.
Foufou et al. (Foufou et al., 2005) extended the numerical prob-
abilistic method (NPM) which valuates the Jacobian matrix at a set
of random configurations in the variable space. Such methods
are useful piratically, but theoretically they cannot guarantee to
avoid singular configurations.
2. Witness configuration method
Instead of selecting configurations randomly, Michelucci et al.
(Michelucci & Foufou, 2006, 2009) suggested to valuate the Jaco-
bian at the witness configurations that has the same structure
of Jacobian as that of solutions. To guarantee the same structure
of Jacobian between witness configurations and solutions, all the
singular constraints, e.g. point/line/plane incidences, needs to
be satisfied in witness configurations. The aim is to avoid degen-
erate cases between geometric entities which may change the Ja-
cobian structure.
When all the singular constraints are stated by the user, a wit-
ness configuration can be computed as a solution to a GCS con-
taining only these singular constraints. This GCS is generally
highly under-constrained, and can be solved easily.
Li et al. (Li et al., 2001) presented a method to detect numeri-
cal redundancies. It gives a perturbation to the parameter value
of each constraint, and then tests the solvability of the new GCS
by optimization method (Ge et al., 1999). This method can only
handle consistent over-constrained GCS.
3.2.3 Solving
The earliest proposed methods and prototypes (Borning, 1981;
Hillyard & Braid, 1978; Sutherland, 1964) employed the relaxation
method, which starts with a initial guess of the solution, and iter-
atively gives perturbations to the variable values until some mea-
sure is minimized. The convergence of the relaxation method is
generally slow.
Later on, Newton-Raphson iteration was widely used in the
subsequent work (Light & Gossard, 1982; Lin et al., 1981; Nelson,
1985). It converges faster but heavily relies on an appropriate
initial guess. It can hardly handle consistently over-constrained
GCSs, since a square Jacobian is required within the iteration pro-
cess. Generally, the relaxation method and Newton-Raphson iter-
ation can only find one root.
For exhaustive searching of multiple solutions, homotopy con-
tinuation was applied (Allgower & Georg, 1993; Durand & Hoff-
mann, 2000; Imbach et al., 2017; Lamure & Michelucci, 1996). It
theoretically guarantees to find all solutions to an equation sys-
tem. However, as there is always a trade-off between efficiency
and exhaustive searching, its computational load is heavier.
Nearly 2000, numerical optimization was introduced to geo-
metric constraint solving (Cao et al., 2006; Ge et al., 1999; Yuan
et al., 2006). It is stable and less sensitive to the initial guess. The
main advantage is that consistently over-constrained and under-
constrained can be effectively handled.

===== PAGE 5 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X) X-X | 5
Table 1: Jacobian of F(X) in Equation (3)
˙x1 ˙y1 ˙x2 ˙y2 ˙x3 ˙y3
F1 1 0 0 0 0 0
F2 0 1 0 0 0 0
F3 0 -1 0 1 0 0
F4 –2(x2 – x1) –2( y2 – y1) 2( x2 – x1) 2( y2 – y1) 0 0
F5 0 0 –2( x3 – x2) –2( y3 – y2) 2( x3 – x2) 2( y3 – y2)
F6 2(x1 – x3) 2( y1 – y3) 0 0 –2( x1 – x3) –2( y1 – y3)
Table 2: Non-singular Jacobian at the solution in Figure 4(a)
˙x1 ˙y1 ˙x2 ˙y2 ˙x3 ˙y3
F1 1 0 0 0 0 0
F2 0 1 0 0 0 0
F3 0 -1 0 1 0 0
F4 -20 0 20 0 0 0
F5 0 0 10 -17.32 -10 17.32
F6 -10 -17.32 0 0 10 17.32
Table 3: Singular Jacobian at the configuration in Figure 4(b)
˙x1 ˙y1 ˙x2 ˙y2 ˙x3 ˙y3
F1 1 0 0 0 0 0
F2 0 1 0 0 0 0
F3 0 -1 0 1 0 0
F4 –20 0 20 0 0 0
F5 0 0 –20 0 20 0
F6 –20 0 0 0 20 0
The numerical approaches are general, but they are time-
consuming without involving constraint decomposition, espe-
cially for large-scale systems. Actually, the numerical ap-
proaches are commonly included in other decomposition ap-
proaches to solve subproblems, or are chosen as the last choice
when other approaches do not work well.
3.3 Symbolic approaches
The symbolic approaches employ symbolic techniques to convert
an equation system into a triangular form. The conversion, in
some sense, is a decomposition of the GCS, where the equations
in the triangular form can be solved sequentially. Representative
methods include Gröbner bases (Bose, 1995; Buchanan & de Pen-
nington, 1993; Kondo, 1992) and Wu-Ritt decomposition (Chou,
1988a, 1988b).
3.3.1 Constraint state characterization
Basically, the symbolic approaches characterize the constraint
states of the GCS by the triangular form of equations.
Criterion Given a GCS S, let P1 and P2 be two points in S. Fix-
ing the position ofP1 and the directionP1P2, S is well-constrained
iff the triangular set contains (2 n – 4) polynomials; S is under-
constrained iff the triangular set contains less than (2n – 4) poly-
nomials; S is consistently over-constrained iff the triangular set
contains more than (2n – 4) polynomials; S is inconsistently over-
constrained iff there is no triangular set.
3.3.2 Constraint state detection and solving
In symbolic approaches, the solving process is generally mingled
with the constraint state detection process. Gröbner basis method
(Bose, 1995; Buchberger, 1985) and Wu-Ritt method (Chou, 1988a;
Gao & Chou, 1998; Wu, 2012) are respectively introduced as fol-
lows.
Gröbner basis method computes the Gröbner basis for a sys-
tem of equations. The criterion of determining the constraint
state of a GCS is presented as follows:
Criterion Assume a set of polynomials f0, f1,... , fs ∈
C[x1, x2,... , xn]. The reduced Gröbner basis rgb0 of the ideal
< f1, f2,... , fs > satisfies rgb0 ⁄= 1 and rgb0 ⁄= 0 with respect
to any ordering. The new reduced Gröbner basis of the ideal <
f0, f1, f2,... , fs > is rgbnew. If rgbnew = 1, the new added f0 = 0
is a conflicting equation; if rgbnew ≡ 0, f0 = 0 is a redundant
equation, rgb0⊂ rgbnew, f0 = 0 is an independent equation.
The algorithm of generating Gröbner basis is first proposed
by (Buchberger, 1985). Kondo (Kondo, 1992) introduced Gröbner
basis into geometric constraint solving and constraint manage-
ment. Solving GCS problem using Wu-Ritt method is firstly intro-
duced by Gao and Chou (Gao & Chou, 1998). Given a set of poly-
nomials P, it decomposes a system of polynomial equations into a
triangular set, and The zero set of the polynomials can be denoted
as:
Zero(P) =∪1≤i≤kZero(TSi/I[i]), (4)
where TSi is a polynomial set in triangular form,I[i] is the produc-
tion of initials of the polynomials in TSi, and k denotes the zero
sets.The symbolic approaches are capable of finding all roots, but
are rarely employed in practical GCS problems due to their high
computational load.
4. Geometric approach
4.1 Representation scheme
The geometric approaches analyze and solve GCS in a geometri-
cal way. These approaches directly operate with the original rep-
resentation scheme of GCS, i.e. the full geometric descriptions
of the geometric objects and the geometric constraints. Faced
with these, the supporting theories and techniques include ele-
mentary geometry and 2D ruler-and-compass drawing. For ex-
ample, the GCS in Figure 3 can be trivially solved geometrically by
ruler-and-compass drawing, and the construction steps are given
as follows:
(i) FixOrigin( P1);
(ii) FixX-Axis( L1);
(iii) P2 = CreatePoint(P1, L1, d1);
(iv) L2 = CreateLine(P2, L2,α);
(v) P3 = CreatePoint(P2, L2, d2).
However, the supporting theories and techniques could have
little effects when handling more complicated situations, e.g. 3D
geometric constraint solving and complex 2D problems.
4.2 Constraint state characterization
The strategy of the geometric approaches is to decompose the
whole GCS into a set of subsystems that can be trivially analyzed

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 | Geometric Constraint Solving Review
and solved. Generally, the decomposition process is executed
first, and the detection is then operated on the decomposition
results. The constraint states of GCS is characterized by the un-
matched parts as follows:
Criterion Given a GCS and a repertoire of well-constrained
patterns or construction rules to be matched with, when the
matching terminates:
(i) the system is well-constrained if all its components are
matched;
(ii) the system is under-constrained if there are geometric objects
left;
(iii) the system is over-constrained if there are geometric con-
straints left.
4.3 Constraint state deterction
4.4 Decomposition algorithms
Basically, the constraint state of a geometric constraint system is
determined by iteratively matching it with the repertoire of pre-
defined well-constrained patterns or construction rules. These
well-constrained patterns, as well as the construction rules, are
the abstractions of the existing geometric knowledge. The pro-
cess terminates when no patterns or rules are applicable.
The rule-based method employs geometric assertions and ax-
ioms to identify rigid patterns in the geometric constraint sys-
tem.
Sunde (Sunde, 1987) proposed a method to handle 2D geomet-
ric constraint problems with points constrained by distances and
angles. First, basic patterns in the geometric constraint system
are created, e.g. a pair of points with a distance constraint (called
a CD) and two pair of points with an angle constraint (called a CA).
Then, several rules are used to iteratively merge the existing pat-
terns, e.g. three CDs pairwise sharing one point or two CAs shar-
ing one segment can be combined into a bigger rigid subsystem.
The method terminates when all the points belong to a CD set.
Essentially, the rules are abstracted from the geometric knowl-
edge of triangles. The subsequent literatures further extended
the types of geometric entities and geometric constraints, and
the repertoire of rigid patterns (Joan-Arinyo & Soto, 1997a; Joan-
Arinyo & Soto, 1997b; Verroust et al., 1992). Particularly, Joan-
Arinyo and Soto-Riera (Joan-Arinyo & Soto, 1997a; Joan-Arinyo &
Soto, 1997b) introduced the point-line distance constraint (called
a CH).
Another set of methods (Aldefeld, 1988; Bruderlin, 1989;
Brüderlin et al., 1990; Sohrt & Brüderlin, 1991; Yamaguchi &
Kimura, 1990) develop an axiomatic description of elementary
geometry for ruler-and-compass construction. These axioms are
expressed as rewrite-rules for replacing constraints which are
stored in a database by equivalent ones. Essentially, these meth-
ods realize the automatic process of ruler-and-compass drawing.
As the rule-and-compass drawing generates the geometric loci
of elements, an important issue is to handle the loci intersection
problem. For this, Gao et al. (Gao et al., 2004) proposed a method
to calculate the locus intersection in 2D by discretization.
The decomposition process is essentially an automatic geo-
metric reasoning process, thus it directly works at the original
representation scheme. The reliability of the methods mainly de-
pends on the completeness of the repertoire, i.e. whether all well-
constrained patterns can be enumerated, or whether there are a
set of basic rules to construct all kinds of well-constrained sys-
tems.
x1 y1 x2 y2 x3 y3 φ1 ρ1 φ2 ρ2
E1 E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7
(a)
P1 P2 P3 L1 L2
C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7
(b)
P1 P2 P3
L1 L2
C1 C2
C3
C4
C5 C6
C7
(c)
Figure 5: The graph representations of the geometric constraint system in Figure
3(a): (a) the equation graph, (b) the constraint graph where constraints are defined
as nodes, and (c) the constraint graph where the constraints are defined as edges.
5. Topological approach
5.1 Representation scheme
The other set of approaches choose to translate the geometric con-
straint system into a graph, so that graph theories and algorithms
are available to further analyze the structural properties and de-
compose the system. Specifically, the graph-based representa-
tion of the geometric constraint system can be further classified
into two categories: the equation graph and the constraint graph.
The equation graph is derived from the equation-based repre-
sentation. A node denotes either a variable or an equation; and
an edge linking a variable node and an equation node denotes
that the variable is constrained by the equation. Since the nodes
can be divided into two groups linked by the edges, the equation
graph can also be represented as a bipartite graph. For example,
the equation graph derived from Equation 1 is presented in Fig-
ure 5(a).
The constraint graph is directly derived from the original
scheme of the geometric constraint system. It abstracts geomet-
ric objects by their degree of freedom (DOF), and abstracts geo-
metric constraints by thier degree of constraints (DOC). The DOF
of a geometric object is the number of independent coordinates
used to define it; and the DOC of a geometric constraint is the
number of equations needed to defined it. For example, a 2D point
and a 2D line both have 2 DOFs, and a 2D circle has 3 DOFs; a dis-
tance constraint with non-zero parameter value has 1 DOC. Gener-
ally, the constraint graph has two representation schemes. One is
the general constraint graph where the nodes only represent geo-
metric objects and the edges are the constraints; and the other is
the bipartite graph where a node denotes either a geometric ob-
ject and a geometric constraint, and an edge links a geometric
constraint and a geometric object it constraints. Figure 5(b-c) re-
spectively presents the two schemes of the constraint graph.

===== PAGE 7 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X) X-X | 7
d1
P1 P2
P3
P4 d3
(a)
d1
P1 P2
P3
P4 d3 (b)
d1
P1 P2
P3
P4 d3
(c)
Figure 6: Examples of structural constraint states: (a) a structurally over-
constrained system, (b) a structurally well-constrained system, and (c) a struc-
turally under-constrained system.
5.2 Constraint state characterization
5.2.1 Criteria for constraint graph
Laman’s theorem (Laman, 1970) characterizes the rigidity of 2D
bar frameworks, i.e. geometric constraint systems composed of
points and distance constraints between the points.
Theorem 1. A 2D GCS composed of n points constrained by m
distances is rigid iff 2×n–m = 3, and for any subsystem composed
of n′ points and m′ distances, 2× n′ – m′≥ 3.
However, the theorem is restricted in 2D points and distance
constraints, thus cannot be applied in more complicated systems.
To extend the theorem, Podgorelec et al. (Podgorelec et al., 2008)
proposed the concept of structural rigidity in the geometric con-
straint problems.
Definition (Structural constraint states) Let S = (C, X, A) be a
constraint system.
1) The system S is structurally over-constrained iff there exist
a subsystem S′ = (C′, X′, A′) of S such that DOF(X′) – DOC(C′) < D.
2) The system S is structurally well-constrained iff it is not
structurally over-constrained and DOF(X) – DOC(C) = D.
3) The system S is structurally under-constrained iff it is not
structurally over-constrained and DOF(X) – DOC(C) > D.
Definition (Structurally over-constrained)A constrainte is a
structural over-constraint if a structurally over-constrained sub-
system G′ = ( V′, E′) of G with e ∈ E′, can be derived such that
G" = (V′, E′ – e) is structurally well-constrained.
Examples are presented in Figure 6 to illustrate the definition.
The 2D geometric constraint system in the figure is composed of 4
points. Since each point has 2 DOFs, the whole system has 8 DOFs
totally. As shown in Figure 6(a), the system is structurally under-
constrained. 4 distance constraints are set; as each constraint
gives 1 DOC, the whole system satisfies 2×4–1×4 > 3. As shown in
Figure 6(b), the system is structurally well-constrained, because
the whole system satisfies 2× 4 – 1× 5 = 3, and the two subgraphs
P1P2P4 and P2P3P4 both satisfy 2× 3 – 1× 3 = 3. As shown in Fig-
ure 6(c), the system is structurally over-constrained, because the
whole system satisfies 2× 4 – 1× 6 < 3.
Note that a structural well-constrained system can be geomet-
rically over-constrained. An example is presented in Figure 7.
The geometric constraint system in Figure 7(a) is composed of 3
lines L1, L2, and L3 constrained by 3 anglesα,β, andγ; the con-
straint graph illustrated in Figure 7(b) shows that the system is
α β
γ
L1
L2L3
(a)
L1 L2
L3
α
β
γ (b)
Figure 7: A structurally well-constrained but geometrically over-constrained ge-
ometric constraint system: (a) the geometric constraint system, and (b) the con-
straint graph.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 8: Counter examples of 3D extension of Laman’s theorem: (a) Double-
Banana, and (b-d) Ortuzar’s configurations.
structurally well-constrained. However, there is a implicit con-
straintα +β +γ = 180◦, making the system geometrically over-
constrained.
As for 3D extension of Laman’s theorem, the term 2v–3 should
be replaced with 3v–6, since each 3D point has 3 coordinates and a
displacement of a 3D body is characterized by 6 parameters, i.e. 3
translation parameters and 3 rotation parameters. However, the
condition is necessary but not sufficient. Counter examples are
Double-Banana and Ortuzar’s configurations, presented in Fig-
ure 8. The system is structurally well-constrained by our defini-
tion but is actually under-constrained. So far, no combinatorial
characterizations have been found yet.
Sitharam and Zhou (Sitharam & Zhou, 2004) proposed an ap-
proximate characterization of 3D rigidity, which effectively han-
dles some geometry (e.g. Double-Banana) misjudged by Laman’s
theorem.
Definition (Structural constraint states) Let S = (C, X, A) be a
constraint system.
1) The system S is structurally over-constrained iff there exist
a subsystem S = (C, X, A) of S such that DOF(X) – DOC(C) < D.
2) The system S is structurally well-constrained iff DOF(X) –
DOC(C) = D and all subgraphs satisfy DOF(X) – DOC(C)≥ D.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 | Geometric Constraint Solving Review
3) The system S is structurally under-constrained iff DOF(X) –
DOC(C) > D.
Another problem arises that whether all rigid bodies need D
(D = 3 in 2D and D = 6 in 3D) parameters for displacements.
Counter examples are 2 points binding with a distance constraint
in 3D, or a 3D cylindrical surface. The former needs only 5 inde-
pendent displacements since the body cannot rotate around the
axis crossing the 2 points; the latter also needs only 5 independent
displacements as it cannot rotate around its axis. That is to say,
the number of independent displacements are determined by the
system itself rather than the dimensions. To address this, degree
of rigidity (DOR) (Jermann et al., 2003) is proposed to replace the
original D. The updated definitions are as follows:
Definition (Structural constraint states) Let S = (C, X, A) be a
constraint system.
1) The system S is structurally over-constrained iff there exist
a subsystem S = (C, X, A) of S such that DOF(X) – DOC(C) < DOR(X).
2) The system S is structurally well-constrained iff DOF(X) –
DOC(C) = DOR(X) and all subgraphs satisfy DOF(X) – DOC(C) ≥
DOR(X).
3) The system S is structurally under-constrained iff DOF(X) –
DOC(C) > DOR(X).
For example, the DOR of 3 collinear 2D points is 2, but the DOR
of 3 non-collinear 2D points is 3. This indicates that the value of
DOR depends on the relative positions between the geometric ob-
jects in the rigid bodies. However, the relative positions cannot be
directly obtained from the pure graph representation.
The main limitation of the criteria mentioned above is that
they are restricted in specific geometries (e.g. point, lines, planes)
and constraints (e.g. distances). Thus, extensions on types of ge-
ometries and constraints are needed for applications in practical
CAD problems.
5.2.2 Criteria for equation graph
For an equation graph, a variable has only one DOF, and an equa-
tion has only one DOC. The criterion of constraint states determi-
nation for an equation graph is presented as follows:
Criterion If there are only unsaturated constraints, the GCS
is over-constrained; if there are only unsaturated variables, the
GCS is under-constrained; if all variables and constraints are sat-
urated, the GCS is well-constrained.
As the criterion works on the equation level, it is not limited
to any specific types of geometries. However, it can hardly be ap-
plied to GCS with so called black box constraints, which cannot be
converted to equations.
5.3 Constraint state detection
For a equation graph, it is also converted into a bipartite graph,
where maximal matching algorithms can be used. Such method
is pioneered by Serrano (Serrano, 1987). In (Ait-Aoudia et al.,
2014), the Dulmage & Mendelsohn (D& M) algorithm was used to
divide the equation graph into a well-constrained part, an under-
constrained part, and an over-constrained part. A maximal
matching of an equation graph can be further decomposed into
well-constrained subsystems by decomposing it into strongly con-
nected components. An effective approach is a linear depth first
search algorithm by Tarjan (Tarjan, 1972).
For a constraint graph, it is first converted into a bipartite
graph. Then, the problem is translated into a maximal flow prob-
lem where a number of methods is applicable. Such translation
was first discussed by Hoffman et al. (Hoffmann et al., 1997), and
was extended in (Hoffman et al., 2001a). The applied maximal
flow methods are mainly based on greedy algorithms.
5.4 Decomposition
5.4.1 Matching-based decomposition
The matching-based approach employs matching algorithms to
decompose the geometric constraint system. It directly acts on
the graph representation.
At first, the matching-based approach operates on the equa-
tion graph representation. This was pioneered by Serrano (Ser-
rano, 1987), which consists of the following steps:
(1) Find a maximum matching of the equation graph.
(2) Transfer the equation graph into a digraph. Specifically,
orient each edge in the maximum matching from the variable
node to the equation node; and orient each unmatched edge from
the equation node to the variable node.
(3) Identify strong connected components from the digraph
and collapse them into super nodes.
(4) Obtain the solution plan by topological sorting.
This work was followed by Ait-Aoudia et al. (Ait-Aoudia et
al., 2014). Dulmage-Mendelsohn (D-M) decomposition was in-
troduced that divided the whole equation graph into three sub-
parts: the well-constrained sub-part, the over-constrained sub-
part, and the under-constrained sub-part. With D-M decompo-
sition, the ill-conditions of the geometric constraint system is
made explicit to the user or the CAD system and specific treat-
ment can be provided for repairing. Moreover, the maximum
matching of the well-constrained sub-part is guaranteed to be a
perfect matching.
Further, the matching-based approach was extended to con-
straint graph. Lamure and Middleditch (Lamure & Michelucci,
1996) proposed a weighted maximal matching to the system de-
composition. The method no longer works at equation level, but
directly works on the constraint graph which is weighted by DOFs
of geometric entities and DOCs of geometric constraints. The
method converts the constraint graph into a directed one by max-
imal weighting. The directions of edges are set by the following
rules: a edge is set bidirectional if its weight is non-zero, and is
directed from geometric entity to constraint if its weight is zero.
Hoffmann et al. (Hoffmann et al., 1997) introduced the flow-
based algorithm. The method first computes the maximum flow
in the constraint graph and identifies the minimal dense subsys-
tem. The minimal dense subsystem is then extended iteratively
to include the neighboring nodes. Two extension algorithms are
proposed, which are called condensing algorithm (CA) (Hoffman
et al., 2001b) and the frontier algorithm (FA) (Hoffman et al.,
2001a). Both the algorithms collapse the subsystem, but differ in
the schemes. Specifically, the CA simply collapse the identified
subsystem into a super node, while the FA preserves the frontier
vertices of the subsystem. Both the algorithms yield a cluster tree,
which indicates a solving sequence. Moreover, work (Hoffmann
et al., 2004) has been proposed to develop the ability of FA in han-
dling over-constrained systems.
5.4.2 Bottom-up decomposition
The bottom-up approach iteratively aggregates components into
bigger ones. It was pioneered by Bouma et al. (Bouma et al., 1995).
In this method, triangles in the constraint graph are identified
and combined. An example of the decomposition process is il-
lustrated in Figure 9. Compared with top-down approach, the
bottom-up approach behaves better in handling over-constrained
problems.
One of the critical issues to be addressed is extending the
repertoire of rigid patterns. Subsequent work include handling
variable-radius circles (Chiang & Joan-Arinyo, 2004; Hoffmann
& Chiang, 2002; Owen, 1996), Bezier curves (Hoffmann & Peters,

===== PAGE 9 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X) X-X | 9
(a)
L P
P
PL
P
L
L
P
P
C P
L
L
(b)
Figure 9: An example of bottom-up decomposition.
1995), conics (Fudos & Hoffmann, 1996). Hoffmann and Joan-
Arinyo (Hoffmann & Joan-Arinyo, 1997) proposed a method to
handle the geometric constraint systems involving algebraic con-
straints that relates parameters (e.g. two distance constraints d1
and d2 satisfy d1 = 2d2).
Bouma et al (Bouma et al., 1995) proposed a DOF-based method
to make the bottom-up decomposition. The method operates on
the constraint graph. The rigid subsystem is called a cluster. The
main rule used in the method is "three clusters pairwise sharing
an geometric element can be merged into a bigger cluster". How-
ever, this rule sometimes yield non-rigid subsystems, i.e. the sub-
system formed by three lines with three angle constraints are not
rigid.
Apparently, triangle is only one of the rigid patterns, and
the main difficulty of the rule-based approach lies in a complete
repertoire of patterns. Gao and Zhang (Gao & Zhang, 2003) pre-
sented a classification of basic merge patterns between two rigid
bodies in 2D. For all the eleven cases presented, the symbolic so-
lution of each case is given, and whether it can be constructed by
ruler-and-compass method is analyzed.
Later on, non-rigid patterns are also taken into consideration.
Shreck et al. (Schreck & Mathis, 2006; Schreck & Schramm, 2006)
extended the types of 2D patterns with invariant properties, e.g.
similarity. van der Meiden and Bronsvoort (Van der Meiden &
Bronsvoort, 2010) considered 3D geometric constraint solving,
and presented two non-rigid patterns: scalable clusters and redial
clusters. Also, a mapping method was presented from 3D geomet-
ric constraint system with several kinds of primitives to the one
with only 3D points.
Considered that not all geometric constraint systems are
ruler-and-compass constructible (Gao & Zhang, 2003), Mathis et
al. (Mathis et al., 2012) and Barki et al. (Barki et al., 2016) proposed
a re-parameterization method to make the ruler-and-compass
technique available. It is achieved by removing a constraint and
adding a new constraint with driving parameter. With the driv-
ing parameter changing, a geometric locus is generated, from
which the positions that satisfying the removed constraint are
taken as solutions. The method essentially converts the well-
constrained geometric constraint system into the 1-DOF one. The
limitation is that only one removable constraint is considered at
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: An example of h-graph: (a) The GCS, and (b) the corresponding h-graph.
current stage; the situation becomes more complex when more
than one constraint are removed.
The decomposition generates a ternary tree where each node
captures a construction of a pattern (e.g. a triangle) and the
leaves capture the set of geometric objects. The tree representa-
tion shows the construction sequence of the GCS. However, the
representation doesn’t explicitly show the dependencies between
the construction steps. For this, Hidalgo and Joan-Arinyo (Hi-
dalgo & Joan-Arinyo, 2015) introduced h-graph, which is obtained
from the tree representation and captures the dependency rela-
tionships between construction steps. An example is given in
Figure 10. In Figure 10(b), the undirected edges represent co-
dependencies, and the directed edges represent indirect depen-
dencies.
The bottom-up decomposition has a better performance in
handling over-constrained GCSs, but can hardly handle under-
constrained problems.
5.4.3 Top-down decomposition
Top-down decomposition methods work by iteratively splitting
the whole geometric constraint system into smaller components.
Apparently, the critical issue to be addressed lies in finding the
splitting position.
The top-down decomposition was pioneered by Owen (Owen,
1991). The method handles 2D geometric constraint systems with
points and lines constrained by distance and angle constraints.
During each iteration, this method decomposes the constraint
graph at an articulation pair. The articulation pair is a pair of
nodes that their removal results in two disconnected subgraphs.
After splitting, the pair of nodes is duplicated in both subgraphs,
and a virtual bond, i.e. a edge, is added between them. The virtual
bonds constraints the relative position between the two vertices.
The splitting terminates when no more articulation pairs can be
found. After the splitting, the geometric constraint system is de-
composed into triangles. The triangles can be solved according to
the reverse order of the decomposition. An example is illustrated
in Figure11.
Joan-Arinyo et al. (Joan-Arinyo et al., 2004) presented s-tree
to formalize the top-down decomposition. Fudos and Hoffmann
(Fudos & Hoffmann, 1997) presented a similar decomposition
method that combined bottom-up techniques to handle over- and
under-constrained problems. Zhang and Gao (Zhang & Gao, 2004)
proposed a method to decompose a GCS into a d-tree in a top-

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 | Geometric Constraint Solving Review
L P
P
PL
P
L
L
L P
P
PL
P
P
P
L
L
L P
P
L
P
PL
L
P
L
P
PL
P
P
P
L
P
P
L
P
P
P
P
P
L
Figure 11: An example of top-down decomposition.
down manner. It extends the connection types to 3D.
Generally, the top-down decomposition can better decompose
the under-constrained GCS, because the under-constrained GCS
only has more articulation pairs. However, the top-down decom-
position can hardly handle over-constrained GCSs.
5.4.4 Propagation-based decomposition
The propagation-based approach aims at converting the con-
straint graph into a directional one where the incident edges of
each vertex are all incoming edges except for one. More specifi-
cally, the approach includes DOF propagation and variable prop-
agation.
Freeman-Benson et al. (Freeman-Benson et al., 1990) proposed
the DeltaBlue algorithm to incrementally solve the GCS by local
propagation. Sannella et al. (Sannella, 1993) presented the Sky-
Blue algorithm as a successor to the DeltaBlue algorithm. It can
detect loops, but cannot entirely break them. Veltkamp et al.
(Veltkamp, 1995) proposed a method to break loops. Borning et
al. (Borning et al., 1996) proposed a local propagation method to
deal with GCSs with inequalities.
The main drawback of this approach is that loops are often
generated during the propagation. Veltkamp el al. (Veltkamp,
1995) proposed a method to break loops. Borning et al. (Borning
et al., 1996) proposed a local propagation method to handle geo-
metric constraint system with inequality constraints.
6. Introduction and limitations of VCM
6.1 A brief introduction
The above review suggests that conventional methods have inher-
ent limitations and are often used beyond their validity. By con-
trast, the very recent WCM is likely the most promising method to
bypass those limitations. Successful applications of this method
have been reported, including mechanism design, freeform sur-
face design, (Hu et al., 2017; Mathis & Schreck, 2014; Zou & Feng,
2019b), to name a few.
VCM is essentially a bunch of criteria to characterize con-
straint states. It attains these criteria by examining how the con-
straint equations behave under infinitesimal perturbations made
to the equation variables. That is, VCM applies a small perturba-
tion∆X to X and examines the response ∆F = F(X +∆X) – F(X)
of the constraint equations, which are related by (the first order
approximation):
∆F = J(X)·∆X + O(‖∆X‖2), (5)
where J(X) is the Jacobian matrix evaluated at point X. The main
result of VCM is that if J is evaluated at a carefully selected point
called witness configuration, the constraint dependencies (i.e.,
over-constraint) between the equations are described by the lin-
early dependent rows of the Jacobian matrix, i.e., the vectors in
the kernel (or null space) ofJT . Under-constraint is closely related
to the free perturbations that do not violate existing constraints,
i.e.,∆F = J·∆X = 0; that is, under-constraint is described by the
vectors in the kernel ofJ. A configuration is deemed a witness con-
figuration if certain types of constraints in the given model has
already been satisfied by the configuration under perturbation,
i.e., X, see (Kubicki et al., 2014) for generation of such configura-
tions. A detailed discussion of witness configurations and the ne-
cessity of them for VCM to work well can be found in (Michelucci
& Foufou, 2009; Thierry et al., 2011).
The formal criteria of under-, well- and over-constraint given
by VCM are as follows (Thierry et al., 2011). A model is over-
constrained if Kernel(JT )⁄=∅, where Kernel(·) denotes the kernel
of a matrix: Kernel(A) = x|Ax = 0. This criterion can be rewritten
as:
Rank(J) – RowSize(J) < 0. (6)
A model is under-constrained if Dim(Kernel(J)) > 6, where
Dim(·) is to get the dimension of a linear space and the number
6 represents the 6 rigid-body transformations. This criterion can
be rewritten as:
Dim(Kernel(J)) = ColumnSize(J) – Rank(J) > 6. (7)
Using the rank-nullity theorem (Strang, 2003). Following imme-
diately, the criterion for a well-constrained GCS is given as:



(Rank(J) – RowSize(J) = 0,
ColumnSize(J) – Rank(J) = 6.
(8)
These criteria were accepted once, but were later proven
wrong. The failure is due to the assumption that a well-
constrained GCS admits exactly 6 DOFs, which is seen to be not
true in many real cases (Jermann et al., 2002). Figure 12 shows
such a failure example1. To address this issue, the recent VCM re-
place the fixed number 6 with a variable called degree of rigidity
(DOR) (Michelucci & Foufou, 2009). The DOR notion may be first
presented in (Jermann et al., 2002), and then was directly applied
to VCM in (Michelucci & Foufou, 2009). This notion essentially
translates the 6 rigid-body transformations (3 axial translations
and 3 axial rotations) to changes made to the parameters of the
participating geometric entities, where these changes are stored
as 6 vectors; then DOR of a GCS is given by the number of inde-
1 In this example, a plane is described with the tuple ( a, b, c, d) and the addi-
tional constraint a2 + b2 + c2 = 1 (the plane equation is ax + by + cz + d = 0).
The equations of the involved constraints are as follows: (1) collinearity of
two normal or direction vectorsv1, v2 is represented withv1 +tv2 = 0 where
t is a scalar unknown; and (2) point-to-point distance and vector angle are
represented with dot products.

===== PAGE 11 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X) X-X | 11
Figure 12: A failure example: a well-constrained model but incorrectly character-
ized by VCM.
pendent vectors among the 6 vectors, see Section 3 of (Michelucci
& Foufou, 2009) for details. Consider, again, the example in Fig-
ure 12. Its DOR is 5; then the numbersColumnSize(J) – Rank(J) and
DOR are matched. This means that the constraint state of this ex-
ample is characterized correctly with the help of the DOR notion.
6.2 Limitation 0
The most important limitation of the witness configuration
method is that the subsystem constituting the witness configu-
ration may not be well-constrained, and thus cannot be satisfied
(Zou & Feng, 2019a).
6.3 Limitation I
The first limitation to be discussed in this subsection concerns
with the ineffectiveness of VCM’s criteria for characterizing con-
straint states. Although enhanced with the DOR notion, there
is still no rigorous proof for VCM. The introduction of the DOR
notion is more like a patch for fixing the bugs encountered in
the application of VCM than a systematic treatment of VCM’s
limitations. In fact, none of the key publications on VCM, say
(Michelucci & Foufou, 2006, 2009; Thierry et al., 2011), come
with guarantees or with clearly stated limitations. Effective-
ness in terms of constraint state characterization was often over-
claimed in previous publications but was negated in later publi-
cations, which is the case for the introduction of the DOR notion
to VCM.
One limitation encountered by the authors in applying VCM is
that the representation scheme used to describe the participating
geometric entities has a significant effect on VCM’s effectiveness.
Consider, for example, the four-plane configuration in Figure 12,
and change the original representation scheme to the following
one: a plane is described with a point p∈ R3 on the plane and the
normal n∈ S2 of the plane. The expressionColumnSize(J)–Rank(J)
becomes 24 – 13 = 11, and DOR of this example becomes 6, which
leads to a mismatch and a failed constraint state characteriza-
tion. From this example, we can conclude that different repre-
sentation schemes could result in different numbers of the terms
ColumnSize(J), Rank(J), and DOR, and consequently could lead to
opposite characterization results for a same GCS. Figure 13 gives
one more example about such a situation, and Table 4 summaries
the characterization results for this example and the one in Fig-
ure 12. Representation #1 refers to the original representation
scheme; Representation #2 refers to the scheme we just men-
tioned above; and the representation scheme used to describe the
lines of the example in Figure 13 is: a line is represented by a point
p∈ R3 on the line and the direction d∈ S2 of the line. Based on
the results in Table 4, it is safe to say that the current VCM (with
the DOR notion) is not as effective as we thought.
The above limitation only represents one limitation found dur-
ing the authors’ application of VCM. Are there other hidden lim-
itations? At present, the authors do not have a good answer to
Figure 13: Another failure example: a well-constrained model but incorrectly
characterized by VCM.
this question. There are good reasons that it may be better for
us to take the negative side: existing work has over-claimed the
effectiveness of VCM twice, of which one is before the introduc-
tion of DOR, and the other before this work. Despite of these lim-
itations (found ones and future ones), VCM is still a promising
(maybe the most promising) method for handling the task of con-
straint state characterization (other known methods are less ef-
fective than VCM and have inherent limitations). Further devel-
opment of VCM is necessary to prefect VCM (for constraint state
characterization). Two improvement directions maybe taken to
achieve the goal: (1) have a comprehensive analysis of VCM’s ca-
pabilities and limitations, and then device new (add-on) methods
to specifically handle the limitations; and (2) propose a variant of
VCM for which a rigorous proof is achievable. The authors have
presented a systematic method in (Zou & Feng, 2019c) to address
Limitation I, following the latter direction.
6.4 Limitation II
This subsection and the next discuss the limitations of VCM for
dealing with the second issue in geometric constraint solving. To
repeat, the issue concerns with the optimal decomposition of a
non-well-constrained constraint system into the minimal over-
constrained parts and the maximal well-constrained parts. The
limitation this subsection focuses on is the ineffectiveness of the
current methods on minimal over-constrained part detection.
Over-constrained parts in a non-well-constrained GCS could
take the form of a group of dependent constraints, or the form
of a group of geometric entities whose associated constraints are
more than needed. These two forms are equivalent; and this work
defines an over-constrained part as a group of dependent con-
straints. The task of minimal over-constrained part detection is
to minimize the size of each over-constrained part in the GCS.
Existing methods to accomplish the task share the same idea
of using greedy methods (Hu et al., 2017; Michelucci & Foufou,
2009; Moinet et al., 2014; Thierry et al., 2011). Conceptually, they
first find a maximal subset of independent constraints in the
given GCS, then decide the dependencies of the rest constraints
on these independent constraints in a one-by-one manner, which
can be understood using the simple example in Equation (9). To
simplify the indexing of these equations, they are numbered E1-
E5 sequentially. The existing methods start from a seed equa-
tion, e.g., E1, then iterate through all equations to greedily find
a maximal subset of independent equations; for this case, it will
be {E1, E2, E3}. Subsequently, the dependencies of the rest con-
straints with the constraints already presented in the subset will
be checked. For example, equation E4 is dependent with all the
three constraints in the subset, and the same for equation E5. Ac-
cording to these dependencies, the methods will output two min-

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 | Geometric Constraint Solving Review
Table 4: Characterization results for the plane and line examples.
VCM without DOR notion VCM with DOR notion
ColumnSize(J) Rank(J) DOR Matched? ColumnSize(J) Rank(J) DOR Matched?
The plane example
(Representation #1) 16 11 6 $ 16 11 5 "
The plane example
(Representation #2) 24 13 6 $ 24 13 6 $
The line example 12 5 6 $ 12 5 6 $
imal dependency groups: {E1, E2, E3, E4} and {E1, E2, E3, E5}.



x + y + z = 0,
2x + y + x = 1,
3x + 2y + z = 1,
x + 2y + 3z = 1,
2x + 4y + 3z = 2.
(9)
The above strategy may fail to detect the minimal over-
constrained parts in a GCS because the maximal independent
subset of a constraint system is not unique; this non-uniqueness
could lead to wrong detection results. Consider the example
in Equation (10) (a slight modification of Equation (9)). The
existing methods will give two “minimal” dependency groups:
{E1, E2, E3, E4} and { E1, E2, E3, E5}. However, it is easy to see that
there is another dependency group with smaller size: {E4, E5}.



x + y + z = 0,
2x + y + x = 1,
3x + 2y + z = 1,
x + 2y + 3z = 1,
2x + 4y + 6z = 2.
(10)
From the above discussion, it is safe to say that the develop-
ment of current methods for minimal over-constraint detection
is far from being sufficient. The insufficiency has its origins in
the inherent limitations of greedy methods. Again, two direc-
tions may be taken to solve the limitation or insufficiency. It can
be seen from the examples that greedy methods gave the wrong
detection results due to the wrong choice of the seed equation. For
example, if the seed equations is set to equations E4, the greedy
methods may give the right detection results. Therefore, one im-
provement direction is to have a preprocessing that finds that op-
timal seed equation. This problem is however a challenging is-
sue for its own sake and remains an open issue. The other im-
provement direction, which is more desirable, is to put effort into
the insights of the detection problem and to attain a solid math-
ematical modeling of this problem. The authors have presented
a new, precise formulation of the minimal over-constraint detec-
tion problem in (Zou & Feng, 2020) to address Limitation II, follow-
ing the latter direction.
6.5 Limitation III
The limitation this subsection discusses is the ineffectiveness of
the current methods on maximal well-constrained part detec-
tion. Maximizing sizes of well-constrained parts is equivalent to
minimizing under-constrained parts because under-constraint
is described by DOFs between well-constrained parts. A well-
constrained part of a GCS refers to a subset of the participating
geometric entities whose induced constraint subsystem is well-
constrained. An induced subsystem of a part is the subset of
the constraints that are defined merely over the part. A well-
constrained part P is deemed as maximal if there is no another
subset P′ of the participating geometric entities such that P⊂ P′
and P′ is well-constrained.
Existing methods to solve the problem of maximal well-
constrained part detection also use greedy methods (Michelucci
& Foufou, 2009; Thierry et al., 2011), which leads to the limitation
similar to Limitation II. The work flow of these methods is as fol-
lows. First, a geometric entity set S is initialized with a seed ge-
ometric entity (randomly chosen); then, iterate through all the
other geometric entities to check if the geometric entity form a
well-constrained part with the geometric entities in S, and, if so,
add the geometric entity to S; the resulting S gives a maximal well-
constrained part. Repeat above procedures on the left geometric
entities until no geometric entity is left. Similar to Limitation II,
the initialization of the methods — the choice of seed geometric
entities — has a significant effect on their effectiveness, and they
may fail to detect the maximal well-constrained parts in a GCS.
An example of this limitation is given in Figure 14 and Figure
15. A crank model with two DOFs is shown in Figure 14, and the
two DOFs are a rotation of plane F2 about cylinder F4’s axis and
a rotation of plane F3 about cylinder F4’s axis. Figure 15a shows
one detection result of using the greedy method, where the seed
geometric entity for part I is plane F3, the seed geometric entity
for part II is cylinder F7, and that for part III is plane F2. How-
ever, Figure 15b shows another solution to the problem of maxi-
mal well-constrained part detection, with a larger size on the well-
constrained part I.
This limitation, again, has its origins in the inherent limita-
tions of greedy methods. In fact, the use of greedy algorithms
does not give a formulation of the detection problem but repre-
sents an incomplete technical tool. To address the issue, we need
to develop a mathematical modeling of the maximal requirement
on sizes of well-constrained parts. The authors have presented a
new, precise formulation of the maximal well-constraint detec-
tion problem in (Zou & Feng, 2020) to address Limitation III.
6.6 Limitation IV
This limitation is related to the third issue in geometric constraint
solving — the optimal decomposition of a well-constrained GCS
into the minimal well-constrained parts. It is not strictly
necessary to have a VCM-based method to decompose a well-
constrained GCS into the minimal well-constrained parts. The
major advantage of VCM over the previous graph-based methods
(Hoffman et al., 2001b) is the ability to handle constraint depen-
dency, but the setting of the third issue excludes such dependen-
cies as the given GCS is well-constrained. There have been ef-
fective methods to accomplish the task of decomposing a well-
constrained GCS into the minimal well-constrained parts, such
as the graph-based methods (Hoffman et al., 2001b).
For VCM to be self-contained and systematic, we want to have
a VCM-based method to decompose a well-constrained GCS into

===== PAGE 13 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X) X-X | 13
Figure 14: An under-constrained GCS example.
Figure 15: Results of maximal well-constrained part detection.
the minimal well-constrained parts (although this may not have
a practical value). To our knowledge, there is no existing work on
this topic. This issue, as already noted, is secondary.
7. Conclusions
Limitations of VCM have been discussed in this work, under the
context of geometric constraint solving. To have a systematic dis-
cussion of these limitations, we first outlined the three essential
tasks/issues in geometric constraint solving, then introduced the
basic idea of VCM in a brief fashion, and finally showed the ca-
pabilities and limitations of VCM using examples. The history of
geometric constraint solving has also been briefly reviewed. With
the limitations stated above, we expect that VCM can be perfected,
starting from solving these limitations.
Acknowledgements
This work is a byproduct of the authors developing a new CAD
modeling approach: variational direct modeling (Zou, 2019; Zou
et al., 2022). The associated project was in part funded by the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC). This financial support is greatly appreciated.
Conflict of interest statement
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with re-
spect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this ar-
ticle.
References
Ait-Aoudia, S., Jegou, R., & Michelucci, D. (2014). Reduction of con-
straint systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.6131.
Aldefeld, B. (1988). Variation of geometries based on a geometric-
reasoning method. Computer-Aided Design, 20(3), 117–126.
Allgower, E. L., & Georg, K. (1993). Continuation and path follow-
ing. Acta Numerica, 2(1), 1–64.
Barki, H., Fang, L., Michelucci, D., & Foufou, S. (2016). Re-
parameterization reduces irreducible geometric constraint
systems. Computer-Aided Design, 70, 182–192.
Bettig, B., & M Hoffmann, C. (2011). Geometric constraint solving
in parametric computer-aided design. Journal of computing
and information science in engineering, 11(2).
Borning, A. (1981). The programming language aspects of
thinglab, a constraint-oriented simulation laboratory. ACM
Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems
(TOPLAS), 3(4), 353–387.
Borning, A., Anderson, R., & Freeman-Benson, B. (1996). Indigo:
A local propagation algorithm for inequality constraints. Pro-
ceedings of the 9th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology, 129–136.
Bose, N. (1995). Gröbner bases: An algorithmic method in polyno-
mial ideal theory.Multidimensional systems theory and appli-
cations (pp. 89–127). Springer.
Bouma, W., Fudos, I., Hoffmann, C., Cai, J., & Paige, R. (1995). Ge-
ometric constraint solver. Computer-Aided Design, 27(6), 487–
501.
Bruderlin, B. (1989). Rule-based geometric modelling.
Brüderlin, B. et al. (1990). Symbolic computer geometry for com-
puter aided geometric design. Advances in Design and Manu-
facturing Systems, Tempe, AZ.
Buchanan, S. A., & de Pennington, A. (1993). Constraint defi-
nition system: A computer-algebra based approach to solv-
ing geometric-constraint problems. Computer-Aided Design ,
25(12), 741–750.
Buchberger, B. (1985). Gröbner bases: An algorithmic method in
polynomial ideal theory . Multidimensional Systems Theory –
Progress, Directions; Open Problems in Multidimensional Sys-
tems.
Cao, C., Zhang, B., Wang, L., & Li, W. (2006). The parametric design
based on organizational evolutionary algorithm. Pacific Rim
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Chiang, C.-S., & Joan-Arinyo, R. (2004). Revisiting variable radius
circles in constructive geometric constraint solving.Computer
aided geometric design, 21(4), 371–399.
Chou, S.-C. (1988a). An introduction to wu’s method for mechan-
ical theorem proving in geometry. Journal of Automated Rea-
soning, 4(3), 237–267.
Chou, S.-C. (1988b). Mechanical geometry theorem proving
(Vol. 41). Springer Science & Business Media.
Coons, S. A. (1963). An outline of the requirements for a computer-
aided design system. Proceedings of the May 21-23, 1963,
spring joint computer conference, 299–304.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 | Geometric Constraint Solving Review
Coons, S. A., & Mann, R. W. (1960). Computer-aided design related
to the engineering design process. MIT Electronic Systems Lab-
oratory.
Cottrell, J. A., Hughes, T. J., & Bazilevs, Y. (2009).Isogeometric anal-
ysis: Toward integration of cad and fea. John Wiley & Sons.
Durand, C., & Hoffmann, C. M. (2000). A systematic framework
for solving geometric constraints analytically.Journal of Sym-
bolic Computation, 30(5), 493–519.
Foufou, S., Michelucci, D., & Jurzak, J.-P. (2005). Numerical de-
composition of geometric constraints.Proceedings of the 2005
ACM symposium on Solid and physical modeling, 143–151.
Freeman-Benson, B. N., Maloney, J., & Borning, A. (1990). An incre-
mental constraint solver. Commun. ACM , 33(1), 54–63. https :
//doi.org/10.1145/76372.77531
Fudos, I., & Hoffmann, C. M. (1996). Constraint-based parametric
conics for cad. Computer-Aided Design , 28(2), 91–100. https :
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-4485(95)00037-2
Fudos, I., & Hoffmann, C. M. (1997). A graph-constructive ap-
proach to solving systems of geometric constraints. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 16(2), 179–216.
Gao, X.-S., & Chou, S.-C. (1998). Solving geometric con-
straint systems. ii. a symbolic approach and decision of
rc-constructibility. Computer-Aided Design, 30(2), 115–122.
Gao, X.-S., Hoffmann, C. M., & Yang, W.-Q. (2004). Solving spatial
basic geometric constraint configurations with locus intersec-
tion. Computer-Aided Design, 36(2), 111–122.
Gao, X.-S., & Zhang, G.-F. (2003). Classification and solving of
merge patterns in geometric constraint solving. 2003 Shape
Modeling International., 89–98.
Ge, J.-X., Chou, S.-C., & Gao, X.-S. (1999). Geometric constraint
satisfaction using optimization methods.Computer-Aided De-
sign, 31(14), 867–879.
Haug, E. J. (1989).Computer aided kinematics and dynamics of me-
chanical systems. vol. 1: Basic methods. Allyn & Bacon, Inc.
Hidalgo, M., & Joan-Arinyo, R. (2015). H-graphs: A new represen-
tation for tree decompositions of graphs. Computer-Aided De-
sign, 67-68, 38–47. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cad.2015.05.003
Hillyard, R. C., & Braid, I. C. (1978). Characterizing non-ideal
shapes in terms of dimensions and tolerances. SIGGRAPH
Comput. Graph., 12(3), 234–238.
Hoffman, C. M., Lomonosov, A., & Sitharam, M. (2001a). Decom-
position plans for geometric constraint problems, part ii: New
algorithms. Journal of Symbolic Computation, 31(4), 409–427.
Hoffman, C. M., Lomonosov, A., & Sitharam, M. (2001b). Decom-
position plans for geometric constraint systems, part i: Per-
formance measures for cad.Journal of Symbolic Computation,
31(4), 367–408.
Hoffmann, C. M., Sitharam, M., & Bo, Y. (2004). Making constraint
solvers more usable: Overconstraint problem. Computer-
Aided Design, 36(4), 377–399.
Hoffmann, C. M., & Chiang, C.-S. (2002). Variable-radius circles of
cluster merging in geometric constraints: I. translational clus-
ters. Computer-aided design, 34(11), 787–797.
Hoffmann, C. M., & Joan-Arinyo, R. (1997). Symbolic constraints
in constructive geometric constraint solving. Journal of Sym-
bolic Computation, 23(2-3), 287–299.
Hoffmann, C. M., & Joan-Arinyo, R. (2005). A brief on constraint
solving. Computer-Aided Design and Applications , 2(5), 655–
663.
Hoffmann, C. M., Lomonosov, A., & Sitharam, M. (1997). Finding
solvable subsets of constraint graphs. International Confer-
ence on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming ,
463–477.
Hoffmann, C. M., & Peters, J. (1995). Geometric constraints for
cagd. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Mathematical Methods for CAGD, Ulvic, 237–254.
Hu, H., Kleiner, M., & Pernot, J.-P. (2017). Over-constraints detec-
tion and resolution in geometric equation systems.Computer-
Aided Design, 90, 84–94.
Hu, H., Zhang, C., Huang, Y., Zhao, Q., & Yeung, S. (2021). Geomet-
ric over-constraints detection: A survey.Archives of Computa-
tional Methods in Engineering, 1–25.
Imbach, R., Mathis, P., & Schreck, P. (2017). A robust and effi-
cient method for solving point distance problems by homo-
topy. Mathematical Programming, 163(1-2), 115–144.
Jermann, C., Neveu, B., & Trombettoni, G. (2002). A new structural
rigidity for geometric constraint systems.International Work-
shop on Automated Deduction in Geometry.
Jermann, C., Neveu, B., & Trombettoni, G. (2003). Algorithms for
identifying rigid subsystems in geometric constraint systems,
233–238.
Jermann, C., Trombettoni, G., Neveu, B., & Mathis, P. (2006). De-
composition of geometric constraint systems: A survey. Inter-
national Journal of Computational Geometry & Applications ,
16(05n06), 379–414.
Joan-Arinyo, R., & Soto, A. (1997a). A ruler-and-compass geomet-
ric constraint solver. In M. J. Pratt, R. D. Sriram, & M. J. Wozny
(Eds.), Product modeling for computer integrated design and
manufacture: Tc5/wg5.2 international workshop on geometric
modeling in computer aided design 19–23 may 1996, airlie, vir-
ginia, usa(pp. 384–393). Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-0-387-35187-2_33
Joan-Arinyo, R., & Soto, A. (1997b). A correct rule-based geometric
constraint solver. Computers & Graphics, 21(5), 599–609.
Joan-Arinyo, R., Soto-Riera, A., Vila-Marta, S., & Vilaplana-Pasto,
J. (2004). Revisiting decomposition analysis of geometric con-
straint graphs. Computer-Aided Design, 36(2), 123–140.
Kondo, K. (1992). Algebraic method for manipulation of dimen-
sional relationships in geometric models.Computer-Aided De-
sign, 24(3), 141–147.
Kubicki, A., Michelucci, D., & Foufou, S. (2014). Witness compu-
tation for solving geometric constraint systems. 2014 Science
and Information Conference, 759–770.
Laman, G. (1970). On graphs and rigidity of plane skeletal struc-
tures. Journal of Engineering mathematics, 4(4), 331–340.
Lamure, H., & Michelucci, D. (1996). Solving geometric constraints
by homotopy. IEEE Transactions on visualization and com-
puter graphics, 2(1), 28–34.
Li, Y.-T., Hu, S.-M., & Sun, R.-G. (2001). On the numerical redun-
dancies of geometric constraint systems. Proceedings Ninth
Pacific Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications. Pa-
cific Graphics 2001, 118–123.
Light, R., & Gossard, D. (1982). Modification of geometric models
through variational geometry. Computer-Aided Design, 14(4),
209–214.
Lin, V. C., Gossard, D. C., & Light, R. A. (1981). Variational geometry
in computer-aided design. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graph-
ics, 15(3), 171–177.
Liu, S., Liu, T., Zou, Q., Wang, W., Doubrovski, E. L., & Wang, C. C.
(2021). Memory-efficient modeling and slicing of large-scale
adaptive lattice structures. Journal of Computing and Infor-
mation Science in Engineering, 21(6).
Mathis, P., & Schreck, P. (2014). Coordinate-free geometry and
decomposition in geometrical constraint solving. Computer-
Aided Design, 50, 51–60.
Mathis, P., Schreck, P., & Imbach, R. (2012). Decomposition of ge-
ometrical constraint systems with reparameterization. Pro-

===== PAGE 15 =====
XXXXX, 202X, X(X) X-X | 15
ceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Com-
puting, 102–108.
Michelucci, D., & Foufou, S. (2006). Geometric constraint solving:
The witness configuration method. Computer-Aided Design ,
38(4), 284–299.
Michelucci, D., & Foufou, S. (2009). Interrogating witnesses for ge-
ometric constraint solving. 2009 SIAM/ACM Joint Conference
on Geometric and Physical Modeling, 343–348.
Moinet, M., Mandil, G., & Serré, P. (2014). Defining tools to address
over-constrained geometric problems in computer aided de-
sign. Computer-Aided Design, 48, 42–52.
Nelson, G. (1985). Juno, a constraint-based graphics system. Pro-
ceedings of the 12th annual conference on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques, 235–243.
Owen, J. C. (1991). Algebraic solution for geometry from dimen-
sional constraints.Proceedings of the first ACM symposium on
Solid modeling foundations and CAD/CAM applications , 397–
407.
Owen, J. C. (1996). Constraints on simple geometry in two and
three dimensions. International Journal of Computational Ge-
ometry & Applications, 6(04), 421–434.
Podgorelec, D., Žalik, B., & Domiter, V. (2008). Dealing with re-
dundancy and inconsistency in constructive geometric con-
straint solving. Advances in Engineering Software, 39(9), 770–
786. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.
2007.10.003
Rao, S. S. (2019). Engineering optimization: Theory and practice .
John Wiley & Sons.
Sannella, M. (1993). The skyblue constraint solver. Citeseer.
Schreck, P., & Mathis, P. (2006). Geometrical constraint system de-
composition: A multi-group approach. International Journal
of Computational Geometry & Applications , 16(05n06), 431–
442.
Schreck, P., & Schramm, É. (2006). Using invariance under
the similarity group to solve geometric constraint systems.
Computer-Aided Design, 38(5), 475–484.
Serrano, D. (1987). Constraint management in conceptual de-
sign (Doctoral dissertation). Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology.
Shah, J. J. (1998). Designing with parametric cad: Classification
and comparison of construction techniques. International
Workshop on Geometric Modelling, 53–68.
Sitharam, M., & Zhou, Y. (2004). A tractable, approximate, combi-
natorial 3d rigidity characterization. Fifth Automated Deduc-
tion in Geometry (ADG.
Sohrt, W., & Brüderlin, B. D. (1991). Interaction with constraints in
3d modeling. Proceedings of the first ACM symposium on Solid
modeling foundations and CAD/CAM applications, 387–396.
Strang, G. (2003). Introduction to linear algebra . Introduction to
Linear Algebra.
Su, C., Jiang, X., Huo, G., Zou, Q., Zheng, Z., & Feng, H.-Y. (2020).
Accurate model construction of deformed aero-engine blades
for remanufacturing. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 106(7), 3239–3251.
Sunde, G. (1987). A cad system with declarative specification of
shape. Intelligent cad systems i (pp. 90–104). Springer.
Sutherland, I. E. (1964). Sketchpad a man-machine graphical com-
munication system. Simulation, 2(5), R–3.
Tarjan, R. (1972). Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms.
SIAM J. Comput., 1, 146–160.
Thierry, S. E., Schreck, P., Michelucci, D., Fünfzig, C., & Génevaux,
J.-D. (2011). Extensions of the witness method to characterize
under-, over-and well-constrained geometric constraint sys-
tems. Computer-Aided Design, 43(10), 1234–1249.
Van der Meiden, H. A., & Bronsvoort, W. F. (2010). A non-rigid clus-
ter rewriting approach to solve systems of 3d geometric con-
straints. Computer-Aided Design, 42(1), 36–49.
Veltkamp, R. C. (1995). A quantum approach to geometric con-
straint satisfaction. In C. Laffra, E. H. Blake, V. de Mey, & X. Pin-
tado (Eds.), Object-oriented programming for graphics (pp. 54–
70). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-79192-5_6
Verroust, A., Schonek, F., & Roller, D. (1992). Rule-oriented method
for parameterized computer-aided design. Computer-Aided
Design, 24(10), 531–540.
Wu, W.-t. (2012).Mechanical theorem proving in geometries: Basic
principles. Springer Science & Business Media.
Yamaguchi, Y., & Kimura, F. (1990). A constraint modeling system
for variational geometry. Geometric Modeling for Product En-
gineering, 221–233.
Yuan, H., Li, W., Yi, R., & Zhao, K. (2006). The tpso algorithm
to solve geometric constraint problems. Journal of Computa-
tional Information Systems, 2(4), 1311–1316.
Zhang, G.-F., & Gao, X.-S. (2004). Geometric constraint solving
based on connectivity of graph. Computer-Aided Design and
Applications, 1(4), 469–476.
Zou, Q. (2019).Variational direct modeling for computer-aided de-
sign (Doctoral dissertation). University of British Columbia.
Zou, Q., & Feng, H.-Y. (2019a). On limitations of the witness config-
uration method for geometric constraint solving in cad mod-
eling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00526.
Zou, Q., & Feng, H.-Y. (2019b). Push-pull direct modeling of solid
cad models. Advances in Engineering Software, 127, 59–69.
Zou, Q., & Feng, H.-Y. (2019c). Variational b-rep model analysis
for direct modeling using geometric perturbation. Journal of
Computational Design and Engineering , 6(4), 606–616. https :
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcde.2019.03.002
Zou, Q., & Feng, H.-Y. (2020). A decision-support method for in-
formation inconsistency resolution in direct modeling of cad
models. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 44, 101087. https:
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2020.101087
Zou, Q., Zhang, J., Deng, B., & Zhao, J. (2014). Iso-level tool path
planning for free-form surfaces. Computer-Aided Design, 53,
117–125.
Zou, Q., Zheng, Q., Tang, Z., & Gao, S. (2022). Variational de-
sign for a structural family of cad models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.02926.
