===== PAGE 1 =====
Abstract
The weak equivalence principle (WEP) is a central pillar of general relativity. Its precise test with quantum sys-
tems in space offers a unique window onto new physics. Here, we report an in-orbit quantum test of the WEP. A
dual-species ( Rb/ Rb) atom interferometer is realized aboard the China Space Station. Methods of platform
motion suppression, fluorescence detection switching, and two-photon detuning switching are developed to
eliminate phase noise and improve measurement accuracy. A test uncertainty of 2.8 × 10  is obtained from 280
days of WEP test data, and a test result of (−2.7 ± 4.7) × 10  is achieved after error estimation. This improves
prior atom-interferometric WEP tests in microgravity by three orders of magnitude. This work paves the way
for space-borne quantum inertial sensors and their application to future fundamental physics in space.
SIGN UP FOR THE AWARD-WINNING SCIENCEADVISER NEWSLETTER
The latest news, commentary, and research, free to your inbox daily
INTRODUCTION
The weak equivalence principle (WEP), which posits the universality of free fall, is a cornerstone of Einstein’s the-
ory of general relativity. Its continued validation through ever more precise experiments is essential, as any de-
tected violation would herald new physics (1). Tests using macroscopic bodies have reached phenomenal precision,
at the 10  level on Earth (2, 3) and 10  in space (4, 5).
Cold atom interferometry (CAI) is at the basis of quantum mechanics (6). Owing to its quantum nature and high-
precision potential, CAI has found applications in inertial sensing and fundamental physics research (6–18), and
has emerged as a powerful technique for testing the WEP (19–33). By extending the free-fall time in large towers,
CAI has achieved WEP test precision on the order of 10  (31). CAI also broadens the scope of these tests by en-
85 87
−8
−7
−13 −15
−12
SIGN UP 
HOME  SCIENCE ADVANCES  VOL. 12, NO. 35  IN-ORBIT TEST OF THE WEAK EQUIVALENCE PRINCIPLE WITH ATOM INTERFEROMETRY
     󡀆 󡐢 
In-orbit test of the weak equivalence principle with atom
interferometry
 ,  , [...] , AND   +22 authors  Authors Info & Affiliations
   
 RESEARCH ARTICLE PHYSICS
DAN-FANG ZHANG JING-TING LI MING-SHENG ZHAN
SCIENCE ADVANCES 28 Aug 2026 Vol 12, Issue 35 DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aeh4502
889
ADVERTISEMENT
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
MANAGE PREFERENCES
PDF

===== PAGE 2 =====
abling comparisons of atoms in different internal quantum states, such as those differing in spin (22, 26), superpo-
sition (27), or hyperfine structure (30, 32).
The precision of CAI scales quadratically with the interference time T. On Earth, the interference time is limited to
a few seconds due to gravitational acceleration. Microgravity environments remove this constraint, enabling ex-
tended interference times. Pioneering experiments on microgravity platforms, including drop towers (34, 35), para-
bolic flight aircraft (25, 36), sounding rockets (37, 38), and the Einstein Elevator (39–41), have demonstrated the
potential of this approach, with the first microgravity CAI-based WEP test reaching a precision of 10  (25).
However, these platforms offer microgravity durations on the order of seconds or minutes. Reaching an extremely
high WEP test precision, e.g., 10  (42, 43), requires a permanent microgravity environment for long-term data ac-
cumulation and comprehensive control of systematic errors. An orbital laboratory, such as the China Space Station
(CSS) (44, 45) or the International Space Station (46–48), provides the necessary stable environment to realize this
potential. Here, we report on the realization of a dual-species atom interferometer on board the CSS (Fig. 1A) and
present the first in-orbit test of the WEP using CAI.
RESULTS
Experiment principle and procedure
The CSS Interferometer (CSSAI) is a compact, dual-species instrument installed within the CSS’s High Microgravity
Level Research Rack (HMLR) (44). Its core system (Fig. 1B) simultaneously prepares and coherently manipulates
clouds of Rb and Rb atoms. The interferometer operates on the principle of double single diffraction (DSD) (Fig.
1D) (25), driven by counterpropagating Raman lasers that are reflected by a piezo tilt mirror. This configuration
creates two symmetric interference loops per isotope. A critical feature of the setup is the point-source interfer-
ence (PSI) scheme (Fig. 1C) (49–51), which transforms the interferometric phase into a spatial fringe pattern, al-
lowing robust extraction of inertial signals. A more detailed description of the experimental procedure is provided
in the “Experimental design” section.
For our experiment, the optimized atom numbers and temperatures are 3.4 × 10  and 6.6 μ K for Rb, and 2.9 × 10
and 4.5 μ K for Rb. The Raman lasers interact with the cold atom cloud starting at  = 43 ms after the atom
clouds are released. The interference time is T = 50 ms for both isotopes. The single-photon detunings  of the
−4
−17
Fig. 1. Overview of the CSS Atom Interferometer (CSSAI).
(A) The CSS, its coordinate system, and its orbit around Earth. The CSSAI is installed inside the CSS. (B) The physical system of the CSSAI and
its core functional modules. (C) Principle of point-source interferometry (PSI) using a piezo tilt mirror. The shearing fringe is induced by rota-
tion rate of the CSS Ω  and also the angle of the piezo tilt mirror θ . (D) Dual-species double single diffraction (DSD) interference sequence for
Rb and Rb. The fluorescence of the isotopes is detected in sequence to obtain separate spatial interference fringes.
x x
85 87
 OPEN IN VIEWER
85 87
8 85 8
87 trel
δsp
      
 
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 3 =====
Raman laser are 440 and 425 MHz relative to the Rb F = 3 →  F′  = 4 D  transition and the Rb F = 2 →  F′  = 3 D
transition, respectively. The two-photon detuning is labeled as . The width of the π  Raman pulse is τ  = 30 μ s. The
fluorescence is captured through an imaging system with a magnification of 0.45 and recorded with a scientific
complementary metal-oxide semiconductor camera. The fluorescence images of Rb and Rb would overlap if de-
tected simultaneously. Therefore, we excite and detect their fluorescence sequentially at  = 40 ms and  = 85
ms relative to the last Raman pulse to obtain separate spatial interference images (Fig. 1D). By fitting the phases of
the spatial fringes, the acceleration values along the z-direction are obtained (45).
The Eötvös parameter  is defined as the ratio of the differential gravitational acceleration to the average
gravitational acceleration between the Rb and Rb atoms induced by the Earth. In space, what we measure is the
residual acceleration, which is the sum of the gravitational acceleration and the centrifugal acceleration, and the
latter is the same for the dual-species atoms. Thus,  is expressed as
(1)
where  and  are the residual accelerations measured by the Rb and Rb CAIs, g  is the average gravi-
tational acceleration of the dual-species atoms along the z direction, which is calculated from the altitude of the
CSS and equals 8.72 m/s .  is derived from the WEP-violation-induced differential phase  of the inter-
ference fringes, where  is the averaged Raman laser’s wave vector of the two Rb isotopes.
Platform motion effect suppression
The CSS maintains a nadir-pointing attitude with a constant rotation around the x axis (Fig. 1A). The x axis rota-
tion  has a mean value of −1.138 mrad/s with a SD of 12.0 μ rad/s over the long-term measurements, and the ro-
tation rates in the other two axes are nearly zero. By precisely controlling the angles of the piezo tilt mirror during
the Raman pulses according to an optimized relation (31, 45), the decoherent effect induced by the atom cloud’s
position distribution is eliminated, and proper fringe spatial periods are introduced for interference phase extrac-
tion. The optimized angle relation is related to the detection time , and is different for the two Rb isotopes. We
choose an effective detection time between  and  to calculate and set the optimized angles. Clear dual-
species interference fringes are shown in Fig. 2 (A to D). The spatial frequencies  of the observed fringe patterns
are 1.72 and 1.36 rad/mm for Rb and Rb, respectively. This frequency difference arises from the different fluo-
rescence detection times. Without angle compensation, the rotation of the CSS leads to a fringe frequency of about
0.5 rad/mm, which results in a phase variation less than 2 π  in the 1.1 cm image width. This makes it difficult to ex-
tract the interference fringes. The fringe contrast is also lower and the phase error is higher compared with the ro-
tation-compensated case.
85 2 87 2
δtp
85 87
tdet,1 tdet,2
ηRb85,Rb87
85 87
ηRb85,Rb87
ηRb85,Rb87 = az,Rb85 − az,Rb87
gz
= Δϕη
keffgzT 2
¯
az,Rb85 az,Rb87 85 87 z
2 ηRb85,Rb87 Δϕη
keff
¯
Ωx
tdet
tdet,1 tdet,2
fspa
87 85
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 4 =====
The CSS’s platform experiences residual acceleration due to the nonconservative force acting on the station, crew
activities, and vibrations from scientific racks. The phases for a single-species atom interference fringes are mea-
sured, as shown in Fig. 2E. Their range is restricted to 2 π  due to the value range of the inverse sine function. The
phase exhibits a uniform distribution, as shown in Fig. 2F, suggesting that its true distribution is much broader
than 2 π . For comparison, the acceleration of the CSSAI was measured by a classical accelerometer, and the corre-
sponding phase was calculated from the measured acceleration using the sensitivity function (Supplementary
Materials). The phase fluctuations for an individual interferometer are shown in Fig. 2G, and have a SD of 7.8 rad.
The differential phase  is measured and is shown in Fig. 2 (E and F). It has a SD of 0.55 rad, over
an order of magnitude smaller than the single-species phase noise. This is because the dual-species interferome-
ter, operating with an identical time sequence, inherently provides a high vibration rejection ratio on the order of
 ∼  10 . The residual noise of the differential phase is mainly attributed to the fringe’s sig-
nal-to-noise ratio rather than the acceleration.
Suppression of the spatial frequency induced phase
The differential phase has a notable offset from zero, as shown in Fig. 2 (E and F). One reason for this offset is the
spatial frequency mismatch of the interference fringes. The interference phases of the dual fringes are obtained
through sine fitting. An offset of the initial fitting position  will cause phase offset of . When the spatial fre-
quencies are different, these phase offsets are not identical, and a residual differential phase exists. The zero point
of  is at the position of the piezo tilt mirror’s rotation axis and is hard to estimate accurately, as shown in Fig. 3A.
Fig. 2. Dual-species interference fringes and differential phase extraction.
(A and B) Principal component analysis (PCA) of the fluorescence images for (A), Rb and (B), Rb, showing 2D shearing fringes. Both are
extracted from the 2D fluorescence images acquired over 366 experiments. (C and D) Typical 1D interference fringes for (C), Rb and (D),
Rb, obtained by averaging the 2D images in the x direction and using a normalization method (45). (E) Time series of the measured interfer-
ence phase  and the differential phase . (F) Histograms of  and . (G) Histogram of the acceleration induced interference phase
calculated according to the acceleration recorded by a classical accelerometer.
87 85
87
85
ϕRb87 Δϕ ϕRb87 Δϕ
Δϕ = ϕRb85 − ϕRb87
(keff,Rb87 − keff,Rb85)/keff
¯ −6
y0 fspay0
y0
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 5 =====
To solve this problem, we designed a fluorescence detection switching method. Two groups of dual-species inter-
ference experiments are conducted with alternated fluorescence detection sequence, then we measure the differen-
tial phase  for each group and calculate their average , where i = 1,2 represents different sequences. This
method can effectively eliminate the phase shift induced by the spatial frequency mismatch. To verify its effective-
ness, we fit the two groups of interference fringe with changing fitting position . The calculated  and  are
shown in Fig. 3B. The differential phase  changes by approximately 1.6 rad when  varies by 4.3 mm. However,
the averaged differential phase  remains constant with a maximum phase change of 0.044 rad. A differential
phase suppression ratio of about 36 is achieved.
We also performed a theoretical analysis to determine the magnitude and suppression ratio of the uncertainty as-
sociated with this phase offset. The formulas for  and  are derived, and the uncertainties of these phases
are calculated on the basis of typical values of the experimental parameters. Detailed information is illustrated in
the “Analysis of the phase for the shearing fringe” section. The majority terms of the phase uncertainty of  are
induced by the uncertainty of  and also the position uncertainty of the cold atom cloud. The calculated differen-
tial phase uncertainty for  and  are 0.47 rad and 3.7 × 10  rad, respectively, corresponding to a suppres-
sion factor of more than 1000 by using the fluorescence detection switching method.
Suppression of the k -independent phase
The differential phase is still offset from zero after the fluorescence detection switching method. Another impor-
tant reason is the asymmetry of the DSD interference loop. The DSD interference scheme employs two interference
loops driven by the k  and k  Raman laser pairs. These loops are identical in shape but opposite in direction.
The interference phase of each loop comprises k -dependent phase  such as the acceleration related phase,
and k -independent phase  such as the light shift induced phase.  shifts the spatial fringes of the two inter-
ference loops in the same direction, but  shifts the fringes in opposite directions (25). The detected interference
Fig. 3. Switching methods for fluorescence detection and two-photon detuning.
(A) Diagram of the induced differential phase when  are different for the dual interferometers. (B) Calculated differential phase  and
their averaged  with varying sine-fitting offset  for the interference fringe. (C) Diagram of the shearing fringe of  and their summa-
tion when  is not zero. (D) Calculation of the residual phase  with  and  and their average with varying .  is set to 0.92
rad.
fspa Δϕi
Δϕavg y0 keff±
vz0 ϕres δtp > 0 δtp < 0 vz0 ϕind
Δϕi Δϕavg
y0 Δϕi Δϕavg
Δϕi y0
Δϕavg
Δϕi Δϕavg
Δϕi
y0
Δϕi Δϕavg −4
eff
eff+ eff−
eff ϕdep
eff ϕind ϕdep
ϕind
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 6 =====
fringe is the sum of the fringes of the two loops and has a phase of . If the amplitudes of the two interference
loops are the same,  is eliminated and  is just . However, if the amplitudes of the two interference loops
are different,  will induce a residual phase shift , as shown in Fig. 3C.
The residual velocity of the atom cloud in the z-direction  is the main factor that breaks the symmetry of the in-
terference loops. A nonzero velocity component along the interferometer axis ( ) results in different atom
populations ( ) being selected by the  Raman transitions, as illustrated in Fig. 3C. A residual velocity of,
e.g., 4 mm/s, would cause a 16% change in the population of the Rb cold atom cloud. The value of  cannot be
measured directly for our experiment configurations, but its range is estimated to be within ±4 mm/s, as estimated
according to the measured velocity of the atom cloud in the x, y directions through the time-of-flight (TOF)
method. Detailed illustration is in the Supplementary Materials.
To eliminate , we designed a two-photon detuning switching method. Two groups of dual-species interference
experiments are conducted with alternated sign of the two-photon detuning .  selected by the  transi-
tions are then reversed for these two configurations, and the signs of  are reversed too. An average of the de-
tected phases  for these two configurations will eliminate the residual phase . Numerical simulation of the
DSD interference process for the PSI fringe (“Simulation for the PSI fringe” section) is developed to calculate the
phase error elimination ratio of this method. We set the k -independent phase  to be 0.92 rad, and vary  from
−5 to 5 mm/s. Then, we calculate  for  and  and their average according to the actual experiment
parameters of Rb CAI. The results are shown in Fig. 3D. The residual phases for individual configurations exhibit
opposite slopes, with a maximum amplitude of 0.65 rad. However, the averaged residual phase has a maximum am-
plitude of 0.04 rad, which shows a residual phase suppression ratio about 15.
Long-term differential phase measurement
Using the two switching methods, we conducted a long-term WEP test with four experimental configurations. Over
a period of 280 days, we acquired more than 9700 pairs of interference fringes. The differential phases of each con-
figuration are averaged to 44 data points to reduce the noise. The averaged differential phases are denoted as ,
where i = 1,2 represents different sequences, and j = +,− represents different sign of . The averaged phase
 are also calculated. The calculated phases are shown in Fig. 4A. The differential phase bias is
reduced from a maximum value of −0.556 rad for individual configurations to an average value of −0.117 rad,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the switching methods and its critical role in obtaining a reliable WEP test
result.
ϕdet
ϕind ϕdet ϕdep
ϕind ϕres
vz0
vz0 ≠ 0
Nkeff± keff±
85 vz0
ϕres
δtp Nkeff± keff±
ϕres
ϕdet ϕres
eff ϕind vz
ϕres δtp > 0 δtp < 0
87
Δϕi,j
¯
δtp
Δϕavg = ∑i,j Δϕi,j/4
¯
¯
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 7 =====
The averaged differential phases  exhibit a SD of 0.046 rad. The long-term stability of the differential phase is
represented by the Allan deviation. It reaches 0.010 rad for the average of 10 data points, which represents an ef-
fective averaging time of 64 days, as shown in Fig. 4B. This indicates that the measured differential phases are sta-
ble over months, and reach a WEP test resolution of 2.8 × 10  according to Eq. 1.
Fig. 4. Long-term differential phase measurement and stability.
(A) Averaged differential phase  for the four measurement configurations and their average  over long-term measurement. The start-
ing date is 27 August 2024. The dots represent the values of experiment data. The solid lines represent the data’s average values. The dashed
areas represent the data’s SD. (B) Allan deviation of  over the experiment time t, demonstrating the stability of the differential phase mea-
surement. The dots represent the calculated Allan deviation. The dashed line represents the theoretical curve. It is calculated by dividing the
Allan deviation of the first data point by , where  is the effective time interval of a single differential phase.
Δϕi,j
¯ Δϕavg
¯
Δϕavg
¯
√t/tsin tsin
Δϕavg
¯
−8
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 8 =====
Error estimation
A detailed error estimation is essential for obtaining an accurate WEP test result. The major systematic error terms
are summarized in Table 1. In Fig. 2F, we observe skewness in the differential phase distribution. This is because we
fit a noisy fringe for both its spatial frequency and phase, which leads to an asymmetric distribution of the ex-
tracted phase. Through simulation, we find that the average of the fitted phase has an offset from its actual value.
A correction is therefore applied to estimate the differential phase more accurately. Besides the phase error in-
duced by data processing, the dominant uncertainty arises from a newly identified effect: imaging angle offset,
which results from the coupling between the centroid offset of the DSD interference fringes and the angular mis-
alignment of the imaging system. The centrifugal force and gravity gradient effects are both linked to the centroid
offset of the DSD interference loops, which is primarily induced by the residual velocity . The single-photon ac
Stark shift introduces a k -independent phase and is effectively suppressed by the two-photon detuning switching
method. Phase shifts induced by residual acceleration, the multiple-sideband effect of the Raman lasers, and un-
certainties in k  and T are all proportional to the local gravitational acceleration, which are suppressed by at least
three orders of magnitude compared to ground-based measurements. A detailed discussion of each systematic ef-
fect is provided in the “Error estimation” section. The measured average differential phase  after error correc-
tion is (−0.10 ± 0.17) rad. The Eötvös parameter  is then calculated to be (−2.7 ± 4.7) × 10  according to Eq.
1.
DISCUSSION
This paper presents the WEP test experiment conducted with the CSSAI. This work successfully transitions such
experiments from short-duration microgravity platforms to a permanent orbital laboratory. The instrument oper-
ated stably for over 280 days. We addressed the challenges posed by the rotation rate and residual acceleration of
the CSS platform. Methods were designed to suppress the differential phase errors. Error estimations are carried
out to give a test result with a precision of 4.7 × 10 , improving upon the best previous microgravity test result
based on atom interferometry by three orders of magnitude.
The methods developed in this paper are also beneficial for future space-based CAI WEP tests. By rotating the
spacecraft with a certain spin velocity, one can modulate the WEP signal and suppress the noise at the orbital fre-
quency (4). For this case, the proposed PSI interference scheme with optimized angle relation could be used to ex-
tract the interference phase and reduce the atom parameter induced phase error. The proposed two-photon detun-
ing switching method eliminates the k -independent phase and can improve the measurement accuracy for the
Raman or single-photon diffraction interference scheme (52). This study also provides a comprehensive error
analysis, identifying several newly discovered sources of phase error and highlighting differences between ground-
based and space-based experiments. This provides a reference for future space-based cold atom interferometer de-
sign and error analysis.
This result is primarily a proof-of-principle demonstration. Future development should focus on drag-free technol-
ogy (4, 53) to reduce the residual acceleration of the spacecraft, deeply cooled atom ensembles (34, 37, 46) such as
delta-kick-cooled ultracold quantum gases, and in-space demonstrations of longer interrogation times. All of these
are essential for future space-based CAI experiments such as STE-QUEST, AEDGE, SAGE, and others (43, 54–56).
Nonetheless, by reporting the first WEP test using an atom interferometer in orbit and validating key technologies
vz0
eff
eff
Δϕavg
¯
ηRb85,Rb87 −7
Table 1. Error budget for the differential phase.
Terms Differential phase (rad)
Measurement result −0.12 ± 0.01
Systematic effects Imaging angle offset 0.01 ± 0.16
Phase distribution skewness 0.01 ± 0.03
Residual acceleration (−2.1 ± 8.0) × 10−5
Expand for more 
−7
eff
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 9 =====
for quantum precision measurement in space, this work represents a substantial step toward the practical applica-
tion of space-based CAI, opening a new avenue for fundamental physics research in space.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design
The CSSAI operates in an intermittent mode on the free-floating platform for microgravity experiment within the
HMLR (45). For a single round of WEP test experiments, the total operation time is limited to 70 min to prevent
overheating of the payload. The first 13 min are dedicated to the startup process, which includes stabilization of
temperature control, achievement of a stable vacuum level, and automatic locking of the laser frequencies. The
subsequent 18 min are allocated to scientific experiments, during which the atom interference sequence is exe-
cuted periodically. WEP test experiments with four experimental configurations are performed alternately, and ap-
proximately 30 pairs of interference fringes are obtained per configuration per round. The final 39 min are reserved
for data transfer.
Analysis of the phase for the shearing fringe
Phase of the PSI interference fringe
The formula for shearing fringe when considering the acceleration, rotation and Raman mirror’s angle is (45)
(2)
where k  is the effective wave vector, T is the time interval between the Raman pulses, a  is the residual accelera-
tion along the z axis, Ω  is the rotation rate of the CSS around the x axis, and θ  and θ  are the angles of the
Raman laser beam along the x axis at the time of the first and third Raman laser pulses, relative to its angle at the
time of the second Raman laser pulse. r  and v  are the position and velocity of the atom at the time of the 1st
Raman laser pulse.
When  and  have the following relationship (45),
(3)
the decoherent effect induced by the atom cloud’s distribution is eliminated, where t  is the time delay between
the last Raman laser pulse and the detection laser pulse. The shearing fringe has the following form (45)
(4A)
(4B)
where R  = r  − v (2T + t ) is the position of the atom at the detection time.  is the optimized spatial frequency.
When the relation of Eq. 3 is not exactly fulfilled and has an angle offset , then both the phase and
the spatial frequency have to be modified.
(5A)
(5B)
ϕ = keffazT 2 + keff [2ΩxvyT 2 + θx,1ry + θx,3 (ry + 2vyT )]
eff z
x x,1 x,3
y y
θx,1 θx,3
θx,1 = θxo,1 = −tdetθx,3 + 2 Ωx T 2
2 T + tdet
det
ϕ = fyoRy
fyo = 2keff
2T + tdet
(θx,3T + ΩxT 2)
y y y det fyo
Δθx = θx,1 − θxo,1
ϕ = fyRy + keffα (βρy0 − vy0ttot)Δθx
fy = fyo + keff ( trel
ttot
+ α) Δ θx
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 10 =====
where  and ,  is the time from atom release to the first Raman pulse,
 is the total time. ,  are the distribution widths of the position and velocity of the atom
cloud.  and  are the initial position and initial velocity of the atom cloud.
Differential phase of the PSI interference fringe
For the dual-species atom interferometer WEP test experiment, the fluorescence detection times for the two iso-
topes are different, denoted as  and . This will lead to different ideal angles  according to Eq. 3.
Therefore, we use a time  midway between  and  to set the angle of  according to Eq. 3. Then, the
modified phase of Eq. 5 is denoted as , where i = 1,2 for Rb and Rb isotopes and j = 1,2 for detection times
 and . The differential phase  for the case where Rb is detected before Rb, and  for the case
where Rb is detected before Rb are
(6A)
(6B)
After derivation,  has the form
(7)
where, , , , , ,  are defined parameters with i = 1,2 for Rb and Rb isotopes and j = 1,2 for de-
tection times  and .  is the differential spatial frequency with . The zero point of R  is
at the position of the rotation axis of the tilt mirror, and  is the fitting position of the shearing fringe from this
zero point, as shown in Fig. 3A.  has similar form.
The average differential phase  for  and  are
(8)
After derivation,  has the form
(9)
Two features can be seen for . First, the phase term  is eliminated due to the fluorescence detection
switching. Second, if the two atom clouds have identical distributions, that is , , ,
, then the phase error of  is completely suppressed according to Eq. 9. If the distributions of the
atom clouds are not the same, residual phase error exists.
Error estimation for the differential phase
Actual experimental parameters are used to calculate the differential phase errors. The value of  is calculated
through the Raman laser’s single-photon detuning. The distributions of atom clouds are calculated through the
fluorescence images and the TOF measurement. The angle of piezo tilt mirror is calculated through its control volt-
ages and the calibrated angle coefficient (45). The timing sequence is determined by its set values. The uncertainty
of position of the atom cloud  and the fitting position offset  are restricted by the uncertainty of it coordinate
origin, which is the position of the rotation axis of the tilt mirror. By substituting these parameters into Eq. 9, the
α = ttot−trel
ttot
⋅ σρy
2
σvy
2ttot2+σρy
2 β = σvy
2ttot2/σρy
2 trel
ttot = trel + 2T + tdet σρy σvy
ρy0 vy0
tdet,1 tdet,2 θxo,1
tdet tdet,1 tdet,2 θx,1
ϕ (i, j) 85 87
tdet,1 tdet,2 Δϕ1 85 87 Δϕ2
87 85
Δϕ1 = ϕ (1, 1) − ϕ (2, 2)
Δϕ2 = ϕ (1, 2) − ϕ (2, 1)
Δϕ1
Δϕ1 = keff [α1,1 (β1,1ρ1,y0 − v1,y0ttot,1)Δθx,1 − α2,2 (β2,2ρ2,y0 − v2,y0ttot,2)Δθx,2]
+keffΔfyy0 + keff [(trel/ttot,1 + α1,1)Δθx,1 − (trel/ttot,2 + α2,2)Δθx,2]y0
αi,j βi,j ρi,y0 vi,y0 ttot,j  Δθx,j 85 87
tdet,1 tdet,2 Δf Δfy = fyo,1 − fyo,2 y
y0
Δϕ2
Δϕavg Δϕ1 Δϕ2
Δϕavg = (Δϕ1 + Δϕ2)/2
Δϕavg
Δϕavg = 1
2 keff({[α1,1 (β1,1ρ1,y0 − v1,y0ttot,1) − α2,1 (β2,1ρ2,y0 − v2,y0ttot,1)]Δθx,1
+ [α1,2 (β1,2ρ1,y0 − v1,y0ttot,2) − α2,2 (β2,2ρ2,y0 − v2,y0ttot,2)]Δθx,2}
+ [(α1,1 − α2,1)Δθx,1 + (α1,2 − α2,2)Δθx,2]y0)
Δϕavg keffΔfyy0
α1,j = α2,j β1,j = β2,j ρ1,y0 = ρ2,y0
v1,y0 = v2,y0 Δϕavg
keff
ρy0 y0
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 11 =====
differential phases are calculated and are shown in Table 2. The calculated value for  is (0.00 ± 0.47) rad. The
majority uncertainties come from the  and , where the spatial frequency difference couples to the position un-
certainty and contributes phase uncertainty. The calculated value for  is (−1.5 ± 3.7) × 10  rad. By applying
the fluorescence detection switching method, the uncertainty of the differential phase is suppressed by over 1000
times.
Simulation for the PSI fringe
To calculate phase shifts induced by effects that are difficult to analyze theoretically, we developed a simulation
program for the interference process. This program starts from the initial state of the atom with velocity distribu-
tion, solves the state evolution using the Schrödinger equation with spatial coupled phase such as the rotation and
tilted angles induced phase, and computes the shearing interference fringes in the position space. On the basis of
the obtained fringes, the phase shifts induced by various parameters can be calculated. Since the interference pro-
cesses for the two atomic species are similar, we introduce the procedure of the simulation for one species.
State evolution equation and Hamiltonian
The configuration of the Raman lasers for atom interferometry is shown in Fig. 5A.  and  are the incident
Raman lasers. They are linearly polarized with the same polarization direction.  and  are reflected with the
piezo tilt mirror. A quarter-wave plate before the mirror adjusts the Raman laser polarization so that the reflected
and incident beams form pairs with perpendicular linear polarizations. The reflected lasers are labeled as , . 
and  form the  Raman laser pair, and  and  form the  Raman laser pair.
The atom is modeled with three internal energy levels, labeled as , , and , where  and  are the two
ground states and  is the excited state. The Raman laser’s two-photon detuning is defined as ,
where  and  are the frequency of the Raman lasers and  is the frequency difference between state  and 
. In the general case, the atom has a momentum p. The  Raman laser drives the atom to a series of momentum
Δϕ1
ρy0 y0
Δϕavg −4
Table 2. Error estimation of the differential phase  and  based on actual experimental parameters.
Error source Parameters  (rad)  (rad)
Phase offset   1.2 × 10 −1.5 × 10
Phase offset uncertainty Raman wave vector (/m) k  = 16105796.82 ± 0.04 2.9 × 10 3.8 × 10
Time sequence ( μ s) t  = 43.243 ± 0.01 4.0 × 10 3.1 × 10
T = 50.128 ± 0.01
Δϕ1 Δϕavg
−3 −4
eff −12 −13
rel −7 −7
Expand for more 
Δ𝛟1 Δ𝛟avg
I1 I2
I1 I2
I1,r I2,r I1
I2,r keff+ I2 I1,r keff−
Fig. 5. Raman lasers and interferometer dynamics for the simulation model.
(A) The counterpropagating Raman laser pairs. (B) Momentum states coupled by the DSD Raman transitions. (C) Interference loops involving
the  and  states.∣ a, p, 0⟩ ∣ b, p, ±1⟩
∣ a⟩ ∣ b⟩ ∣ c⟩ ∣ a⟩ ∣ b⟩
∣ c⟩ δtp = f1 − f2 − fa,b
f1 f2 fa,b ∣ a⟩ ∣ b⟩
keff±
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 12 =====
states labeled  and , where n = 0,±1… and , as shown in Fig. 5B. For convenience,
we denote them as  and . The state amplitudes of the above states are denoted as  and
.
Following the derivation in (57), the state amplitudes can be calculated by the coupled equations
(10A)
(10B)
where,  are the effective Rabi frequency of the  Raman transition,  are the Raman laser’s phases,  is
the recoil frequency,  is the Doppler frequency shift. Eq. 10 could be expressed as
(11)
where .
Calculation of the PSI interference fringe
The Mach-Zehnder interferometer sequence consists of π /2 − π  − π /2 Raman pulses. The end state through these
pulses is calculated using
(12)
where  is the evolution operator.
Equation 12 describes the internal state evolution. However, it does not consider the decoherence effect between
different momentum states. Figure 5C shows the interference loops when considering the  and 
states. There are five exit ports for the interference loop. If Eq. 12 alone is used to calculate the final state, coher-
ence is assumed between states at different exit ports, as shown in Fig. 5C. However, the finite temperature of the
atom cloud causes decoherence between states from different ports. To address this issue, we use a state-grouping
method to calculate the population for each exit port individually (57). We calculate the state populations for each
port, and then calculate the total population over all ports.
To simulate the PSI spatial fringe, the velocity distribution of the atom cloud in the y and z directions is consid-
ered. The velocity distribution is discretized into individual velocity component. For each discrete velocity compo-
nent in the initial state, Eq. 12 associated with the grouping method is used to calculate the population of the end
state. The shearing phases described in Eq. 2 is added to the Raman laser’s phase during the calculation. The 2D
PSI interference fringes are a sum of the end state population over all velocity components. Typical fringes in the
y-z plane are shown in Fig. 6 (A and B). A pair of spatial fringes in the y direction and separated along the z direc-
tion are clearly shown.
∣ a, nℏkeff + p⟩ ∣ b, nℏkeff + p⟩ p = mv
∣ a, p, n⟩ ∣ b, p, n⟩ c (a, p, n)
c (b, p, n)
iℏ˙c (b, p, n) = ℏΩeff+
2 expi[(2n−1)δrec−δDop−δtp]t−iϕeff+c (a, p, n − 1)+
ℏΩeff−
2 expi[(−2n−1)δrec+δDop−δtp]t−iϕeff−c (a, p, n + 1)
iℏ˙c (a, p, n) = ℏΩeff−
2 exp−i[(−2n+1)δrec+δDop−δtp]t+iϕeff−c (b, p, n − 1)+
ℏΩeff+
2 exp−i[(2n+1)δrec−δDop−δtp]t+iϕeff+c (b, p, n + 1)
Ωeff± keff± ϕeff± δrec
δDop = keffv
iℏ˙φ (t) = Hφ (t)
φ (t) = ∑n c (a, p, n) ∣ a, p, n⟩ + c (b, p, n) ∣ b, p, n⟩
φend (t) = Uπ/2UπUπ/2φint (t)
U = e−iH/ℏ
∣ a, p, 0⟩ ∣ b, p, ±1⟩
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 13 =====
To extract the fringe phase, the 2D population is averaged along the z-direction to obtain the 1D shearing fringe, as
shown in Fig. 6 (C and D). By fitting these curves with a model of Gaussian envelope modulated by sinusoidal
fringe, we can calculate the phase and also other parameters such as the fringe contrast and spatial frequency.
Phase shifts induced by various parameters, such as AC Stark shift, atom cloud velocity, rotation, etc., can be
calculated.
Error estimation
Phase distribution skewness
In the fringe fitting process, we simultaneously fit the spatial frequency and phase. We performed simulations (see
the Supplementary Materials). For simulated fringes with zero phase and spatial frequency and signal-to-noise ra-
tio similar to those of the actual fringes, notable skewness is observed in the fitted phase distribution. The average
and median of the fitted phase from the simulated fringes are (31 ± 5) mrad and (1 ± 5) mrad, respectively. The me-
dian phase provides a more accurate estimate of the true phase. We therefore adopt the median phase as the esti-
mated phase and take the difference between the median and the average as the phase error. We then calculated
the average and median differential phases and their differences for the actual data from the four experimental
configurations used in the WEP test, yielding a differential phase correction of (0.01 ± 0.03) rad, as listed in Table 1.
The calculation process and results are presented in the Supplementary Materials.
Imaging angle offset
The DSD interference forms a pair of shearing fringes separated in the z direction. If the populations of the two
fringes differ, then the centroid of the fringe is not coincident with its geometric center in the z direction. For a
value of = 4 mm/s, the calculated centroid offset  is approximately 1.6 mm. If the imaging system has an angle
Fig. 6. Simulation result of the point-source interferometer (PSI) fringes.
(A and B) Simulated 2D interference fringes in the y-z plane for the end states  and . (C and D) The corresponding 1D spatial fringes ob-
tained by integrating the 2D population distributions along the z direction. The simulation parameters are: atom cloud temperature 6.7 μ K,
t  = 43 ms, T = 50 ms, t  = 40 ms, τ  = 30 μ s, and  = 69 kHz. = −0.0011 rad/s, = −93 μ rad, and  = 188 μ rad. The initial velocity of
atom cloud  is set to 4 mm/s.
∣ a⟩ ∣ b⟩
rel det δtp Ωx θx,1 θx,3
vz0
vz0 zfri
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 14 =====
offset θ  in the z direction, it will induce a phase offset of . For the dual-interference fringe, a centroid
offset difference  will cause a differential phase offset, , where  is the averaged spatial fre-
quency. This phase shift could not be suppressed by the proposed switching methods. Considering the uncertainty
of the sign of , and the installation uncertainty of the imaging system, the estimated differential phase is
(0.00 ± 0.16) rad. Detailed illustration is in the Supplementary Materials.
Imaging angle offset in the x-y plane will also induce differential phase error. The initial velocities of the dual atom
clouds in the x-y plane are not exactly the same due to the imperfections of the experimental parameters. It will
cause an x-direction difference  of the dual-species interference fringes center. If the imaging system has a rota-
tion angle  in the x-y plane, it will cause a differential phase offset .  is measured through the
2D interference fringe and is found to be  = (−0.034 ± 0.011) rad. The value of  is measured through a method
that rotates the image angle of the 2D fringe image in x-y plane, and is found to be −0.175 mm. Detailed illustra-
tion is in the Supplementary Materials. The induced differential phase is calculated to be (0.009 ± 0.003) rad.
Taking into account the two imaging misalignment effects, the induced differential phase is (0.01 ± 0.16) rad.
Acceleration
The differential phase arising from residual acceleration is given by , where  is the differential
effective wave vector and  denotes the residual acceleration measured by a classical accelerometer.  is six or-
ders lower than , which means the WEP test precision induced by the residual acceleration is also suppressed by
the same order. The acceleration is measured by a classical accelerometer. The measured residual acceleration  is
(2.7 ± 0.6) × 10  m/s  during the WEP test experiment, and the accelerometer has a zero bias of ±10  m/s . The
synthetic residual acceleration value is (2.7 ± 10.0) × 10  m/s , and its induced differential phase is
(−2.1 ± 8.0) × 10  rad.
Rotation and piezo tilt mirror
Rotation and the tilt angle of the piezo tilt mirror can induce a residual differential phase, even after applying the
detection switching method. The derived formula for their influence is illustrated in the “Experimental design”
section. By substituting actual experimental parameters, the calculated contribution of  for this effect is
(−1.5 ± 3.7) × 10  rad. The differential phase uncertainty is mainly caused by the uncertainties of the position of
the atom clouds and the fit position  relative to the position of the tilt mirror’s rotation axis. The rotation will
also cause centrifugal force. The induced differential phase is , where
 is the centroid position difference of the Rb and Rb interference loops. This centroid
position offset is mainly caused by the  induced interference loop asymmetry. If  is 4 mm/s, the calculated 
is 0.7 mm. Considering the uncertainty of  of the two cold atom clouds, the induced differential phase is
(0.0 ± 7.4) × 10  rad.
Single-photon light shift
The CSSAI uses electro-optic phase modulation to generate laser sidebands that serve as the Raman lasers (58).
The ratios of the sidebands are monitored by an F-P cavity. According to the measured sideband ratios, the total
power of the Raman lasers, and the single-photon detuning of the Raman lasers, the single-photon light shifts 
are calculated to be −27.7 and 38.4 kHz for Rb and Rb. These frequency shifts were verified by in-orbit Raman
transition spectroscopy measurements.
 induced phase is k -independent for each interference loop of DSD. It causes residual phase  only when the
interference loops are asymmetric. The residual phase is calculated to be proportional to  and . Because 
of the two isotopes have opposite signs, the contribution of  induced by this effect will be maximum when 
of the two atom clouds have the same sign. By applying the two-photon detuning switching method, the induced
differential phase could be suppressed to some extent.
 induced phase is related to the Raman laser’s profile and also the expansion of the cold atom clouds, and it will
imprint phase aberration on the 2D-shearing fringe. It is difficult to obtain the analytical derivation. We carried out
simulation calculation to obtain the shearing fringe and evaluate the resulted phase shift.  of the two atom
clouds are both set to 4 mm/s. For the cases of positive and negative two-photon detuning, the calculated differen-
z ϕ = fspaθzzfri
Δzfri Δϕ = f spaθz Δ zfri
¯ f spa
¯
vz0
Δx
θrot Δϕ = f spaθrotΔx
¯ θrot
θrot Δx
Δϕ = ΔkeffazT 2 Δkeff
az Δkeff
keff
az
−4 2 −3 2
−4 2
−5
Δϕavg
¯
−4
y0
Δϕ = −keffωx
2ΔzintT 2
Δzint = zint,Rb85 − zint,Rb87 85 87
vz0 vz0 zint
vz0
−5
δspls
85 87
δspls eff ϕres
δspls vz0 δspls
Δϕavg
¯ vz0
δspls
vz0
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 15 =====
tial phases are 0.057 and −0.076 rad for the two cases. The induced averaged differential phase is −0.01 rad.
Considering the uncertainty of the sign of , the induced phase for  is (0.0 ± 1.0) × 10  rad.
Two-photon light shift
The two-photon light shift  arises from off-resonant Raman transitions. For the DSD interference process, the
two-photon detuning is nonzero. When the k  Raman transition is in resonance to an atom ensemble with a cer-
tain velocity distribution, the k  Raman transition is off-resonance to this atom ensemble, and vice versa.  is
calculated through the effective Rabi frequency and the two-photon detuning (59). At the free fall condition on
ground,  induced phase is mainly induced by the gravity induced Doppler frequency shift, and is a kind of k -
dependent phase (59). However, under microgravity condition, the gravity-induced Doppler frequency changing is
absent,  induced phase is found to be k -independent. Similar to the single-photon light shift case, the in-
duced residual phase exists only when the DSD interference loop is asymmetric. We set  for both atom clouds to
have a magnitude of 4 mm/s but with opposite sign to maximize the induced differential phase. For the cases of
positive and negative two-photon detuning, the calculated differential phases are −2.0 and −2.6 mrad. Considering
the uncertainty of the sign of , the induced differential phase is (0.0 ± 2.3) × 10  rad.
Magnetic field
For the DSD interference, the magnetic field induced phase shift is , where  is the second
order Zeeman frequency shift coefficient, B  = 504 mGal is bias magnetic field, γ  is its gradient, and  is the mass
of rubidium. γ  is evaluated on ground and has an uncertainty of (0.0 ± 5.6) mG/m (45). This phase shift is k  de-
pendent. The induced differential phase is (0.0 ± 3.8) × 10  rad.
Other effects
The gravity gradient induced differential phase is , where  is the zz component of the gravity
gradient tensor, which has a value of (−2.582 ± 0.017) × 10  s  according to the CSS’s altitude.  is the centroid
difference of the dual atom interference loops, which is the same as introduced in the centrifugal force effect. This
effect induces a differential phase error of (0.0 ± 1.5) × 10  rad.
The CSSAI uses sidebands generated by phase modulation as the Raman laser pairs. This can induce a phase shift
due to the multiple-sideband effect (60). This phase is proportional to the value of gravity. Under microgravity con-
dition in the CSS, this phase is suppressed by at least three orders compared to the case on the ground. Under ac-
tual experiment parameters, the induced phase for Rb and Rb are ±2.0 × 10  rad and ± 1.0 × 10  rad. The in-
duced differential phase is (0.0 ± 2.2) × 10  rad.
The wavefront aberration of the Raman laser will cause distortion of the shearing fringe, and induce phase shift.
Because the cold atom clouds overlap and have similar expansion rates, the induced phases are common for some
extent for the dual-species interference fringes (61). The reflecting mirror of the Raman laser has an aberration
better than λ /10. To estimate the induced differential phase, we numerically generate 10 random wavefronts with
λ /10 peak-to-valley distortion for the mirror and calculate the induced differential phase. The result is
(0.0 ± 1.2) × 10  rad.
The uncertainty of the Raman laser’s frequency and the interference time sequence will induce phase errors, which
are proportional to the value of gravity. These phase errors are suppressed greatly due to the microgravity condi-
tion in the CSS. The laser frequency has an accuracy better than 1 MHz. The interference time sequence is refer-
enced to a temperature-controlled crystal oscillator (TCXO), which has a frequency accuracy better than 1 part per
million. The induced differential phase errors from these two effects are less than 1 μ rad and can therefore be
neglected.
Acknowledgments
Funding:
This work was supported by Space Application System of China Manned Space Program second batch of the
Scientific Experiment Project grant 04-3-02, Space Application System of China Manned Space Program grant JC2-
0576, Quantum Science and Technology-National Science and Technology Major Project grant 2021ZD0300603,
vz0 Δϕavg
¯
−2
δtpls
eff+
eff− δtpls
δtpls eff
δtpls eff
vz0
vz0 −3
ϕ = 2π αB0γℏkeffT 2/mRb α
0 mRb
eff
−4
Δϕ = keffTzzΔzintT 2 Tzz
−6 −2 Δzint
−4
85 87 −5 −5
−5
−2
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 16 =====
Quantum Science and Technology-National Science and Technology Major Project grant 2021ZD0300604, Hubei
Provincial Science and Technology Major Project grant ZDZX2022000001, Defense Industrial Technology
Development Program grant JCKY2022130C012, National Natural Science Foundation of China grant 12174403,
National Natural Science Foundation of China grant W2412045, National Natural Science Foundation of China
grant U25D8014, Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province grant 2022CFA096, Strategic Priority Research
Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences grant XDA0520501, and Strategic Priority Research Program of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences grant XDB1070103.
Author contributions:
Conceptualization: X.C., J.W., and M.-S.Z. Methodology: X.C., D.F.Z., and J.-T.L. Software: X.C., D.-F.Z., and J.-T.L.
Validation: X.L., J.-Q.Z., L.Q., H.-Y.S., D.-F.G., B.T., L.Z., R.-B.L., and Y.-B.W. Formal analysis: X.C., D.-F.Z., and J.-
T.L. Investigation: X.C., D.-F.Z., J.-T.L., W.-Z.W., W.-H.X., and J.-Y.W. Resources: M.-Z.A., L.Q., X.-X.G., Q.-F.C., Y.T.,
Z.-F.L., X.-H.Y., and S.-Q.W. Data curation: D.-F.Z, W.-Z.W., and W.-H.X. Writing–original draft: X.C. and D.-F.Z.
Writing–review and editing: X.C., J.W., and M.-S.Z. Visualization: X.C. and D.-F.Z. Supervision: X.C., J.W., and M.-
S.Z. Project administration: M.-S.Z., J.W., and H.-E.Z. Funding acquisition: X.C., J.-Q.Z., L.Z., J.W., and M.-S.Z.
Competing interests:
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data, code, and materials availability:
All data and code needed to evaluate and reproduce the results in the paper are present in the paper and/or the
Supplementary Materials. This study did not generate new materials.
Supplementary Materials
This PDF file includes:
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S6
Table S1
References
DOWNLOAD 2.21 MB
REFERENCES
1 M. S. Safronova, D. Budker, D. DeMille, D. F. J. Kimball, A. Derevianko, C. W. Clark, Search for new physics with atoms and molecules. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 90, 025008 (2018).
 GO TO REFERENCE • CROSSREF • WEB OF SCIENCE • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
2 S. Schlamminger, K. Y. Choi, T. A. Wagner, J. H. Gundlach, E. G. Adelberger, Test of the equivalence principle using a rotating torsion balance.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 041101 (2008).
 GO TO REFERENCE • CROSSREF • PUBMED • WEB OF SCIENCE • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
3 J. G. Williams, S. G. Turyshev, D. H. Boggs, Lunar laser ranging tests of the equivalence principle. Class. Quantum Grav. 29, 184004 (2012).
 GO TO REFERENCE • CROSSREF • WEB OF SCIENCE • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
4 P. Touboul, G. Métris, M. Rodrigues, Y. André, Q. Baghi, J. Bergé, D. Boulanger, S. Bremer, P. Carle, R. Chhun, B. Christophe, V. Cipolla, T.
Damour, P. Danto, H. Dittus, P. Fayet, B. Foulon, C. Gageant, P.-Y. Guidotti, D. Hagedorn, E. Hardy, P.-A. Huynh, H. Inchauspe, P. Kayser, S. Lala,
C. Lämmerzahl, V. Lebat, P. Leseur, F. Liorzou, M. List, F. Löffler, I. Panet, B. Pouilloux, P. Prieur, A. Rebray, S. Reynaud, B. Rievers, A. Robert, H.
Selig, L. Serron, T. Sumner, N. Tanguy, P. Visser, MICROSCOPE Mission: First results of a space test of the equivalence principle. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 119, 231101 (2017).
 SEE ALL REFERENCES • CROSSREF • PUBMED • WEB OF SCIENCE • GOOGLE SCHOLAR
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 17 =====
SHOW ALL REFERENCES
eLetters (0)
eLetters is a forum for ongoing peer review. eLetters are not edited, proofread, or indexed, but they are screened. eLetters should
provide substantive and scholarly commentary on the article. Neither embedded figures nor equations with special characters can
be submitted, and we discourage the use of figures and equations within eLetters in general. If a figure or equation is essential,
please include within the text of the eLetter a link to the figure, equation, or full text with special characters at a public repository
with versioning, such as Zenodo. Please read our Terms of Service before submitting an eLetter.
LOG IN TO SUBMIT A RESPONSE
No eLetters have been published for this article yet.
CURRENT ISSUE
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 18 =====
A Li metal-SiO  hybrid anode enabling synergistic plating/alloying dual-mechanism lithium storagex
BY CHAO-HUI ZHANG,  JUAN ZHANG,  ET AL.
Impaired liver-muscle lactate metabolism causes sarcopenia via lactic acidosis in skeletal muscle in mice
BY TAKAHIRO EGUCHI,  NOZOMI HAYASHIJI,  ET AL.
Amplification of RNA for identification of Zika and HCV in whole blood
BY JONGWON LIM,  HANKEUN LEE,  ET AL.
ADVERTISEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 19 =====
Sign up for ScienceAdviser
Get Science’s award-winning newsletter with the latest news, commentary, and research, free to your inbox daily.
SUBSCRIBE 
LATEST NEWS
Outrage greets NIH pact that could funnel biodefense research funds to Pentagon
SCIENCEINSIDER 5 SEP 2026
Massive herbarium merger rescues century-old plant collection
SCIENCEINSIDER 4 SEP 2026
Bernie Sanders aims to ban AI ‘superintelligence.’ But experts can’t agree on what the term means
SCIENCEINSIDER 4 SEP 2026
Are these killer whales out for revenge on humans—or just trying to play?
NEWS 4 SEP 2026
To prevent forest fires, Trump wants to end a road-building ban. Scientists are skeptical
SCIENCEINSIDER 4 SEP 2026
NSF initiative seeks tech fixes for Colorado River water crisis
SCIENCEINSIDER 4 SEP 2026
ADVERTISEMENT
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 20 =====
RELATED JOBS
MORE JOBS ▶
Ignite Scholar, Research Assistant Professor
Northeast Ohio Medical University
Rootstown, Ohio
Nuclear Science Division Director
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, California
Faculty Positions (Information & Mathematical Science) in ShanghaiTech University
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai (CN)
RECOMMENDED
Interleaved atom interferometry for high-sensitivity inertial measurements
RESEARCH ARTICLE DECEMBER 2018
Twin Matter Waves for Interferometry Beyond the Classical Limit
REPORT NOVEMBER 2011
Electrically driven optical interferometry with spins in silicon carbide
RESEARCH ARTICLE NOVEMBER 2019
Emergence of a Measurement Basis in Atom-Photon Scattering
REPORT MARCH 2013
 TECHNOLOGY 30 SEP 2026
The future of 3D cell models: Charting the path to 2031
SPONSORED  WEBINAR
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 21 =====
View full text | Download PDF
ADVERTISEMENT
FOLLOW US
    󡀆     GET OUR NEWSLETTER
NEWS
All News
ScienceInsider
News Features
Subscribe to News from Science
News from Science FAQ
About News from Science
Donate to News
CAREERS
Careers Articles
Find Jobs
Employer Hubs
COMMENTARY
Opinion
Analysis
Blogs
JOURNALS
Science
Science Advances
Science Immunology
Science Robotics
Science Signaling
Science Translational Medicine
Science Partner Journals
AUTHORS & REVIEWERS
Information for Authors
Information for Reviewers
LIBRARIANS
Manage Your Institutional Subscription
Library Admin Portal
Request a Quote
Librarian FAQs
ADVERTISERS
Advertising Kits
Custom Publishing Info
Post a Job
RELATED SITES
AAAS.org
AAAS Communities
EurekAlert!
Science in the Classroom
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF

===== PAGE 22 =====
ABOUT US
Leadership
Work at AAAS
Prizes and Awards
HELP
FAQs
Access and Subscriptions
Order a Single Issue
Reprints and Permissions
TOC Alerts and RSS Feeds
Contact Us
© 2026 American Association for the Advancement of Science. All rights reserved. AAAS is a partner of HINARI, AGORA, OARE, CHORUS, CLOCKSS, CrossRef and COUNTER. Science Advances
eISSN 2375-2548.
Terms of Service  |  Privacy Policy  |  Cookie Preferences  |  Accessibility
This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. To learn
more, view the following link: Privacy Policy
PDF
