===== PAGE 1 =====
Consciousness came before life
The fundamental cause of evolution
8th May 2024
 cite
Stuart Hameroff | Professor of Astrobiology, Psychology and Anesthesiology, and Director of the Center
for Consciousness Studies at The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.
Anirban Bandyopadhyay | Principal Research Scientist at the National Institute for Materials Science
(NIMS) in Tsukuba, Japan.
Dante Lauretta | Regents Professor of Planetary Science and Cosmochemistry, and Director of the
Arizona Astrobiology Center, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona. He led NASA’s OSIRIS REx
mission to Asteroid Bennu.
3,022 words
Read time: approx. 15 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
Most scientists believe that consciousness came after life, as a product of evolution.
But observations of extraterrestrial organic material, along with Roger Penrose and
Stuart Hameroff’s quantum theory of consciousness, provide reason to believe that
consciousness came before life. In fact, argue Hameroff and his collaborators,
consciousness may have been what made evolution and life possible in the first place.
You can see Stuart Hameroff live, debating in ‘Darwin vs Consciousness’
alongside biologist Denis Noble and philosopher Antonella Tramacere at the
upcoming HowTheLightGetsIn Festival on May 24th-27th in Hay-on-Wye.
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
Penrose’s theory
of consciousness
supported by new
quantum evidence
New studies
suggest
consciousness
exists in
organisms
without brains
Patterns are alive,
and we are living
patterns
Kierkegaard, Bob
Dylan, and how to
become yourself
Related Videos:
Consciousness
has evolutionary
roots, with Eva
Jablonka
This article is presented in association with Closer To Truth, an esteemed
partner for the 2024 HowTheLightGetsIn Festival.
 
Most scientists and philosophers believe that life came before consciousness. Life
appeared on Earth about 3.8 billion years ago; consciousness and feelings, it’s said,
evolved later due to complex biological information processing, perhaps only recently
in brains with language and tool-making abilities. In fact, though, there’s good reason
to think that consciousness preceded life, and was central to making life and evolution
possible.
SUGGESTED VIEWING
Electricity creates consciousness
With Nick Lane
What is life? It is often described as its functions: metabolism, adaptation,
reproduction, etc. But non-biological systems can have similar functions, for example,
oceanic hydrothermal vents can metabolize, transform energy and synthesize
chemicals, weather and climate systems adapt to changes in solar radiation, volcanic
activity, and other natural factors, and a seed crystal in a solution can lead to the
formation of more crystals with the same lattice structure, essentially reproducing
itself. In the 19th century “vitalists” proposed life was a living field, force, or élan vital,
but vitalism was eclipsed by molecular biology and genetics.
Erwin Schrödinger suggested that a form of “quantum vitalism” accounted for life’s
unitary oneness, and Herbert Fröhlich later proposed that quantum coherent
vibrational modes, similar to those in a laser, could play a central role in various
biological processes (“Fröhlich coherence”). The idea is that in a crystal-like structure,
laser-like coherent vibrations could be driven by small random changes in
temperature or energy.
___
Penrose argues that consciousness is made of collapses of
quantum superpositions into definite states
___
This was proven by Anirban Bandyopadhyay’s group for biological microtubules – self-
assembling cylindrical lattice polymers of the protein tubulin. Microtubules dynamically
organize the interiors of all animal and plant cells, as part of the cell’s structural
cytoskeleton, and appear also to serve as its nervous system and memory bank.
Anirban’s team sent low-power electromagnetic signals of varying frequency into
microtubules and measured their conductance. They found distinctive self-similar


===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Free will is real
Consciousness is
quantum
mechanical, with
Stuart Hameroff
Freedom and fate
resonance conductance patterns where each conductance response is grouped into
sets of three, and then these groups are themselves grouped into larger sets of three.
These “triplets-of-triplets” repeat in microtubules every three orders of magnitude, in
kilohertz, megahertz, gigahertz and terahertz. 
The “triplets-of-triplets” are phase shifted to make a unique structure called a “time
crystal” (first described for biology by Arthur Winfree in the 1960s). In ordinary
crystals, like salt or quartz, atoms are arranged in a repeating spatial pattern. But in a
time crystal patterns also repeat in time, in a regular, repeating cycle returning to the
same positions over and over. This movement happens without using energy – it's a
stable, perpetual motion at the atomic level.
SUGGESTED READING
The most complex thing in the
universe
By Marina Cortês
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers

===== PAGE 4 =====
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
freedom trap with Sophie Scott-Brown too
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
