===== PAGE 1 =====
Draft version October 29, 2025
Typeset using LATEXdefaultstyle in AASTeX7
The Local Distance Network: a community consensus report on
the measurement of the Hubble constant at∼1% precision
H0DN Collaboration
Stefano Casertano,1 Gagandeep Anand
 ,1 Richard I. Anderson
 ,2 Rachael Beaton
 ,1
Anupam Bhardwaj
 ,3 John P. Blakeslee
 ,4 Paula Boubel
 ,5 Louise Breuval
 ,6 Dillon Brout
 ,7
Michele Cantiello
 ,8 Mauricio Cruz Reyes
 ,2 Geza Cs¨ornyei
 ,9 Thomas de Jaeger
 ,10 Suhail Dhawan
 ,11
Eleonora Di Valentino
 ,12 Llu´ıs Galbany
 ,13, 14 H´ector Gil-Mar´ın
 ,15, 16, 14 Dariusz Graczyk
 ,17
Caroline Huang
 ,18 Joseph B. Jensen
 ,19 Pierre Kervella
 ,20, 21 Bruno Leibundgut
 ,22 Bastian Lengen
 ,2
Siyang Li
 ,23, 24 Lucas Macri
 ,25 Emre ¨Oz¨ulker
 ,12 Dominic W. Pesce
 ,18, 26 Adam Riess
 ,1, 23
Martino Romaniello
 ,22 Khaled Said
 ,27 Nils Sch¨oneberg
 ,28, 29 Dan Scolnic
 ,30 Teresa Sicignano
 ,22, 31, 32
Dorota M. Skowron
 ,33 Syed A. Uddin
 ,34, 35 Licia Verde
 36, 15 And Antonella Nota
 37
1Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
2Institute of Physics, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ ed´ erale de Lausanne (EPFL), Observatoire de Sauverny, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland
3Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Post Bag 4, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411 007, India
4NSF NOIRLab, 950 N Cherry Ave, Tucson AZ 85719
5Research School of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Australian National University, Cotter Road, Weston Creek ACT 2611, Australia
6European Space Agency (ESA), ESA Office, Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
7Boston University Departments of Astronomy and Physics, 725 Commonwealth Ave, Boston USA
8INAF – Astronomical Observatory of Abruzzo, Via Maggini, 64100 Teramo, Italy
9Max-Planck-Institute for Astrophysics, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 1, 85741 Garching, Germany
10Sorbonne Universit´ e, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique Nucl´ eaire et de Hautes Energies, 75252 Paris, France
11School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
12School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, University of Sheffield, Hounsfield Road, Sheffield S3 7RH, United Kingdom
13Institute of Space Sciences (ICE-CSIC), Campus UAB, Carrer de Can Magrans, s/n, E-08193 Barcelona, Spain.
14Institut d’Estudis Espacials de Catalunya (IEEC), 08860 Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain
15Institut de Ci` encies del Cosmos (ICCUB), Universitat de Barcelona (UB), c. Mart´ ı i Franqu` es, 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
16Departament de F´ ısica Qu` antica i Astrof´ ısica, Universitat de Barcelona, Mart´ ı i Franqu` es 1, E08028 Barcelona, Spain
17Polish Academy of Sciences, Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center, Department of Astrophysics,
ul. Rabia´ nska 8, 87-100 Toru´ n, Poland
18Center for Astrophysics|Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
19Department of Physics, Utah Valley University, 800 West University Parkway, Orem, UT 84058, USA
20LIRA, Observatoire de Paris, Universit´ e PSL, Sorbonne Universit´ e, Universit´ e Paris Cit´ e, CY Cergy Paris Universit´ e,
CNRS, 92190 Meudon, France
21French-Chilean Laboratory for Astronomy, IRL 3386, CNRS and U. de Chile, Casilla 36-D, Santiago, Chile
22European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Strasse 2, 85748 Garching, Germany
23Department of Physics & Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218
24Department of Astronomy, University of California, Berkeley
25Department of Physics & Astronomy, College of Sciences, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley,
1201 W University Blvd, Edinburg TX 78539
26Black Hole Initiative at Harvard University, 20 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
27School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
28University Observatory, Faculty of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨ at, Scheinerstr. 1, 81677 Munich, Germany
29Excellence Cluster ORIGINS, Boltzmannstr. 2, 85748 Garching, Germany
30Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
31 Scuola Superiore Meridionale, Largo S. Marcellino 10, 80138 Napoli, Italy
32 INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Capodimonte, Salita Moiariello 16, 80131 Napoli, Italy
33Astronomical Observatory, University of Warsaw, Al. Ujazdowskie 4, 00-478 Warszawa, Poland
34 American Public University System, 111 W. Congress St., Charles Town, WV 25414, USA
35Center for Astronomy, Space Science and Astrophysics, Independent University, Bangladesh, Dhaka 1245, Bangladesh
36Instituci´ o Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avan¸ cats, Passeig de Llu´ ıs Companys, 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain
arXiv:2510.23823v1  [astro-ph.CO]  27 Oct 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
37International Space Science Institute, Hallerstrasse 6, 3012 Bern, Switzerland
ABSTRACT
The direct, empirical determination of the local value of the Hubble constant (H 0) has markedly ad-
vanced thanks to improved instrumentation, measurement techniques, and distance estimators. How-
ever, combining determinations from different estimators is non-trivial, due to their correlated cali-
brations and different analysis methodologies. Using covariance weighting and leveraging community
expertise, we constructed a rigorous and transparentDistance Networkto find a consensus value and
uncertainty for the locally-measured Hubble constant. A broad and comprehensive list of experts
across all relevant distance measurement domains were invited to critically review the available data
sets, spanning parallaxes, detached eclipsing binaries (DEB), masers, Cepheids, the Tip of the Red
Giant Branch (TRGB), Miras, carbon-rich AGB stars (JAGB), Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), Surface
Brightness Fluctuations (SBF), Type II supernovae (SNe II), the Fundamental Plane, and Tully-Fisher
relations. Before any calculations, the group voted for first-rank indicators to define a ‘baseline’ Dis-
tance Network. Other indicators were included to assess the robustness and sensitivity of the results.
We provide open-source software and data products to support full transparency and future extensions
of this effort. Our key conclusions are: 1) The localH 0 is robustly determined, with first-rank indicators
internally consistent within their uncertainties; 2) A covariance-weighted combination yields a relative
uncertainty of 1.1% (baseline) or 0.9% (all estimators); 3) The contribution from SNe Ia is consistent
across four current compilations of optical magnitudes or using NIR-only magnitudes; 4) Removing
either Cepheids or TRGB has minimal effect on the central value ofH 0; 5) Replacing SNe Ia with
galaxy-based indicators changesH 0 by less than 0.1 km s−1 Mpc−1, while doubling its uncertainty; 6)
The baseline result isH 0=73.50±0.81 km s−1 Mpc−1. Compared to early Universe+ΛCDM results,
our result differs by 7.1σfrom the CMB anisotropies within flat ΛCDM, 67.24±0.35 km s −1 Mpc−1
from Planck+SPT+ACT (Eq. (54) of E. Camphuis et al. 2025) and 5.0σfrom BBN+BAO within flat
ΛCDM from DESI DR2 (68.51±0.58 km s −1 Mpc−1; Tab. V of M. Abdul Karim et al. 2025). A net-
worked approach, such as presented here, is invaluable for enabling further progress in Hubble constant
measurements, providing much needed advances in accuracy and precision without overreliance on any
single method, sample or group.
Keywords:Hubble Constant (758) – Cosmology (343) – Distance measure (395)
1.INTRODUCTION
The current expansion rate of the Universe, quantified by the Hubble constant (H 0), is a cornerstone of modern
cosmology (see reviews by G. H. Jacoby et al. 1992; W. L. Freedman & B. F. Madore 2010, and references therein).
Over the past decade, increasingly precise measurements ofH 0 have revealed a striking and persistent discrepancy
between its value inferred from observations of the early Universe, such as the cosmic microwave background (CMB),
and its value measured directly in the local Universe using distance ladder methods. This disagreement, known as the
“Hubble Tension”, has persisted for a decade, exceeds the threshold for a statistical fluctuation, and has withstood
extensive scrutiny of both observational data and analysis techniques (see L. Verde et al. 2019; P. Shah et al. 2021; M.
Kamionkowski & A. G. Riess 2023; L. Verde et al. 2024, for recent reviews). As such, it poses a major challenge to
the standard ΛCDM cosmological model and may point to new physics (see E. Di Valentino et al. 2021, 2025), barring
the increasingly observationally disfavored possibility of multiple, independent, and unrecognized systematics. While
many distance indicators have been used to measure the local value ofH 0, few of these studies attempt to optimally
combine these measures, which would require properly accounting for their correlations. In addition, correlations
and/or redundant information offer a key advantage to ensure robustness. Rather than a single distance ladder, or
several parallel, partially correlated ladders, we show below that these measurements constitute a (stable) network:
the Local Distance Network. The study presented here is a comprehensive, community-wide effort in 2025 to construct
this Local Distance Network via a broad, collaborative effort.

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
1.1.The ISSI Bern Workshop setup and philosophy
Building a Local Distance Network requires expert knowledge across diverse astronomical disciplines. There is a
wide range of distance indicators with varying levels of maturity, confidence, and uncertainty, necessitating careful
consideration before employing them jointly. The various subsets of the astronomical community working on aspects
related to the Hubble Tension have interacted at different junctures and have a general understanding of each other’s
methodologies. However, accurately and reliably combining results while considering all inter-dependencies requires
a hands-on collaborative approach and a careful and thorough treatment, rooted in transparency, engagement, and
scientific discourse.
This was the underlying motivation and raison d’ˆ etre for the workshop 38 “What’s under the H0od?” held at the
International Space Sciences Institute (ISSI) in Bern, Switzerland, in March 2025. The goal of this workshop was
to arrive at a consensus set of ‘baseline’ and ‘variant’ datasets to include, to define statistically rigorous analysis
procedures that account for dataset covariance, and to begin developing the open access tools required to measureH 0
within a networked formalism. The Local Distance Network (Fig. 1) extends the distance ladder concept “horizontally”
by linking multiple, overlapping calibration paths. It combines the statistical advantages of consistently averaging the
contributions from multiple probes with the robustness to allow for the omission of any single probe. This is possible
because there are multiple indicators that can serve the same methodological role (e.g., different anchors, different
intermediate calibrators, different tracers of the Hubble flow, cf. Sect. 2.1.1), as well as some parts of the distance
network that require fewer connections or steps (megamaser distances, type II supernova modeling). This ambitious
program required assembling the leading experts in each of the relevant reserach areas. The workshop conveners sought
to leverage worldwide expertise across multiple tools as much as possible in selecting the∼40 in-person attendees
invited to participate in the ISSI workshop (see Section 6 for a list of attendees and their respective areas of expertise).
Attention was given to inviting representatives from the most active groups in the field, including competing groups
using similar or identical methods, in order to build consensus on how to consistently incorporate methods within the
network and evaluate the level of agreement, especially in cases considered contentious in the literature. 39 The group
thus assembled (i.e., we, the H 0DN collaboration) placed emphasis on the methodology of combining datasets (i.e.,
the “how-to”), rather than on the results themselves, which were understood to be subject to quality and consistency
checks (e.g.,χ 2 or residuals) and to be published irrespective of the resulting value ofH 0.
2.METHODOLOGY
2.1.The Local Distance Network
The goal of measuring accurate and precise distances well into the Hubble flow (D≳100 Mpc) to directly and
empirically determineH 0 requires the overlapping use of multiple techniques, a combination traditionally referred
to as a “distance ladder.” The primary need for this approach is that geometric distance measurements have been
limited in range (D≲10 Mpc, and most oftenD≲100 kpc), while long-range indicators, such as type-Ia supernovae
(SNe Ia), are too rare to provide enough examples within reach of geometric distances. Historically, measuringH 0
thus required a rather large number of methods and combinations of inhomogeneous data sets (e.g., W. L. Freedman
et al. 2001; A. Sandage et al. 2006). Significant improvements in precision and accuracy have since been achieved by
streamlining distance ladder setups, focusing on high-quality and maximally homogeneous data sets while maintaining
tight control of systematic errors by using the same instrument across rungs to cancel flux calibration offsets. An
example is the three-rung “SH0ES” distance ladder A. G. Riess et al. (2009a), which calibrates classical Cepheids
(henceforth: Cepheids) as standard candles using distances measured by geometrical methods (i.e., higher precision
MW parallaxes, detached eclipsing binaries in the Magellanic Clouds,the megamaser distance to NGC 4258), and, in
turn, calibrates SNe Ia luminosity using distances to their host galaxies measured using Cepheids observed exclusively
using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Finally, SNe Ia luminosity distances in the Hubble flow and their redshifts
determineH 0 (see Fig. 10 in A. G. Riess et al. 2016). Such streamlined approaches provided significant benefits in
terms of robustness and precision, in part because they avoided potentially correlated systematics, ultimately leading
to the Hubble tension as discussed today.
38 https://workshops.issibern.ch/hubble-constant/
39 Though the overall acceptance rate was high (>90%), several invitees were unable to attend or declined participation in the workshop.
Following the inclusive spirit of the workshop, opportunities for remote participation via Zoom and asynchronous participation by e-mail
were offered in such cases. In the case where a group declined to participate in any format, their published data were still included to
preserve their scientific contributions.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
DEB
Parallax
Masers
Cepheids
TRGB SBF
FP
SNeIa
SNeII
TF
SNeII
EPM
JAGB
Miras
SH0ES
CCHP/EDD
Pop-II
MCP
Pop-I
CF4
Pop-Mix
DESI
adh0cc
The Local Distance Network to H0
Figure 1.Conceptual overview of the Local Distance Network, a many routes approach. Different methods for distance
determination may connect the absolute scale determined by geometric means toH 0. A non-exhaustive list of baseline linkages
discussed in the literature or the paper is labeled on the right. Links to geometric distances provided by Masers, DEB, and
Parallax are indicated as available in our analysis. Background rectangles in orange, light blue, and gray indicate where Rung 1,
Rung 2, and Rung 3 of a traditional distance ladder would fall. Unlabeled tickmarks represent Groups (Fornax & Virgo for the
TRGB to SBF, Coma for FP). Example references: A. G. Riess et al. (2022a, SH0ES), W. L. Freedman et al. (2025, CCHP),
G. S. Anand et al. (2021, EDD), G. S. Anand et al. (2024a, Pop-II), D. W. Pesce et al. (2020a, MCP), T. de Jaeger et al. (2022,
Pop-I), E. Kourkchi et al. (2020, CF4), K. Said et al. (2025, DESI), C. Vogl et al. (2025, adh0cc). Appendix C.1 replicates a
subset of these routes.
In recognition that the tension may be indicating something profound, greater reliability has been sought through an
increasing number of different methods, sources, and measurements. These provide multiple, interrelated constraints
for the same or different astrophysical sources, resulting in partially independent paths toH0. Many of these approaches
replace certain steps with alternative methods, sources, or calibrators. For this reason, we believe it is appropriate to
consider these tools in aggregate to comprise a “Distance Network,” illustrated schematically in Fig. 1, to better convey
the interdependence of these methods. While such a goal was considered “lofty” and potentially unreachable more
than a decade ago (cf. R. de Grijs 2013, and Fig. 1 therein, originally credited to R. Ciardullo 2006), the improvements
to the systematics of several distance measurement techniques—inspired not least by the Hubble tension—now provide
a wealth of robust information that allow to again “diversify” the base on which the local measurement ofH 0 rests.
The Distance Network provides two critical advantages on the path to a more accurate measurement ofH 0: robust-
ness (to reduce systematic errors) and statistical advantage (to reduce statistical uncertainties). Systematic errors can
be recognized by the redundancy of methods allowing for analyses that “leave one out.” At the same time, redundancy
offers the means to reduce statistical fluctuations through covariance-weighted averaging. Informally, method combi-
nation and robustness has been evaluated through the display of “whisker diagrams” which separate measurements
ofH 0 by the combination of techniques they employ. Intermediate measure comparisons have also been made, most
importantly by comparing multiple ways to measure distances to specific SN Ia hosts, each calibrated by the same
geometric source (e.g., Cepheids, TRGB, Miras, and JAGB), though these involve only a fraction of the available data
(A. G. Riess et al. 2024). Formal covariance-weighting and combining has been attempted for only a limited set of
indicators (A. G. Riess et al. 2022a).
In this paper, we introduce an approach to the Distance Network that obviates these shortcomings. By combining
existing measurementsat the component level, rather than in terms of the resulting value ofH 0, into a common,
statistically rigorous framework encompassing a broad range of methods, this approach yields a combined value ofH 0

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
with an uncertainty that reflects all available information. Within this framework, we will also be able to include or
exclude different subsets of measurements, thus identifying possible outliers. We will be able to inspect residuals at
different levels, verifying whether they are consistent with their stated accuracies.
2.1.1.Nomenclature and definitions
Given the intricate interrelations between different methods and measurements, and the complexity of the resulting
framework, we define at the outset a set of terms, following past usage as closely as possible, that we will use to
formulate our approach. The principles underlying the various methods alongside the datasets used are presented in
Sect. 3 and App. A.
Anchor:Any object, or collection of objects, whose distance is directly determined by geometric means, such as
parallax or measurements of orbiting systems, and is used to calibrate the distances of other indicators. Anchors
set the absolute scale of the Distance Network; all other distances, with a few exceptions (Section 3), are measured
relativeto this scale. Anchors used in this analysis include NGC 4258 (through Keplerian motion of circumnuclear
masers), the Magellanic Clouds (through detached eclipsing binaries, DEBs), and the collection of Milky Way
Cepheids (through trigonometric parallaxes). The Milky Way uniquely provides distances to individual objects
rather than a single extragalactic system, mostly measured by the ESAGaiamission, which are then combined
into a single calibration of the Leavitt Law for Galactic Cepheids. To a lesser extent, depth effects are also present
in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) and Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC), but may be corrected through the use
of empirical geometric modeling fit to the collection of DEBs. In the traditional distance ladder, these anchors
of geometric measures are often referred as the first rung.
Primary Distance Indicator:An astronomical feature that can be measured or calibrateddirectlyusing the afore-
mentioned geometric means. Examples include the luminosity of the intercepts of the Leavitt Law of Cepheids
or oxygen-rich Mira variables, as well as the luminosities of the Tip of the Red Giant Branch (TRGB) or the
J-region of the Asymptotic Giant Branch (JAGB).
Host:An object, typically a galaxy, whose distance can be estimated from its properties via a Primary Distance
Indicator. Relevant hosts include one or more Secondary Distance Indicators and by means of their identical
distance, enable absolute calibration of the secondary indicator (i.e., converting relative distance to true distance).
In the distance ladder, these are often referred to as the second rung.
Secondary Distance Indicator:An astronomical feature that can be measured in more distant systems (“hosts”)
and ideally reach out to Hubble flow systems. Secondary distance indicators used here include the luminosity
of Type Ia and Type II supernovae (SNe Ia, SNe II), based on the measurement of objects in nearby hosts;
the Tully-Fisher (TF) relation, which relates a spiral galaxy’s luminosity to its velocity width; the standardized
luminosity of Surface Brightness Fluctuations (SBF); and the Fundamental Plane (FP) of elliptical galaxies,
calibrated using its properties in the Coma cluster.
Calibrator:An astronomical object used in the calibration of a Secondary Distance Indicator, such as SNe Ia, SNe II,
and galaxies with luminosity estimated via TF or SBF relations. A Calibrator is in a host (orisa host, when the
Secondary Distance Indicator is based on the whole galaxy), and its distance is constrained by the host distance.
Group:A grouping (group or cluster) of galaxies that are assumed to be at a common distance, with appropriate
dispersion due to depth effects. Group membership is used to obtain a distance estimate for some Calibrators,
including SBF calibrators in Virgo and Fornax and FP calibrators in Coma.
Direct Distance Determination:A method that yields the distance to an astronomical object directly, without
relying on intermediate calibration steps. Such methods are used to determine the distance of anchors, via
trigonometric parallaxes (in the Milky Way), the orbital signatures of red giant stars in DEB (LMC, SMC), or
the relation between line-of-sight and angular velocity fields in a system of masers (NGC 4258). However, direct
distance determinations can sometimes be applied to astronomical objects in the Hubble Flow (see next item)
and thus provide a direct constraint onH 0. Examples include maser systems similar to that in NGC 4258, which
yield an angular diameter distance by modeling their recession and angular velocity fields, and SNe II calibrated
via the Expanding Photosphere Method (EPM), which determines distance by comparing angular size measured

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
from surface brightness and color temperature to physical size determined from the evolution of the velocity
profile.
Hubble Flow System (also called Tracer):An object at sufficiently large distance such that its cosmological red-
shift can be determined with good accuracy from its measured velocity; together with an angular or luminosity
distance determination, such objects provide constraints on the value ofH 0. Tracers used here include SNe Ia,
SNe II, galaxies with luminosity distances estimated from TF or SBF relations, megamasers, and elliptical
galaxies via FP. The angular or luminosity distance can be determined using a Primary or Secondary Distance
Indicator, or through a direct distance determination. Consistent with most determinations of the local value
ofH 0, we limit our analysis to redshifts large enough to reduce the impact of correlated flows due to large-scale
structure, generallyz >0.01 orz >0.023 and small enough (z≲0.15) that a simple, kinematic form of the
redshift-distance relation suffices. In practice, the effective redshift range for Hubble flow systems follows the
relevant literature and depends on the tracer; tracers that require resolved galaxy images, such as SBF, typically
occupy a lower redshift range than SNe Ia.
Use of Variance and Covariance:For each measured quantity, the original sources often define an uncertainty,
which can be the combination (in quadrature) of several terms. For example, the uncertainty in a TRGB-based
measurement of the distance to a host galaxy (calibrator) may combine at least three terms: the uncertainty in
the geometric distance to the anchor, such as NGC 4258; the uncertainty in the apparent magnitude of the TRGB
in the anchor; and the uncertainty in the TRGB of the calibrator itself. However, several of these terms may
be in common with other data. For example, all distance estimates anchored to NGC 4258 share the variance
associated with its geometric distance measurements, and all TRGB distances estimated relative to NGC 4258
share the uncertainty of the apparent TRGB magnitude determination in this galaxy. In order to make use of
more than one such measurement, these terms must be included ascovariancesbetween the relevant data, and
thus added as off-diagonal elements to a full covariance matrix of the data system. More details are given in the
description of the equations in Section B.
Based on the need to define covariance and successfully leverage a broad range of distance indicators, it is
necessary to restrict the use of measurements to those withdirecttraceability to well-defined sources. Likewise,
direct linkages assume consistent measurements between sources (e.g., Cepheids in an anchor and an SN Ia host),
a reasonable assumption when both employ the same telescope and instrument. In contrast, the combination of
measures from different telescopes and instruments involves substantial covariance (most certainly from different
zeropoints) whose characterization is rarely provided in publications and is beyond the scope of this work to
define. The above serve as “quality cuts” for the inclusion of data in the distance network. As an example, we
make use of TRGB measurements in hosts calibrated with NGC 4258, where both are identically measured with
HST (or JWST). However, we do not combine ground-based and space-based calibrations.
2.1.2.Distance Network Architecture
Given very few assumptions, 40 the measures and concepts given above may be linked together as a system of
equations, as we will show below and in Appendix B, which we refer to as the Distance Network. The multiplicity of
data (see Sect. 3 and Appendix A) means we can optimize the system by introducing free global parameters. The wealth
of sources, methodologies, and distance indicators also provide important additional and complementary information
which can help strengthen the distance ladder or can contribute to constrainH 0. For example, the distance to a
given supernova host can be measured via different methods (TRGB, Cepheids, JAGB, Miras) depending on which
observations are available for that galaxy, and each method can be related to a different anchor. However, these
determinations are not independent, as explained under “Use of Variance and Covariance” in Sect. 2.1.1. The full
Distance Network is illustrated in Fig. 2.
Within the approximations of the present analysis, all equations are linear (or linearized), and all probability distri-
butions are Gaussian in magnitude, distance modulus, or log10 (H0). Due to shared calibration sources among primary
or secondary distance indicators, a covariance matrix with off-diagonal elements provides a useful method for proper
40 We make conventional assumptions common to distance ladders: that the cosmological principle holds so that we do not live in a special
place (i.e., there is no intrinsic difference in objects solely based on their separation from us); that evolution over short lookback times,
of order a few hundred Myr, is negligible; and that the expansion history forz <0.15 can be approximated with an expansion of a few
kinematic terms, namelyH 0 ,q 0 , andj 0 .

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
Figure 2.The complete Distance Network, with all possible pathways illustrated. Anchors are objects that establish an
absolute scale based on the methods shown to their left. Primary distance indicators (Cepheids, TRGB, Miras, JAGB) transfer
the absolute scale to hosts (i.e., galaxies), the ensemble of which calibrates secondary distance indicators in the Hubble flow
(tracers). Exceptions are Megamasers and astrophysically modeled SNe II, both of which serve as primary distance indicators
and are capable of reaching the Hubble flow without intermediate steps. Green arrows illustrate direct connections between
anchors or tracers and the method used to determine the absolute scale. Blue, violet, yellow, and red arrows show which
calibrators constrain host distances; line width qualitatively distinguishes the attainable precision. Among hosts, rectangles
qualitatively indicate overlap among objects measured via multiple methods. Diamond shapes represent groups. Dark gray
arrows tie subsets of hosts whose distance is constrained by different calibrators to tracers. Any given arrow may represent
multiple data sets, e.g., HST or JWST photometry of Cepheids, or optical vs. infrared photometry of SNe Ia. The number of
hosts is labeled for Cepheids, TRGB, JAGB, and Miras, with the number of hosts exclusively available to each method shown
in parentheses.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
T able 1.Distance Network Datasets. Note that for all references we have made sure to decompose the listed uncertainties
into those coming from the anchor (which the Distance Network treats separately) and those coming from the actual
measurement of the distance indicator (separated to that within and without the anchor).
Measure Reference Notes
Milky Way (MW) A. G. Riess et al. (2018, 2021, 2022b) (a)
LMC G. Pietrzy´ nski et al. (2019)µ 0=18.477±0.024; converted from distance in kpc
SMC D. Graczyk et al. (2020)µ 0=18.977±0.032; converted from distance in kpc
NGC 4258 Masers M. J. Reid et al. (2019)µ 0=29.397±0.032
Primary distance indicators
HST Cepheids A. G. Riess et al. (2022a) SN hosts, separate measures, N4258, MW, LMC (R22a fits 9,10,11)
A. G. Riess et al. (2022b) MW cluster Cepheid photometry
A. G. Riess et al. (2019) LMC
W. Yuan et al. (2022) NGC 4258
L. Breuval et al. (2024) SMC
JWST Cepheids A. G. Riess et al. (2024, 2025)
JWST TRGB G. S. Anand et al. (2024b)
S. Li et al. (2024b, 2025a)
JWST TRGB T. J. Hoyt et al. (2025)
JWST TRGB G. S. Anand et al. (2024a, 2025)
HST TRGB G. S. Anand et al. (2024b)
HST TRGB W. L. Freedman et al. (2025)
HST TRGB T. de Jaeger et al. (2022) and contained references
JAGB S. Li et al. (2025b)
JAGB W. L. Freedman et al. (2025)
Miras C. D. Huang et al. (2024) Modified in correspondence with C. Huang to N4258-only values
Secondary distance indicators
SNIa Pantheon+ D. Brout et al. (2022a) https://github.com/PantheonPlusSH0ES/DataRelease
SNIa SNooPy (post v2.7) C. Burns 2025, priv. comm. Re-fitting the official data from S. A. Uddin et al. (2024)
SNIa SNooPy (pre v2.7) S. A. Uddin et al. (2024) https://github.com/syeduddin/h0csp/tree/main/data/working
SNIa BayesSN S. Dhawan et al. (2023) also E. Hayes 2025, priv. comm. for additional fits
SNIa Salt3 W. D. Kenworthy et al. (2021)
SNIa IR L. Galbany et al. (2023) J, H bands separately
SNII (SCM) T. de Jaeger et al. (2020a) T. de Jaeger 2025, priv. comm.
TF P. Boubel et al. (2024a) Cosmicflows-4 catalog; data curated by the authors
Other
SNII EPM C. Vogl et al. (2025), Removed galaxies (M61 and N6946), where peculiar
G. Cs¨ ornyei et al. (2023b) velocities could not be meaningfully established.
Megamasers D. W. Pesce et al. (2020b, Tab. 1) We also adopt our own peculiar velocity treatments
Coma FP K. Said et al. (2025) See also Appendix B.3.8
SBF J. B. Jensen et al. (2025) Ancillary info from priv. comm. with J. B. Jensen.
Note—(a) For the measurement of calibrators within the Milky Way galaxy, its extent is quite relevant — therefore we adopt the individual
measurements standardized to a 1 kpc reference distance.
accounting and weighting. The optimization procedure is that of a generalized linear least squares problem. The
global solution to this problem provides best-fit values for the underlying parameters of the Distance Network as well
as their uncertainties, most notably the distance moduli of included host galaxies, absolute magnitude calibrations,
and the Hubble constant. These parameters include log 10 (H0), the distance moduli to host systems,µ host,H, and
groups included in the host data,µ G, as well as the reference magnitudes for each type of calibrator,M ref,T . The full
description of the system of equations and the covariance matrix is given in Appendix B. The employed data sets are
listed in Table 1, described briefly in Section 3, and in greater detail in Appendix A.
2.1.3.Selecting the baseline
There was strong consensus among the workshop participants, which is also shared more broadly within the com-
munity, that not all data, measurements, and tools are viewed with equal confidence. For this reason, we decided
to produce a “baseline” result based on all methods which enjoy the broadest and highest level of confidence (some-
times referred to in the literature as “gold standards”), along with variants to the baseline that incorporate additional

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
methods or datasets, or exclude certain data in order to reflect a broad range of minority viewpoints and explore
the robustness of the results. To reach a true consensus for the baseline and variants, we adopted a collaborative,
methodologically inclusive approach during the ISSI workshop “What’s under the H0od.” Prior to analyzing any com-
bined fits, we engaged in extensive discussion of the various available methods, the choice of data sets (for instance,
Cepheids from HST, TRGB distances from JWST, etc.), distance calibrators, and the systematic uncertainties in-
volved in the determination of local distances andH 0 . These included both classical and emerging techniques, ranging
from geometric anchors (e.g., megamasers,Gaiaparallaxes, detached eclipsing binaries) to stellar standard candles
(e.g., Cepheids, TRGB, Miras, JAGB), as well as other methodologies such as Surface Brightness Fluctuations from
HST and JWST and the Fundamental Plane from DESI. We also carefully reviewed the use of Type Ia and Type II
supernovae, which extend the distance ladder into the Hubble Flow. In particular, we examined various SNe Ia data
sets (e.g., Pantheon+, CSP, NIR-only samples) as well as SNe II determinations based on both the standard candle
method and spectral modeling.
T able 2.Result from anonymous vote on “technical readiness
level” of distance calibrators. Above the line the consensus is that
these will be included in the baseline, below the line will be in-
cluded as variations.
Rank Distance calib in baseline in variants excluded abstain
1 Cepheids281 0 0
2 DEB263 0 0
3 TRGB262 0 1
3 NGC4258262 1 0
4Gaiaparallaxes243 2 0
5 Miras 8151 3
6 JAGB 5153 3
T able 3.Result from anonymous vote on the method and secondary distance
indicators. Above the line the consensus is that these will be included in the
baseline, below the line will be included as variations.
Rank Method in baseline in variants excluded abstain
1 SNIa320 0 0
2 SBF238 0 1
3 Masers in Hubble flow1912 0 1
4 SNe II, empirically standarized 15140 3
5 SNe II, astrophysically calibrated 1223 6
6 DESI FP (calibrated to Coma) 11200 1
7 TF from CF4 8211 2
A key element of this process was a series of open, expert-led discussions in a plenary setting, during which partic-
ipants evaluated the strengths, systematics, data availability, and limitations of each method and dataset. Following
these in-depth assessments, we held anonymous ballot votes to determine the configuration of thebaselineanalysis
and well-motivatedvariantsthereof, as well as configurations that should be excluded entirely.
The first vote identified the primary and secondary distance indicators and methods considered most technically
mature and broadly supported, cf. Table 2. In a second vote, we decided on specific combinations, methodological
choices, and alternative calibrations, resulting in a comprehensive suite of variants, see Table 3. Methods were included
in the baseline if they garnered more than half the total votes, including abstentions, as indicated by the horizontal lines
in Tables 2 and 3. All votes were taken prior to deriving a value ofH 0, and their outcomes were considered binding.
The datasets included in the baseline configuration are listed in Table 1 and discussed in detail in Appendix A. Where

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
multiple datasets were available in principle, preference was given to datasets that had been fully published and/or
have been most widely adopted. Alternative datasets, notably of SNe Ia (i.e., Pantheon+ vs. CSP vs. BayesSN), were
included as variants.
This process aimed at identifying the most widely supported and robust measurement paths based on current data
and understanding, not at enforcing a single value ofH 0. The resulting baseline, variants, datasets and code provide
a flexible framework to assess the stability and reliability of the derived consensusH 0 value under well-motivated
methodological changes. This structured approach reflects the collective judgment of the experts present at the
workshop, and provides a reproducible path forward for future analyses. Hence, “consensus” here refers to an a priori
agreement onhowa Distance Network should be constructed in terms of methods, datasets, and their combinations,
rather than on the outcome, which was not known when the process was fixed.
In summary, the baseline analysis reflects the scientific consensus among workshop participants concerning the
optimal combination of datasets and methodologies as established prior to obtaining results. Variants of the baseline
analysis were performed to test the robustness of the result to individual methods, to different datasets corresponding
to identical methodologies, and to quantitatively explore “hypothesis-driven” setups that combine multiple elements
deviating from the baseline. Further detail on the process of selecting variants is provided in Sect. 2.1.4 below.
2.1.4.Selecting variants and other methodological choices
We defined analysisvariantsto explore the sensitivity of theH 0 determination towell-motivatedmodifications in
the analysis setup. Possible variants were identified through brainstorming and subsequently discussed for their merits
and weaknesses. These variants serve as internal consistency tests (or “null tests”), helping to assess the robustness
of the baseline result under plausible changes to inputs or methodology. Considerable discussion was involved in
ensuring that variants were well-motivated prior to knowing their impact onH 0. We specifically avoided combinations
targeting maximal changes inH 0, as these would requirea posterioriinformation or intermediate outcomes, potentially
becoming prone to confirmation bias. Our process described in Sections 1.1 and 2.1.3 was key to taking these decisions
well informed by broad interdisciplinary and expert knowledge. In each variant, we furthermore aimed to adequately
reflect the current state-of-the-art in the various disciplines by including all data sets sufficiently precise to carry
significant weight in the determination ofH 0. In other words, we omitted data sets or methods only when motivated
by a specific hypothesis in order to avoid artificially inflated uncertainties (i.e., caused merely by insufficient data)
that would reduce the Hubble tension in an uninformative way not representative of the state of knowledge.
We reiterate that most variants are effectively “null tests.” Their consistency (or lack thereof) serve as a test of
robustness of the baseline. In general, they are not fair substitutes for the baseline solution, and should always be
referenced together with a description of their underlying choices. It is also critical to note that the values ofH 0
obtained with all variants arehighly correlated. They share a large fraction of the underlying data, and are therefore
expectedto differ from each other by much less than the nominal uncertainty. Therefore, quantifying if individual
datasets have anomalous pulls on the final result requires a more careful analysis; see Section 5 for further discussion.
The variants discussed in this paper can be organized into different categories:
Add-one-in variants—include additional information that was not voted for inclusion in the baseline, introduced through
a step-by-step process. This category can introduce additional anchors (i.e., the SMC), as well as primary or secondary
distance indicators. For example, V01 (Baseline+JAGB) adds JWST/NIRCam distances of the JAGB in supernova
hosts calibrated to that in NGC 4258. The addition of calibrators to the baseline configuration serves to explore
whether these supplementary methods shift or reinforce the baseline results. Furthermore, this category includes the
incorporation of alternative distance indicators in the Hubble flow, such as SNe II calibrated via the standard candle
method or spectral modeling, the Fundamental Plane from DESI anchored to Coma, and the Tully-Fisher relation as
implemented in the Cosmicflows-4 catalog (CF4; E. Kourkchi et al. 2020).
Leave-one-out variants—involve the exclusion of individual methods or calibrators from the baseline configuration,
motivated by the hypothesis that there is an undiscovered error in a type of measurement. Each variant is constructed
by removing one key element at a time—such as Cepheids, SNe Ia, TRGB,Gaiaparallaxes, or NGC 4258—and
observing the resulting impact on the derivedH 0 value. These tests help identify whether any individual dataset or
calibrator is significantly impacting the result. This category also includes the exclusion of specific indicators in the
third rung, such as SBF, SNe Ia, and masers in the Hubble flow. Since leaving out a given element can implicitly
remove other elements (e.g., specific SNe Ia calibrators), we have constructed custom baselines (cf. below) to separately
assess the effect of the implicit (undesired) modification relative to the baseline.

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
Hypothesis-driven variants—involve compound configurations motivated by specific physical or observational hypothe-
ses. These include the use of alternative calibrations (e.g., CSP/SNooPy instead of Pantheon+/SALT2 for SNe Ia),
different treatments of systematics (e.g., inclusion or exclusion of peculiar velocity corrections, metallicity corrections,
or near-infrared SN data), and restricted subsets of the data (e.g., only modern SNe Ia, or cutting the Hubble flow
sample atz >0.06). Additionally, we included a variant that considered the Cepheid Leavitt law to be independent
of chemical composition.
Instrument-suspicious variants—explore the impact of removing specific observatories. In particular, we tested the
exclusion of all HST or JWST-based observations, allGaiameasurements, etc.
Custom baselines—The exclusion of certain measurements can also cause the exclusion of some SNe Ia calibrators;
for example, when Cepheid measurements are excluded, only 35 of the 55 SNe Ia calibrators in the baseline can be
included, since the other 20 only have determinations of the host distances through Cepheids. The resulting change in
theH 0 value and uncertainty is due to both the exclusion of the measurements and the change in the SNe Ia calibrator
sample. To cleanly separate the two effects, we define a custom baseline that includes those measurements, but is
restricted to only the SNe Ia calibrators for which other measurements are available. Custom baseline versions are not
variantsper se; they are only intended to facilitate the interpretation of the results for the corresponding variants.
Include Everything—We also consider a variant in which all independent methods and data sets are included, to
illustrate the accuracy that can be achieved with presently available measurements if systematic effects and other
issues are resolved. A secondary variant in this class uses all independent methodsexceptTully-Fisher, for which the
current data set has excess dispersion. In either version, this variant includes only one set of measurements for SNe Ia,
since different measurements are likely correlated (because of astrophysical variance) to a degree that has not been
sufficiently quantified in the literature.
Additional solutions—In addition to the variant solutions described above, we also consider special solutions designed
to test our methodology. These are not “variants” in the same sense as those listed previously, and do not appear in
Table 4; they are discussed in mode detail in Sections 5.3.1, 5.3.2, and Appendix C. They includeindependent grouping
solutions,consistency checks, andemulator solutions. Independent grouping solutions consist of configurations in
which two or more fully independent paths through the distance ladder are identified, sharing no common calibrators
or intermediate steps. These allow for the construction of entirely separate determinations ofH 0, such that agreement
between them provides a strong consistency check and minimizes the risk of shared systematic effects. They are the
analogous to splitting the data in uncorrelated halves or thirds. Two such variants are discussed in Section 5.3.1.
Consistency checks are employed to make sure that the network results are statistically self-consistent for different
paths through it and are further discussed in Section 5.3.2. Emulator solutions involve a set ofemulatorsdesigned to
reproduce key published results, such as SH0ES, CCHP, and recent SBF analyses, within our unified framework and
dataset handling. These configurations serve both as validation tests of our pipeline and as transparent benchmarks
for comparison with previous literature, and they may also help explain sources of differences. These are discussed in
Appendix C.
3.DATASETS DESCRIPTION
The analysis presented in this work is based on a comprehensive set of local distance measurements and their
corresponding calibrators, as detailed in Section 2 and conceptually shown in Fig. 1. The dataset includes a broad array
of distance indicators, spanning geometric anchors, calibrators, and tracers. These are combined using a statistically
rigorous framework that accounts for shared systematics and covariances among measurements. To maintain clarity
and readability in the main text, we provide here only a brief summary of the datasets used to construct the Distance
Network, summarized also in Table 1. Methods employed in the baseline are marked in bold. A more detailed
description of the individual measurements, sources, and associated assumptions is given in Appendix A. We employ
peculiar velocity corrections as described in Appendix B.3.7.
Parallaxes—We adopted trigonometric wide-angle parallaxes (henceforth: parallaxes) of Milky Way (MW) stars
from the early third data release of the ESAGaiamission (GEDR3; Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016, 2021). GEDR3
parallaxes were corrected for systematics following L. Lindegren et al. (2021a) and for additional residual offsets as
determined for field Cepheids (A. G. Riess et al. 2021). GEDR3 parallaxes of open stars clusters were determined
using non-variable member stars (A. G. Riess et al. 2022b; M. Cruz Reyes & R. I. Anderson 2023). An additional

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
seven narrow-angle parallaxes of Cepheids based on the HST/WFC3 spatial scanning technique were included (A. G.
Riess et al. 2018).
Detached Eclipsing Binary (DEB) distances—The distances to both Magellanic Clouds have been determined using
helium burning red giants in detached eclipsing binary systems (henceforth: DEBs). These distances are determined
geometrically as the ratio of the physical stellar radii determined from full orbital solutions to the angular diameters
determined by surface-brightness-color relations calibrated empirically using long-baseline interferometry. The distance
to the LMC from G. Pietrzy´ nski et al. (2019) contributes to the Cepheid calibration in the baseline analysis. An
analogous distance to the SMC from D. Graczyk et al. (2020) was considered as part of a variant.
Megamaser distances—We adopted geometric distance measurements to the anchor galaxy NGC 4258 and five addi-
tional galaxies out to the Hubble flow. The distances were determined via very long-baseline interferometric (VLBI)
radio-wavelength observations of water megamasers in accretion disks surrounding central SMBHs of their host galax-
ies. Distances were determined by comparing the physical scale of the megamasers determined from a Keplerian disk
model to the angular extent of the features (J. Braatz et al. 2015; M. J. Reid et al. 2019; C. Y. Kuo et al. 2020).
Cepheids—The Leavitt Law, or Period-Luminosity relation of classical Cepheids (throughout this work: Cepheids)
is a well-understood consequence of the dependence of acoustic oscillations on stellar density, the relation between
mass and luminosity, and the Stefan-Boltzmann law. The periods of their observed brightness variations link directly
to their intrinsic luminosity (H. S. Leavitt & E. C. Pickering 1912) with particularly small scatter in the infrared,
and this is well described by stellar evolution models (e.g., S. Khan et al. 2025). Distances to Cepheids pulsating
in the fundamental mode were measured using the reddening-free near-infrared Wesenheit magnitudes based on HST
photometry published by A. G. Riess et al. (2018, 2021, 2022b, 2019, 2022a); W. Yuan et al. (2022); L. Breuval et al.
(2024), and more recently with JWST by A. G. Riess et al. (2023, 2024, 2025). The Cepheid Period-Luminosity relation
was calibrated in anchor galaxies using geometric distances in the Milky Way, Magellanic Clouds, and NGC 4258.
Tip of the Red Giant Branch (TRGB)—The TRGB represents a recognizable feature in the color-magnitude diagram
of galaxies that is caused by the nearly constant luminosity of the Helium flash of first-ascent red giant stars, which
continue along their evolution towards the Horizontal Branch. The TRGB distances were measured using HST and
JWST observations of resolved stars in nearby (D<30 Mpc) galaxies. These distances were measured by the Carnegie-
Chicago Hubble Program (CCHP; W. L. Freedman et al. 2019; T. J. Hoyt et al. 2021, 2025), the Extragalactic Distance
Database (EDD; R. B. Tully et al. 2009; G. S. Anand et al. 2021), the SH0ES team (G. S. Anand et al. 2024b; S. Li
et al. 2024b), and the TRGB-SBF project team (G. S. Anand et al. 2024a, 2025). Each team used somewhat different
reduction, analysis, and calibration techniques, but we find that the resulting distances are generally consistent across
groups, as shown in Section 4.
J-region Asymptotic Giant Branch (JAGB)—The JAGB is a recognizable feature in the near-infrared color-magnitude
diagram of galaxies attributed to post-third dredge-up carbon-rich intermediate-mass AGB stars. The JAGB distances
used here are derived from data taken with JWST NIRCam as published by (S. Li et al. 2024a, 2025c, SH0ES) and
(W. L. Freedman et al. 2025, CCHP); see also Appendix A. In its current implementation, the JAGB method assumes
a homogeneous stellar population with a constant average luminosity. Systematic uncertainties, e.g., asymmetric
luminosity functions or metallicity effects, were considered following S. Li et al. (2024a) and remain a subject of
research (e.g., B. Zgirski et al. 2021; E. Magnus et al. 2024; A. J. Lee et al. 2025).
Mira distances—Miras are high-amplitude long-period variable asymptotic giant branch stars that obey period-
luminosity relations. We use a sample of 3 Mira host galaxies consisting of the geometric anchor NGC 4258 (C. D.
Huang et al. 2018) and two SNe Ia calibrator galaxies, NGC 1559 and M101 (C. D. Huang et al. 2020, 2024), hosts of
SN 2005df and SN 2011fe, respectively. All observations consisted of at least 10 epochs of HST WFC3/IR time series
photometry spanning a minimum of one year, and distances were obtained using the Mira period-luminosity relation
in the F160W bandpass.
Type Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia)—SNe Ia are standardizable candles whose light curve information (e.g., the duration)
can be related to their intrinsic magnitude. We incorporate five different SNe Ia datasets, ranging from optical to
near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths and spanning different SNe Ia modeling methodologies (Spectral template PCA with
SALT2, SALT3 and SNooPy v2.7, and template-free with BayesSN). Four of these datasets are used in the Hubble
Flow: (1) Pantheon+ (optical) with SALT2 (D. Scolnic et al. 2022; D. Brout et al. 2022b), (2) Carnegie Supernova

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
Project (CSP) I & II (with SNooPy v2.7; C. R. Burns et al. 2011; S. A. Uddin et al. 2024), (3) template-independent
distances in NIR (L. Galbany et al. 2023), (4) optical+NIR samples processed with BayesSN (S. Dhawan et al. 2023).
A fifth dataset of 13 SNe Ia is used to calibrate the distance to the Coma cluster (D. Scolnic et al. 2025).
Type II Supernovae (SNe II)—Several methods exist to standardize SN II magnitudes and derive distances (see T.
de Jaeger & L. Galbany 2024). In particular, the Standard Candle Method (SCM; M. Hamuy & P. A. Pinto 2002)
standardizes SN II luminosities based on correlations with photospheric velocity (from Hβ) and color. We use a sample
of 89 SNe II in the Hubble flow atz >0.01 as well as 14 calibrator supernovae from T. de Jaeger et al. (2020b, 2022),
compiled from CSP-I, LOSS, SDSS-II, SNLS, DES-SN, and SSP-HSC (T. de Jaeger et al. 2017a,b, 2020b).
Expanding photosphere method (EPM) of Type IIP supernovae—We adopted distances of Type IIP supernovae (SNe IIP)
determined by astrophysical modeling via the tailored expanding photosphere method (EPM) from C. Vogl et al.
(2025). Such distances relate the angular extent of SNe IIP measured from light curves to their physical expansion
determined by radiative transfer modeling of optical spectra (C. Vogl et al. 2020; G. Cs¨ ornyei et al. 2023b). The EPM
can be applied to SNe IIP in the Hubble flow without requiring additional calibration, although it depends on the
accuracy of the underlying astrophysical modeling.
Surface Brightness Fluctuations (SBF)—Spatial fluctuations in the surface brightness of an otherwise smooth galaxy
arise from the statistics of the discrete number of stars per pixel. The amplitude of these fluctuations depends inversely
on the distance of the galaxy, as well as on age, metallicity, and other properties of the stellar population. For galaxies
with evolved stellar populations, the SBF method can be calibrated through an empirical relation between the intrinsic
magnitude of the fluctuations and the galaxy’s integrated color, used as a proxy for the stellar population properties.
SBF measurements in the near-infrared are particularly useful because the fluctuations are bright at these wavelengths
and can be well calibrated using optical colors. For this study, we use a sample of 61 HST WFC3/IR SBF elliptical
galaxy distances reaching out to 100 Mpc (J. B. Jensen et al. 2025, 2021; J. P. Blakeslee et al. 2021); distances to the
14 calibrators in the Virgo and Fornax galaxy clusters are based on TRGB; see Appendix B.3.3.
Fundamental Plane (FP)—The distance to an elliptical galaxy can be estimated by means of the fundamental plane
relationship between central velocity dispersion, effective radius, and surface brightness. Fundamental Plane distances
were measured using the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) Early Data Release, analyzing 4191 early-type
galaxies within 0.01< z <0.1 with photometry from the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys and spectroscopic velocity
dispersions from DESI observations (K. Said et al. 2025). The FP zero-point calibration was established using a
collection of galaxies in the Coma cluster, with the distance of the latter constrained by 13 Type Ia supernovae within
Coma analyzed by D. Scolnic et al. (2025), as well as an additional (fixed) constraint from SBF; see Appendix B.3.8.
Tully-Fisher (TF)—The Tully-Fisher relation relates the rotation velocity of spiral galaxies (determined with HI line
widths) to the total intrinsic luminosity. TF data were obtained from the Cosmicflows-4 catalog (E. Kourkchi et al.
2020), which compiled HI line widths, redshifts, and photometry for∼10,000 spiral galaxies across the full sky, out
of which we use 3400 galaxies with complete infrared photometry (as recommended by P. Boubel 2025, priv. comm.).
The TF relation zero-point has been re-calibrated within the Distance Network using calibrator galaxies identified in
P. Boubel et al. (2024b), with systematic corrections applied by D. Scolnic et al. (2024).
4.BASELINE RESULTS
The baseline solution for the Distance Network as illustrated in Figure 3 yields
H0 = 73.50±0.81 km s−1 Mpc−1 .(1)
As described in Section 2.1.3, this solution includes SNe Ia, SBF, and megamaser measurements as Tracers. The
distances to hosts of SNe Ia and SBF calibrators are obtained from the solution of the full Distance Network, incor-
porating measurements based on TRGB and Cepheids from the sources described in Section 3, with the Milky Way,
LMC, and NGC 4258 as anchors for Cepheid distances. 41 SNe Ia measurements are from the Pantheon+ sample, and
peculiar velocity corrections in the Hubble flow are based on the 2M++ model (J. Carrick et al. 2015). This solution
41 Note that the current version only uses TRGB measurements for the calibration of the SBF method, in accordance with the most recent
publication J. B. Jensen et al. (2025); in future iterations we intend to allow for arbitrary primary distance indicators for the calibration.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
Figure 3.The Baseline Distance Network, illustrated analogously to Fig. 2
has an overallχ 2 of 0.9879 per degree of freedom, indicating broad agreement between the estimated uncertainties—all
based on original sources—and the statistical properties of the solution. Note that the value ofχ 2 does not include
degrees of freedom associated with SNe Ia and SBF tracers in the Hubble flow. In our methodology, we solve sep-
arately for the Hubble flow intercept for SNe Ia and SBF tracers in the Hubble Flow—as well for others that are
not included in the baseline solution, such as SNe II and TF tracers—and only the intercept is included in the final
Distance Network solution. It can be shown that, apart from a separation of theχ 2 values, this approach is equivalent
to directly including the Hubble tracer equations into the Distance Network; see also Appendix B.3.6.
Figure 4 shows the residuals of host distances, estimated from the network solution, grouped by methodology. Each
grouping, identified by a different color, refers to a specific combination of primary distance indicator, anchor, and
source, as indicated in the labels below the group. The error bars shown correspond to the uncertainty of the specific
distance measurement for that host, not including terms that are covariant with the other elements of the group. For
example, each Cepheid measurement is shown with the uncertainty of the Period-Luminosity intercept for that galaxy,
which reflects the expected scatter of residualswithin that group. The color-shaded band for each group shows instead
the uncertainty associated with common error terms for that group, i.e., the anchor uncertainty and the uncertainty
in the indicator measurement (TRGB magnitude or Cepheid Period-Luminosity intercept) for that anchor, combined
in quadrature; this term is indicative of the likely scatter of theaverageof the group—shown by the corresponding

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
Distance Modulus Residuals
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Distance Network – Baseline
Cepheid+HST
Large Magellanic Cloud
Riess et al. 2022
Cepheid+HST
Milky Way
Riess et al. 2022
Cepheid+HST
NGC 4258
Riess et al. 2022
Cepheid+JWST
NGC 4258
SH0ES
TRGB+HST
NGC 4258
CCHP
TRGB+HST
NGC 4258
Ex
TRGB+HST
NGC 4258
Anand et al. (2025)
TRGB+JWST
NGC 4258
CCHP
TRGB+JWST
NGC 4258
SH0ES
Figure 4.Residuals for each category of host distance measurements from the Baseline solution. Each panel represents a group
of measurements of host distances that share the same method, anchor, and authors, and shows the deviation of those measured
host distances from the full distance network value. Error bars represent the individual uncertainty of each measurement, while
the shaded regions for each group shows the common (fully correlated) uncertainty due to the reference system.
horizontal line at the center of the band—with respect to zero. 42 As can be seen, the distribution of residuals is
consistent with expectations, with no significant deviation from the published uncertainties for any subset of data.
A closer look at the residuals for Cepheids shows clearly that all anchors are consistent with one anotherandwith
TRGB; the systematic offsets (horizontal bars) for Cepheids anchored to the LMC, the Milky Way, and NGC 4258
differ by 0.02 mag or less from the distance network solution. Subsets of TRGB measurements have slightly larger
typical offsets, about 0.03 mag, justified in part by the smaller number of systems included in each study; but overall
they are in very good agreement, within the expected statistical uncertainties.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of residuals for objects in the Hubble flow as a function of redshift for three classes
of objects. The ordinate is the offset in log 10 (H0) inferred for that specific object; the error bar reflects a combination
of the measurement uncertainty (photometric error, error in standardization, and/or uncertainty in the solution, as
applicable), the effect of the dispersion in peculiar velocities, the uncertainty in the peculiar velocity reconstruction,
and the intrinsic dispersion in the relevant distance indicator, as determined in the original sources from the dispersion
in the calibrators. They do not include the calibration uncertainty, which is determined as part of the distance
network calibration solution for each group when applicable. The shaded bars at the right show the measured mean
and dispersion for each of the three sets of data. Again, both the dispersion in individual measurements and the mean
for each subset are consistent with expectations, which represent the direct measurement uncertainties for each value—
not including calibration uncertainties. Figure 6 shows the posterior distribution for the global fit parameters for this
solution: the absolute magnitude calibration for SNe Ia, the offset in the SBF calibration, the estimated distances
to Virgo and Fornax, and the value ofH 0. These are based on finite-length chains extracted from the probability
distribution of the solution, and the values of the parameters may be slightly different from the analytically calculated
results.
The solution for the baseline Distance Network yields the most accurate directH 0 measurement to date, with a
relative uncertainty of 1.09%, including systematic uncertainties. It agrees to much better than the 1σuncertainty
with previous determinations ofH 0 by the SH0ES team (A. G. Riess et al. 2022a).
42 This is a slightly simplified description of the uncertainties, as it accounts for most, but not all, covariances in the data. However, it is
a useful guide to the properties of residuals, as long as the formalχ 2 is consistent with the statistics of the system.

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
-0.5
0
0.5
-0.5
0
0.5
Megamasers
-0.5
0
0.5
-0.5
0
0.5
Distance Modulus Residuals
Surface Brightness Fluctuations
-0.5
0
0.5
10-2 10-1
Redshift
-0.5
0
0.5
Type Ia Supernovae
Mean & dispersion of values
Global uncertainty
Peculiar velocities uncertainty
Hubble Flow – Baseline
Figure 5.Residuals in distance modulus as a function of redshift for objects in the Hubble flow in the Baseline solution. Error
bars reflect the individual source scatter, without the common calibration uncertainty. The shaded region in each plot indicates
the effect of a velocity uncertainty of 250 km s−1. The bars at the right show the mean and dispersion for each group of sources
and the calibration uncertainty, which is a common error mode for all points in each panel.
The relative uncertainty of this result improves by≳13% over updates by the SH0ES team based on cluster Cepheids
(A. G. Riess et al. 2022b) and sibling SNe Ia (Y. S. Murakami et al. 2023), and by∼7% compared to the most recent
SH0ES update provided by L. Breuval et al. (2024), which furthermore incorporated the SMC as an additional anchor.
As shown by A. G. Riess et al. (2022a), integrating TRGB distances into the fit strengthens the result, but does not
cause it to deviate strongly. In the baseline case, this finding extends to the inclusion of distant megamasers and the
SBF measurements. More generally, we find excellent agreement with most previous literature results based on direct
measurements, as we show in Fig. 7—including most of the studies corresponding to the individual distance ladders
that can be constructed within the Distance Network. We explicitly investigate the similarities and differences with
respect to previous literature results that are part of the Distance Network in Appendix C, where we also showcase
what is necessary to obtain the results with lower central values inH 0 . We also find great agreement with the recent
TDCOSMO results from TDCOSMO Collaboration et al. (2025), which giveH 0 = 71.6+3.9
−3.3 km s−1 Mpc−1 and are
compatible at∼0.5σ.
The consensusH 0 measurement differs from the indirect, ΛCDM-dependent, measurement based on the CMB
anisotropies of 67.24±0.35 km s −1 Mpc−1 (E. Camphuis et al. 2025, Eq. (54)) at a statistical significance of 7.1σ.
5.VARIANTS
Exploring variants to the baseline solution serves multiple purposes. First, several available methods and data sets
were not included in the baseline solution, for various reasons—primarily because of maturity of analysis or questions
about uncertainty estimates. These data can still be used to highlight potential issues with the baseline solution, or
point toward future research directions. In some cases, additional observations may eventually justify including these
methods in the baseline. Second, it is informative to assess what happens to both the value and uncertainty in the
Hubble constant when different categories of data are included or excluded in the solution. Third, some methods—e.g.,
SNe Ia—can be included in several different ways; different filters, different light curve analysis, or different redshift
selections. Finally, it is useful to consider a solution that includes all available, independent data and methods to assess
the potential precision achievable with existing data once the remaining analysis issues are resolved. We stress that
our process determined the baseline analysis as the primary solutionpriori toobtaining any results onH 0. Variants
in these categories are defined in Section 5.1, and the results discussed in Section 5.2.

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
−0.1 0.0
M oﬀ
SBF
72
74
76H0[km/s/Mpc]
−19.30
−19.25
−19.20
MIa
31.0
31.1
31.2
µVirgo
31.34
31.42
31.50
31.58
µFornax
M oﬀ
SBF =
−0.025 ± 0.027
31.4 31.5
µFornax
µFornax =
31.455 ± 0.039
31.0 31.2
µVirgo
µVirgo =
31.060 ± 0.047
−19.3 −19.2
MIa
MIa =
−19.252 ± 0.022
72 74 76
H0[km/s/Mpc]
H0[km/s/Mpc] =
73.47 ± 0.80
Baseline
Figure 6.Corner plot for the baseline solution, illustrating the correlations betweenH 0, the calibration of SNe Ia and SBF,
and the distance to Fornax and Virgo, which contribute to the SBF calibration. The parameters use the naming convention of
Appendix B.3.1. Deviations from the analytically calculated result are due to the numerical precision of a finite-length chain.
Separately, we also consider two additional sets of consistency checks presented in Sect. 5.3. One builds fully inde-
pendent, “orthogonal” paths capable of determiningH 0 to verify that no single path/method dominates the Distance
Network, cf. Section 5.3.1. The other employs a variety of different, albeit not independent, paths through the data
to verify that their statistical properties are consistent with expectations, cf. Section 5.3.2. These checks serve to
demonstrate the statistical consistency of the baseline solution with all possible configurations. Replications of results
presented in the literature provide additional consistency checks of our methodology and are presented in Appendix C.
Some general considerations pertain to all these analyses and their interpretation. First, the baseline and variants
were defined and classifiedbeforeconsidering the resulting values ofH 0. Very minor changes were introduced afterwards
if required by updated data availability, albeit without changing the definition of the baseline. Second, most “variants”

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
64
64
66
66
68
68
70
70
72
72
74
74
76
76
78
78
80
80
H0 [km s 1 Mpc 1]
EARLY UNIVERSE
CMB SPA 2025
BBN+DESI BAO DR2 2025
DIRECT
Cepheids+TRGB, HST+JWST 2025
HST SH0ES 2024 (4 anchors)
JWST SH0ES 2024 (1 anchor)
Cepheids 2022 (2 rungs, no SNIa)
Masers 2019 (no rungs)
TRGB CCHP + CSP 2025
TRGB Early + ZTF 2025
TRGB EDD + CSP 2021
TRGB CAT s + Panth+ 2023
TRGB JWST + SBF 2025
TRGB HST + SBF 2021
Cepheids + SBF 2021
Miras + SNIa 2025
JAGB SH0ES + SNIa 2024
JAGB CCHP + SNIa 2024
JAGB + SNIa 2025
SNeII EPM (adh0cc)
HII galaxies 2024
Tully-Fisher 2024
Tully-Fisher 2022 (optical & IR)
Tully-Fisher 2020 (baryonic)
DESI FP + COMA 2024
STRONG LENSING
8 QSO + SLACS +DESI BAO 2025
SN Refsdal 2025
SN H0pe 2025
Figure 7.Comparison of the baseline result with previous literature results, based on early universe indirect inferences using
the flat ΛCDM model, based on direct measurements in the late universe, and based on strong lensing results (which involve
additional modeling).
should not be regarded as alternative, equally valid solutions. Rather, their role is to illustrate the statistical properties
of the data, identify potential problems, and/or reinforce their validity. This is especially true when considering the
consistency checks, which are designed specifically so that each path uses only a small fraction of the available data,
and thus has by construction a large nominal uncertainty, which isin no wayrepresentative of the uncertainty inH 0.
Third, the results of all variants are highly correlated because they share large portions of data. An exception are the
orthogonal paths in Section 5.3.1, which serve as consistency checks. Hence, the scatter between variants is expected
to be much smaller than their error estimates.

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
5.1.Description of variants
The following is a short description of the main variants included in Table 4. Specific sources of data products are
provided in the text and in Appendix A.
Baseline
V00 Baseline: includes all measurements of SNe Ia host distances using either Cepheids or TRGB, with the Milky
Way viaGaia, the LMC, and NGC 4258 as anchors, as well as SBF calibrated via TRGB and megamasers in
the Hubble flow. Note that TRGB distances are only anchored to NGC 4258, since TRGB calibrations from the
Milky Way and LMC do not meet our data requirements (notably photometric homogeneity across anchors and
hosts in HST/JWST passbands). Cepheids use all three anchors.
Add-one-in variants
V01 Baseline + JAGB: includes all baseline methods, plus measurements of SNe Ia hosts using the JAGB method,
calibrated to NGC 4258.
V02 Baseline + Miras: includes all baseline methods, plus measurements of SNe Ia hosts using Mira variables,
calibrated to NGC 4258.
V03 Baseline + Fundamental Plane: includes all baseline methods, plus distances to elliptical galaxies using the
Fundamental Plane as measured by DESI, and calibrated to the distance of the Coma cluster measured with
SBF and SNe Ia.
V04 Baseline + empirically calibrated SNe II: includes all baseline methods and adds SNe II (standard candle method)
both as calibrators and in the Hubble Flow. SNe II host distances are determined via the distance network.
V05 Baseline + SNe II with Expanding Photosphere Method: includes all baseline methods, plus SNe II distances
measured by the (astrophysical model-dependent) Expanding Photosphere Method. Excludes a handful of su-
pernovae that are too nearby to have significant weight on the determination ofH 0.
V06 Baseline + Tully-Fisher: includes all baseline methods and adds calibrators for the Tully-Fisher relation and
Tully-Fisher galaxies in the Hubble flow. The calibrators are treated in the same way as SNe Ia hosts, and their
individual distances are determined from all available measurements.
V07 Baseline + SMC as anchor: includes all baseline methods and includes the SMC as an additional anchor for
Cepheids.
Leave-one-out variants
V08 Baseline without Cepheids: excludes all Cepheid measurements from the distance network. As a consequence,
it only uses NGC 4258 as anchor, since the Milky Way and LMC are currently only used via Cepheids. It
furthermore excludes some SNe Ia for which TRGB measurements are not available.
V09 Baseline without TRGB: excludes all TRGB-based measurements. As a consequence, it excludes some SNe Ia for
which Cepheid measurements are not available, and the SBF method, which in this version it is only calibrated
via TRGB. A future version could include other primary distance indicators to calibrate the SBF method.
V10 Baseline without parallaxes: excludes parallaxes measured byGaiaand HST. As a consequence, the MW is
removed as an anchor.
V11 Baseline without DEB distances to the LMC: removes the LMC as an anchor. Note that the SMC is not included
in the baseline.
V12 Baseline without NGC 4258: this excludes all measurements based on NGC 4258 as anchor. As a consequence,
all TRGB measurements are removed, since they are exclusively calibrated via NGC 4258. As in V09, this also
results in the exclusion of a number of SNe Ia for which no Cepheid measurements are available, as well as the
SBF method.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
V13 Baseline without SNe Ia: excludes all SNe Ia, both as calibrators and as Hubble Flow objects.
V14 Baseline without SBF: excludes all SBF-measured galaxies in the Hubble Flow.
V15 Baseline without masers in the Hubble flow: retains the maser distance to NGC 4258, but excludes other mega-
maser measurements.
Instrument-suspicious variants
V16 Exclude HST data: excludesallHST data from the baseline. Since JWST anchor measurements are only available
for NGC 4258, this version also excludes the Milky Way and the LMC as anchors.
V17 Exclude JWST data: removes all JWST observations from the baseline.
V18 Exclude SN 1994D and earlier: excludes 7 SNe Ia calibrators that do not have modern data, namely SN 1980N,
1981B, 1981D, 1989B, 1990N, 1992A, and 1994D.
Custom baselines
V08B Modified baseline for the no-Cepheid variant V08. This is identical to the baseline, except that SNe Ia for which
we only have Cepheid distance estimates have been removed, leaving 35 SNe Ia calibrators. Comparing V08 and
V08B allows a direct estimate of the impact of removing Cepheids from the distance network, without the effect
of changing the subset of SNe Ia calibrators.
V09B Modified baseline for the no-TRGB variant V09. This is identical to the baseline, except that SNe Ia for which
we only have TRGB distance estimates have been removed, leaving 42 SNe Ia calibrators. Comparing V09 and
V09B allows a direct estimate of the impact of removing TRGB from the distance network, without the effect
of changing the subset of SNe Ia calibrators. However, this custom baseline includes SBF, which are excluded
from V09 because they are calibrated using TRGB distances; therefore the difference between V09 and V09B is
due to both the TRGB contribution to SN calibrator distances and to the omission of SBF.
V12B Modified baseline for the no-NGC 4258 variant V12. This is identical to the baseline, except that SNe Ia for
which we only have distance estimates based on NGC 4258 have been removed, leaving 42 SNe Ia calibrators.
This variant allows a direct estimate of the impact of removing NGC 4258 from the distance network, without
the effect of changing the subset of SNe Ia calibrators. Unlike V09B, this custom baseline also excludes SBF
measurements; therefore the difference between V12 and V12B is only in the contribution of NGC 4258 to the
distances to SNe Ia calibrators.
V16B Modified baseline for the no-HST variant V16. This is identical to the baseline, except that SNe Ia for which we
only have HST-based distance estimates have been removed, leaving 24 SNe Ia calibrators. Comparing V16 and
V16B allows a direct estimate of the impact of removing HST measurements from the distance network, without
the effect of changing the subset of SNe Ia calibrators.
Hypothesis-driven variants
V19 Modified baseline in the CMB frame: removes the peculiar velocity corrections for SNe Ia, SBF, and megamasers
in the Hubble flow.
V20 Modified baseline that limits Hubble flow SNe Ia to 0.023≤z≤0.06.
V21 Modified baseline, with SNeIa in the Hubble flow limited to 0.03≤z≤0.1.
V22 Modified baseline, with SNeIa restricted to the CSP sample fit using SNooPy v2.7 for both calibrators and
tracers.
V23 Modified baseline with SNe Ia measurements fitted using BayesSN for both calibrators and Hubble flow objects.
V24 Modified baseline, wherein SNe Ia light curves were fitted using the SALT V3 fitter instead of SALT V2.4 (as in
Pantheon+)

===== PAGE 21 =====
21
V25 Modified baseline that exclusively uses H-band NIR measurements for both calibrators and Hubble flow SNe Ia.
V26 Modified baseline that exclusively uses J-band NIR measurements for both calibrators and Hubble flow SNe Ia.
V27 Modified baseline that ignores off-diagonal covariance terms for Hubble flow SNe Ia.
V28 Modified baseline without metallicity corrections for Cepheid PL relation
Include everything
V99 “Everything”: All data included in any variant, without repeating Hubble Flow objects; SNe Ia exclusively from
Pantheon+.
V99a “Everything but Tully-Fisher”: as V99, but excludes the Tully-Fisher method, which contributes to the totalχ 2
beyond expectations, and has highχ 2 in the Hubble Flow.
5.2.Overview of results based on variants
The results of the baseline and all variants are illustrated in Figure8 and reported in Table 4. All variants yield
results consistent with the baseline, typically varying only slightly from the baseline result; the dispersion of central
values is 0.400 km s−1 Mpc−1, or 50% of the baseline’s 1σuncertainty. Since the baseline and its variants are highly
correlated due to shared datasets and methodologies, a scatter significantly below 1σis expected. The absence of
outliers among the variants demonstrates that the results are not driven in any particular direction by any one
dataset or methodology, or any of the hypothetical systematics explored. For example, variants V08, V10, and V13
demonstrate that the central value ofH 0 is not dominated by Cepheids (V08), parallaxes mainly fromGaia(V10), or
SNe Ia (V13). Figure 8 also readily identifies differences in constraining power brought by various methods: the largest
increases in the error onH 0 are seen in V08 (no Cepheids), V13 (no SNe Ia), and V16 (no HST). This underlines the
crucial precision provided by Cepheids, SNe Ia, and HST observations, whereas the insensitivity of the central value
onH 0 demonstrates that neither dominate the result. The exploration of such variants establishes robustness of the
baseline result and demonstrates that the Distance Network is enhanced by the joint consideration of complementary
methodologies. It further underlines that the different methodologies reinforce and strengthen each other, resulting in
improved accuracy thanks to the DN approach.
5.2.1.Adding one class at a time
Variants V01 to V07 each add one category of objects or methodology to the baseline solution; these include JAGB,
Miras, the Fundamental Plane of elliptical galaxies, empirically and astrophysically calibrated SNe II, Tully-Fisher,
and the SMC as an additional anchor. For all cases except the Tully-Fisher relation, the impact on the solution is
negligible, with the central value ofH 0 changing by 0.2 km s−1 Mpc−1 or less (25% of the 1σuncertainty), and the
uncertainty remaining constant or decreasing slightly. Including astrophysically calibrated SNe II (V05) leads to the
most significant improvement to the uncertainty, by 8.5% to 0.74 km s−1 Mpc−1; however, this method being relatively
new, its systematic uncertainties are not yet fully quantified (C. Vogl et al. 2025).
Including the Tully-Fisher relation raisesH 0 by almost 0.5 km s −1 Mpc−1 (∼60% of the baseline error), and
yields a reducedχ 2 significantly larger than unity (1.4712). The increase inH 0 is consistent with the results of
the recalibration of the Tully-Fisher relation by D. Scolnic et al. (2024). Inspection of the residuals shows that the
anomalous value ofχ 2 is caused by the dispersion in predicted magnitude for Tully-Fisher calibrators, whose empirical
scatter significantly exceeds the assumed intrinsic dispersion, particularly at the bright end. Uncertainties in host
distances are subdominant and unlikely to play a role in this comparison. We conclude that the internal dispersion
currently assumed for the Tully-Fisher relation is likely underestimated, and recommend avoiding the inclusion of
Tully-Fisher results until its intrinsic dispersion can be reevaluated.
5.2.2.Leave-one-out variants
Variants V08-V18 each remove one class of measurements or a subset of data from the solution. Most variants
do not change the central value ofH 0 much, with the exception of V08 (no Cepheids), which drops it by almost 1
km s−1 Mpc−1 to 72.51 km s−1 Mpc−1, and V12 (no NGC 4258), which decreases it to 73.08 km s−1 Mpc−1. Comparing
V08 and the corresponding custom baseline (V08B) clearly identifies that the shift in the no-Cepheids variant (V08) is

===== PAGE 22 =====
22
T able 4.H 0 results based on the baseline, variants, and orthogonal paths
#H 0 1–σ χ 2 Ndof Reduced Description
km s−1 Mpc−1 χ2
V00 73.499 0.809 117.5597 119 0.98790 Baseline
V01 73.493 0.807 125.3081 131 0.95655 Baseline + JAGB
V02 73.508 0.809 117.7560 121 0.97319 Baseline + Miras
V03 73.604 0.798 129.4831 133 0.97356 Baseline + DESI FP calibrated to Coma
V04 73.515 0.805 126.9616 129 0.98420 Baseline + empirically calibrated SNe II
V05 73.720 0.740 123.0193 133 0.92496 Baseline + SNe II with Expanding Photosphere method
V06 73.957 0.787 285.4146 194 1.47121 Baseline + Tully-Fisher
V07 73.314 0.789 118.8900 120 0.99075 Baseline + SMC
V08 72.509 1.296 65.8536 69 0.95440 Baseline without Cepheids
V08B 72.873 0.874 95.6518 98 0.97604 Custom baseline for V08
V09 73.526 0.878 55.2382 56 0.98640 Baseline without TRGB, SBF
V09B 73.738 0.827 94.2652 106 0.88929 Custom baseline for V09
V10 73.609 0.929 117.2767 118 0.99387 Baseline without Gaia parallaxes, MW
V11 73.337 0.853 116.9115 118 0.99078 Baseline without DEB, LMC, SMC
V12 73.084 0.920 41.7194 47 0.88765 Baseline without NGC 4258
V12B 73.632 0.861 84.8933 87 0.97578 Custom baseline for V12
V13 73.434 1.795 11.1578 23 0.48512 Baseline without SNe Ia
V14 73.325 0.830 106.9393 100 1.06939 Baseline without SBF
V15 73.633 0.841 115.6990 114 1.01490 Baseline without masers in the Hubble flow
V16 73.754 1.325 56.6229 55 1.02951 Exclude HST data, LMC, MW
V16B 74.024 0.924 83.3998 85 0.98117 Custom baseline for V16
V17 73.002 0.856 81.5863 85 0.95984 Exclude JWST data
V18 73.690 0.822 105.7303 108 0.97898 Exclude SN 1994D and earlier
V19 73.062 0.804 117.2456 119 0.98526 Baseline with SNe Ia, SBF, Masers in CMB frame
V20 73.190 0.862 106.8923 100 1.06892 Hubble flow SNe Ia with z>0.06 (avoid local LSS)
V21 72.667 0.862 106.7433 100 1.06743 SNe Ia in redshift range 0.03–0.10
V22 73.350 0.963 94.4077 119 0.79334 SNe Ia from CSP, all 55 calibrators
V23 73.821 1.072 98.8529 114 0.86713 SNe Ia from BayesSN
V24 73.445 0.810 109.0825 119 0.91666 SNe Ia from PP processed with SALT3 fitter
V25 72.459 1.099 52.9059 64 0.82665 SNe Ia in H-band
V26 72.712 1.164 47.1329 67 0.70348 SNe Ia in J-band
V27 73.411 0.800 117.6522 119 0.98867 Ignore off-diagonal covariance for SNe Ia in Hubble flow
V28 73.080 0.801 135.0255 119 1.13467 No metallicity correction for Cepheid PL
V99 73.994 0.697 321.7222 246 1.30781 Everything available
V99A 73.656 0.713 153.8165 172 0.89428 Everything available except TF
O1 73.110 0.920 53.3538 57 0.9360 Orthogonal path 1 MW+LMC/SMC+ Ceph+ SNIa+FP
O2 73.451 1.777 11.1628 23 0.4853 Orthogonal path 2 N4258+ TRGB+ SBF+MM (V00 equivalent)
O2 V99a 74.083 1.249 33.6889 27 0.6016 Orthogonal path 2 O2+SNII+EPM (V99a equivalent)
O2 V99 74.780 1.133 220.6600 151 1.4613 Orthogonal path 2 O2+SNII+EPM+TF(V99 equivalent)
driven by the implicit exclusion of 20 calibrator SNe Ia rather than by the Cepheids themselves. Analogous effects on
H0 induced by subsampling SNe Ia calibrators have been extensively discussed in A. G. Riess et al. (2024). Accounting
for this effect leaves a difference of merely 0.352 km s−1 Mpc−1 (44% of the baseline error) due to excluding Cepheids.

===== PAGE 23 =====
23
70
70
71
71
72
72
73
73
74
74
75
75
76
76
H0 [km s 1 Mpc 1]
Baseline
ADD ONE METHOD
JAGB
Miras
DESI FP + Coma
SNe II Empirically Calibrated
SNe II Expanding Photoshere
Tully-Fisher
SMC
LEAVE ONE METHOD OUT
No Cepheids
No TRGB/SBF
No Gaia/MW
No DEB/LMC/SMC
No NGC 4258
No SNe Ia
No SBF
No Masers in the Hubble flow
EXCLUDE INSTRUMENT PLATFORMS
No HST
No JWST
No SN <1994
ALTERNATE TREATMENTS
Baseline with SNe Ia, SBF, Masers in CMB frame
SNe Ia in z>0.06
SNe Ia in z=0.03 0.10
SNe Ia from CSP
SNe Ia from BayesSN
SNe Ia from SALT3 PP
H band
J band
No off-diagonal covariance for SNe Ia in Hubble flow
No metallicity correction for Cepheids PL
INCLUDE EVERYTHING
Everything
Everything except Tully-Fisher
ORTHOGONAL PATHS
MW+LMC+SMC+Ceph+SNIa+FP
N4258+TRGB+SBF+MM
O2+SNII+EPM
O2_V99a+TF
V00
V01
V02
V03
V04
V05
V06
V07
V08
V09
V10
V11
V12
V13
V14
V15
V16
V17
V18
V19
V20
V21
V22
V23
V24
V25
V26
V27
V28
V99
V99a
O1
O2
O2_V99a
O2_V99
variants
Figure 8.Baseline and variants results from Table 4. For some variants, a labeled change has a secondary consequence (i.e.,
removing the identified primary distance indicator also results in the loss of calibration to some SN Ia). In these cases a dashed
line immediately below such variants provides a custom baseline–i.e., the same SNe are removed before the removal of the
primary indicator–is shown to provide a custom reference of impact for that variant; see text for details.
Some variants yield significantly increased uncertainties onH 0. Excluding Cepheids (V08) increases the uncertainty
from 0.81 to 1.30 km s −1 Mpc−1, and comparison with the uncertainty of the custom baseline V08B (0.87) reveals
that this increase is truly driven by the exclusion of Cepheids rather than the implicitly removed 20 SNe Ia calibrators.
More modest increases occur for the variants without NGC 4258 as anchor, or when TRGB measurements are excluded.
This is simply a reflection of the reduced constraining power caused by the exclusion of a broad class of measurements.
Excluding either the Milky Way or the LMC as anchors has less impact, as each exclusion leaves two anchors for
Cepheids, and does not affect the TRGB, which is only calibrated via NGC 4258. The most dramatic impact is
associated with the exclusion of all SNe Ia; this increases the uncertainty to 1.79 km s −1 Mpc−1, more than a factor

===== PAGE 24 =====
24
of 2 above the baseline, illustrating the strong constraining power of SNe Ia, which remain the most powerful way to
measure the local value of the Hubble constant. When SNe Ia are excluded from the baseline, the primary constraint
onH 0 is based on the SBF measurement. Even in this case, the central value ofH 0 is changed only little, although
one naturally finds a much larger uncertainty. As an illustration, the solution including all other available data but
excluding SNe Ia in the Hubble flow—formally not a variant, since it does not satisfy the criteria established during
the Workshop—yields 75.29±0.93 km s −1 Mpc−1; despite the higher uncertainty, this value is still 8.1σaway from
the CMB value in flat ΛCDM.
The two variants V16 and V17 explore the impact of excluding all calibrator data from either HST or JWST, testing
potential broad systematics, such as calibration errors, that affect either facility. Note that all primary distance
indicators as included used space-based data from at least one of the two facilities. Excluding HST also implies
excluding the Milky Way and the LMC as anchors, since we do not yet have a calibration for Cepheids in those
systems based on JWST data. The solutions with either no HST or no JWST data are not fully disjoint since they
share a common anchor, NGC 4258, and many of the Hubble Flow tracers, and since the set of calibrators overlap,
carrying with them any intrinsic variance in their properties. However, many of the sources of uncertainty in distance
estimates are different and independent. The resultingH 0 values bracket the baseline, as could be expected, with a
difference in line with their respective uncertainties: without HST, 73.75±1.33 km s −1 Mpc−1; and without JWST,
73.00±0.86 km s −1 Mpc−1. Not surprisingly, the uncertainty in the result increases more if HST is excluded, since
HST results use three anchors (only NGC 4258 is available for JWST) and more HST observations are available, yet
both subsets remain close to the baseline with a difference below 1 km s−1 Mpc−1. The fact that the inclusion of JWST
observations favors a higher value ofH 0 corroborates the conclusion based on host-to-host distance comparisons by
A. G. Riess et al. (2024) thatH 0 measurements based purely on HST (A. G. Riess et al. 2022a) are not biased high
by the limited spatial resolution of WFC3/IR (crowding).
5.2.3.Alternate treatments
Variants V19-V26 show what happens if subsets of data are either excluded or treated differently. For variants
V19-V22, we modify the handling of peculiar velocities or redshift selection. In variant V19, we assume that the
observed velocities directly represent cosmological redshifts, i.e., we set all peculiar velocity corrections, which are
by default derived with the 2M++ model (J. Carrick et al. 2015), to zero. The value ofH 0 decreases slightly, to
73.06±0.80 km s−1 Mpc−1, with no meaningful change in the accuracy. Similarly, restricting the redshift range, either
by removing the high redshift end (V20,z >0.06) or the low-redshift end (V21, 0.3<z <1), changes the value ofH 0
by up to 0.8 km s−1 Mpc−1; the impact on the accuracy is modest.
Variants V22-V27 are noteworthy because they explore different treatments of SNe Ia, which drive overall precision
(cf. Sect. 5.2.2). Variants V22 and V23 consider different light curve fitters (consistently for both calibrators and
tracers), namely SNooPy v2.7 in V22 and BayesSN in V23. Both variants yield slightly higherH 0 values with slightly
larger nominal uncertainties. The BayesSN variant V23 furthermore yields a higher reducedχ 2. Further detail and
comparisons with published articles is provided in App. C.2, specifically concerning SNooPy in App. C.2.1.
Variants V25 and V26 rely exclusively on NIR measurements for SNe Ia (L. Galbany et al. 2023), in theHandJ
band respectively. These also yield slightly lower, yet consistentH 0 results with slightly larger uncertainties due to the
smaller number of calibrators and Hubble flow tracers. Note that we didnotuse SNe Ia measurements from multiple
sources (e.g., Pantheon+ and NIR) simultaneously in any solution; doing so would lead to unreliable, likely incorrect
results. First, the calibration of SN measurements in different samples are inconsistent, as they are based on different
filters, fitting processes, and conventions. More importantly, different measurements of the same SN would share to
a large extent the astrophysical variance of the source; therefore we expect such measurements to be significantly
correlated in their deviation from the mean, to an extent that; to the best of our knowlegde, has not been sufficiently
quantified. Since the SNe Ia samples overlap significantly, multiple measurements cannot be included in the same
solution in a statistically satisfactory way. To avoid such issues, we take care not to include multiple measurements
of the same SNe Ia—whether as local calibrators or as Hubble flow objects—in the same solution. Unless otherwise
stated, all solutions exclusively consider measurements collected in the Pantheon+ system (D. Scolnic et al. 2022).
Another treatment option concerns the covariance between different SNe Ia in the Hubble flow. Several collections
of measurements provide covariances between different objects; these can be due to the effect of standardization
parameters, or the survey from which data have been obtained. By default, we include such covariances where available.
However, Variant V27 deliberately ignores these covariances and assumes (incorrectly) the stated uncertainties to be

===== PAGE 25 =====
25
Distance Modulus Residuals
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Distance Network – All
Cepheid+HST
Large Magellanic Cloud
Riess et al. 2022
Cepheid+HST
Milky Way
Riess et al. 2022
Cepheid+HST
NGC 4258
Riess et al. 2022
Cepheid+HST
Small Magellanic Cloud
Riess et al. 2022
Cepheid+JWST
NGC 4258
SH0ES
JAGB+JWST
NGC 4258
CCHP
JAGB+JWST
NGC 4258
SH0ES
MIRAS
NGC 4258
H24
TRGB+HST
NGC 4258
Anand et al. (2021)
TRGB+HST
NGC 4258
Anand et al. (2022)
TRGB+HST
NGC 4258
CCHP
TRGB+HST
NGC 4258
Ex
TRGB+JWST
NGC 4258
Anand et al. (2025)
TRGB+JWST
NGC 4258
CCHP
TRGB+JWST
NGC 4258
SH0ES
Figure 9.Residuals for host and calibrator distances for the “everything” solution. The groupings, also distinguished by color,
correspond to calibrators measured by the same authors with common method and anchor. The error bars reflect the individual
calibrator errors; the shaded areas for each group indicate the combined uncertainty in the anchor distance and its reference
value, which are in common for all calibrators in the same grouping.
independent in order to assess the impact that the SNe Ia covariances have on the final result. This results in a miniscule
decrease inH 0, by less than 0.1 km s−1 Mpc−1, and analogously miniscule decrease in the nominal uncertainty. We
conclude that covariances between SNe Ia measurements in the Hubble flow currently have a negligible impact onH 0.
5.2.4.“Everything” solution
It is naturally interesting to consider the result of including all available methods into the Distance Network. To this
end, we constructed variant V99 by including all available measurements. As noted above, multiple measurements of
SNe Ia cannot be combined in a statistically satisfactory way, so that V99 exclusively considered Pantheon+ SNeIa.
V99 also incorporates methods with as yet insufficiently well understood systematics, such as SN II with EPM and
the Tully-Fisher relation. These results are provided here for completeness, and we recommend that theynotbe
used for further analysis. The resulting value is 73.99±0.70 km s −1 Mpc−1, which lies 8.7σfrom the Planck+ΛCDM
solution. We recognize that this solution may not be fully reliable, as indicated by the relatively large value of reduced
χ2, namely 1.3078 per degree of freedom; indeed, this solution deviates from the baseline more than several others,
primarily because of the TF contribution. Since the TF relation contributes the most to the excessχ 2, we also include
variant V99a, which is identical to V99 except for the exclusion of TF calibrators and tracers. This variant results in
H0 = 73.66±0.71 km s−1 Mpc−1, very close to the baseline with a 12% smaller uncertainty (and sub-percent precision
onH 0), has a reasonable reducedχ 2 of 0.8943, and lies 8.1σfrom the Plank+ΛCDM solution.
The everything solution is useful to understanding how elements in the baseline solution compare to the elements
not included therein, as well as any covariances among them. Three figures illustrate these points. Figure 9 shows
the fit residuals of host and calibrator distances for V99 in analogy with Fig. 4 for the baseline. Figure 10 illustrates
the corresponding Hubble flow residuals for V99. A corner plot illustrating covariance among the main global fit
parameters of the Distance Network for V99 is shown in Fig. 11.
5.3.Consistency Checks
We demonstrated the statistical consistency of the baseline solution by building alternate paths through the Distance
Network capable of determiningH 0. Statistically independent paths are discussed in Sect. 5.3.1, statistically not
independent paths in Sect. 5.3.2. Replications ofH 0 results from the literature are presented in Appendix C.

===== PAGE 26 =====
26
-0.5
0
0.5
-0.5
0
0.5
Megamasers
-0.5
0
0.5
-0.5
0
0.5
Surface Brightness Fluctuations
-0.5
0
0.5
-0.5
0
0.5
Distance Modulus Residuals
Type Ia Supernovae
-0.5
0
0.5
-0.5
0
0.5
Type II Supernovae
-0.5
0
0.5
10-2 10-1 100
Redshift
-0.5
0
0.5
Tully-Fisher Relation
Mean & dispersion of values
Global uncertainty
Peculiar velocities uncertainty
Hubble Flow – All
Figure 10.Residuals in log(H 0) vs. redshift for objects in the Hubble Flow for the “everything” solution. Each subplot refers
to sources in the same group, measured by the same method. Error bars for individual sources are representative of the expected
scatter across sources in the same category, and do not include calibration uncertainties for each class. The shaded bars at the
right show the mean and dispersion for each category.
5.3.1.Orthogonal paths
Orthogonal paths strike statistically fully independent paths across the Distance Network. In creating these paths,
we sought to identify configurations capable of achieving similar constraining power. We identified the following two 43
orthogonal paths and two extensions of the latter:
•O1:(MW+LMC+SMC+Ceph+SNIa+FP)employs the Magellanic Clouds and MW parallaxes as an-
chors, calibrates SNeIa using Cepheids, and adds in the FP calibrated in Coma. This yieldsH 0 = 73.11±
0.92 km s−1 Mpc−1 with aχ 2 = 53.5 and a reducedχ 2 of 0.922.
•O2:(N4258+TRGB+SBF+MM)Uses N4258 as anchor, TRGB as calibrators, and SBF as tracers, in addi-
tion to megamasers. This corresponds to a modified V07 (baseline+SMC) from which all measurements correlated
with O1 have been removed. This yieldsH 0 = 73.45±1.78 km s−1 Mpc−1, with aχ 2 = 11.2, and a reducedχ 2
of 0.4853. The low reducedχ 2 indicates that the measurement uncertainties used are overestimated.
•O2 V99a:(O2+SNII+EPM)Modified O2 to which both astrophysically and empirically calibrated SNe II
have been added, i.e., corresponds to V99a without elements in O1. We findH 0 = 74.06±1.25 km s−1 Mpc−1,
with aχ 2 = 28.76, and a reducedχ 2 of 0.5752. Here too the reducedχ 2 is a little low.
43 In principle, more orthogonal paths could be formulated (e.g., by separating out specific one-step methods), but such combinations of
paths are typically not balanced in their constraining power.

===== PAGE 27 =====
27
−19.26 −19.20
MIa
72
73
74
75
76H0[km/s/Mpc]
30.9
31.0
31.1
31.2
µVirgo
31.35
31.40
31.45
31.50
31.55
µFornax
−0.14
−0.10
−0.06
−0.02
M oﬀ
TF
34.9
35.0
35.1
µComa
−16.86
−16.78
−16.70
−16.62
MII
−0.05
0.00
0.05
M oﬀ
SBF
MIa =
−19.244 ± 0.019
−0.05 0.05
M oﬀ
SBF
M oﬀ
SBF =
−0.013 ± 0.024
−16.85 −16.70
MII
MII =
−16.750 ± 0.042
34.92 35.00 35.08
µComa
µComa =
34.998 ± 0.032
−0.10 −0.05
M oﬀ
TF
M oﬀ
TF =
−0.077 ± 0.020
31.4 31.5
µFornax
µFornax =
31.444 ± 0.035
31.0 31.1
µVirgo
µVirgo =
31.050 ± 0.045
72 73 74 75 76
H0[km/s/Mpc]
H0[km/s/Mpc] =
73.94 ± 0.67
Everything
Figure 11.Corner plot illustrating the main optimization parameters for the all-inclusive solution, using the naming convention
of Appendix B.3.1. Parameters related to individual host distances are not included. Note that this solution is not an alternative
result to the baseline solution, but rather a variant to check the impact of further data on our result, see also Section 5. We
show it here to highlight the existing correlations between the various (most important) solution parameters. Deviations from
the analytically calculated result are due to the numerical precision of a finite-length chain.
•O2 V99:(O2 V99a+TF)Modified O2 with Tully-Fisher relation added, i.e., corresponds to V99 without the
elements in O1. We findH 0 = 74.93±1.14 km s−1 Mpc−1, with aχ 2 = 186.6631, and a reducedχ 2 of 1.4359. The
very significant increase in reducedχ 2 emphasizes the underestimated uncertainties of the Tully-Fisher results,
cf. V99.
Fig. 12 illustrates the results of these orthogonal paths compared to the baseline result. Both O1 and O2 are highly
compatible with each other, deviating by only 0.17σdespite representing fully independent measurements. As previ-
ously shown in the context of V13, the significantly higher uncertainty of O2 is due to the exclusion of SNe Ia. The
orthogonal nature of O1 and O2 allows to compute their weighted average,H O1+O2
0 = (73.18±0.82) km s−1 Mpc−1,

===== PAGE 28 =====
28
O1
(MW+LMC/SMC+
Ceph+
SNIa+FP)
O2
(N4258+
TRGB+
SBF+MM)
O2 V99a
(O2+SNII+EPM)
O2 V99
(O2 V99a+TF)
Independent path name
72
73
74
75Hubble constant H0 Independent paths
Baseline
Weighted mean
Fraction of data keptFraction of data kept
Figure 12.The two paths starting with “O” are proper orthogonal paths and can be taken as independent measurements of the
Hubble constant. Their weighted mean (red) agrees well with our baseline result despite the latter including all cross-correlations.
The shortcuts of the data sets are as defined in the text. The pie charts “fraction of data kept” represent the fraction of statistical
power remaining in the path. It is computed as the fraction of the variance ofH 0 for the given result (in this way multiple
datasets with the same constraining power inH 0 will be assigned equal percentages). We show the percentages relative to the
baseline result (V00).
which agrees to within 0.3 km s−1 Mpc−1 of the baseline. The slightly offset central value and reduced precision arise
due to fewer internal cross-calibrations—their combination is missing for example any N4258-anchored calibrations
of SNe Ia. This underlines a key advantage of the covariance-combined approach taken by the H0DN collaboration
compared to independent pursuits ofH 0 .
The two extensions to O2 considered, O2 V99a and VO2 V99, add elements from the “everything” variants (V99a,
V99) to improve precision. Both extensions yieldH 0 values marginally higher than O2 and fully compatible with the
respective “everything” variants V99 and V99a. The weighted averageH O1+O2 V99a
0 = (73.45±0.74) km s−1 Mpc−1
agrees to within<0.5σwith V99a and features a very similar uncertainty. Finally, the weighted average including the
Tully-Fisher relation,H O1+O2 V99
0 = (73.77±0.71) km s−1 Mpc−1, agrees to within 0.4 km s−1 Mpc−1 with V99, with
also very similar uncertainty.
Overall these tests confirm both the reliability of the main results as well as the consistent setup of the network.
We note that in the case in which the baseline is split into two orthogonal paths we have a mild domination of the
uncertainty by the SNe Ia, whereas in the extended cases the uncertainties are relatively balanced.
5.3.2.Paths based on subsets of data
In order to verify the internal consistency of different data sets and methods relevant to determining the Hubble
constant, we show below theH 0 values obtained for a set of “paths” through the network, each defined by a unique
combination of anchors, calibrators, and tracers. 44 These paths are not all statistically independent by definition,
since they might share, for example, a common anchor or a common set of tracer objects. However, we expect the
corresponding distribution ofH 0 values to align at least as well as for independent variables, since we expect the shared
data to produce positive, not negative, correlations. In this case, the corresponding test statistics can be regarded as
lower bounds on the true values that would be obtained if the full correlation structure were accounted for (i.e., in
plain English: “if the points sharing the same data are incompatible, that’s even worse than points not sharing the
same data being incompatible”). We find that the Anderson-Darling testcannotreject the null hypothesis of the paths
stemming from a Gaussian distribution at 5% confidence level, and we findp= 86.3% for the Shapiro test, both very
well within acceptable bounds. We also find no visually strong (>2σ) outliers among the paths shown in Figure 13.
Note that since these paths are constructed always using minimal paths through the network, they explicitly do not
qualify as ‘variants’ in the sense defined above. We also note that if we were to include the Tully-Fisher case in the
44 In practice we construct these paths as minimal combinations, except where this might lead to ambiguities. First we use each of the
possible calibrator sets (e.g. Cepheids measured with HST, or Miras, or JAGB, etc.) together with the SNe Ia as Hubble flow tracers
(13 combinations), then using the SNe II (either just with the minimal calibrator set from T. de Jaeger et al. (2020a) or with all
available calibrators) (2 combinations), the megamasers alone, the SBF anchored using any hosts anchored by NGC 4258, and the SNII
tailored EPM method (each 1 path), as well as the FP method anchored only by the SBF value (to remain minimal). In total that
makes 19 paths through the network.

===== PAGE 29 =====
29
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8 T9 T10 T11 T12 T13 T14 T15 T16 T17 T18 T19
Individual path index
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
Diﬀerence to average, ∆ H0
pAnderson = 19.3%
pShapiro = 86.3%
Statistical consistency check
Fraction of data keptFraction of data kept
Figure 13.The statistical consistency of various individual paths through the network. These represent a set of paths that are
highly correlated, and often only take a tiny part of the network into account. They are used for a statistical consistency check
and should not be interpreted as valid variants in the sense of section 2.1.4. We also show the simple weighted mean of these
paths in grey purely for visual purposes, reminding that due to their correlations (and selection effects) it need not necessarily
agree with the baseline result. For details on the pie charts, see Fig. 12.
generation of these paths, the results worsen quite a bit, to ap≃10% for the Anderson-Darling test and ap≃5%
for the Shapiro test, showing once again the high discrepancy of the Tully-Fisher based results within the Distance
Network.
6.CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
The Hubble “tension” has persisted for more than a decade and significantly shifted focus amongst endeavors to
precisely measureH 0. Before∼2012, the primary motivation for measuringH 0 with increasing precision was to provide
a strong prior for constraining ΛCDM parameters and understanding dark energy (e.g., S. H. Suyu et al. 2012). As the
statistical significance of the discrepancy between early- and late-Universe measurements grew, relentless attention was
given to systematics of local distance measurements with an implicit expectation that the tension would be resolved
once the responsible systematic error was identified. In other words, there was a non-negligible preference among many
to discard direct measurements (even ones with small and detailed uncertainties) based on astronomical techniques in
favor of theH 0 value derived from the perceived “simple physics” of the early Universe and a specific cosmological
model. A narrative of merely two or three direct measurements disagreeing with one extremely precise prediction
based on thePlanckCMB and flat ΛCDM lent credence to this view, despite a plethora of semi-(in)dependent
measurements painting similar pictures (e.g., E. Di Valentino et al. 2025, and references therein). A statistically
rigorous combination of the available measurements was thus needed to resolve whether any one method might be
deemed ‘bad’ or unreliable. The present work provides this long overdue combination supported by expert knowledge
from all relevant disciplines, and the results presented discredit the expectation of ‘unknown unknowns’ capable of
misleading the direct measurement of the local expansion rate using astronomical techniques.
The Distance Network framework introduced here establishes a reproducible and extensible methodology for syn-
thesizing local distance constraints. Its transparency and modularity allow for the straightforward integration of new
data, methods, or calibrators, enabling the community to track the evolution ofH 0 estimates over time. In addition
to the primary distance ladder, the network already incorporates several fully independent paths toH 0, including the
maser-based anchor, the TRGB–SBF route, and SNe II distances based on astrophysical modeling. These methods rely
on distinct physical assumptions and observational systematics, yet yield results consistent with the primary solution,
reinforcing the robustness of the empirical determination. While current uncertainties for these paths are larger, their
future competitiveness will depend on targeted improvements in calibration, modeling, and sample size. Promising
opportunities include searches for SNe II in SBF or SNe Ia host galaxies, extending TRGB and Cepheid measurements
deeper into the Hubble flow using ELTs, denser tiling of NGC 4258 to refine JAGB and TRGB calibrations, and
establishing additional anchors via geometric methods (e.g., using population-II pulsating stars calibrated by parallax,
e.g., B. Lengen et al. 2025). Strengthening these independent routes and developing new anchors will be critical for

===== PAGE 30 =====
30
validating and advancing precision cosmology. The approach presented here serves both as a benchmark of current
capabilities and as a foundation for future consensus efforts in the determination ofH 0.
The Distance Network presented in this work provides the most precise direct measurement to date of the Hubble
constant,H 0 = 73.50±0.81 km s −1 Mpc−1, achieving a relative uncertainty of 1.09%. This value is the result of a
comprehensive, covariance-weighted combination of local distance measurements incorporating multiple distance indi-
cators, each rigorously assessed for reliability, consistency, and methodological transparency. By explicitly accounting
for shared uncertainties and correlations, the Distance Network formalism surpasses the precision of previous individual
or pairwise combinations and reflects a collaborative consensus on data selection, treatment, and analysis strategy.
In constructing the distance network, certain methodological deviations from state-of-the-art analyses were necessary
to achieve full covariance treatment across indicators. For example, the use of supernova intercepts for calibration
simplifies network integration but does not incorporate the full cross-rung covariance present in datasets such as
Pantheon+, as done in A. G. Riess et al. (2022a). These tradeoffs are explicitly documented to ensure transparency
and reproducibility. We are publicly releasing the full Distance Network code upon acceptance of this paper at
https://github.com/StefCas789/H0DN. We are planning to additionally publish the code in the Astrophysics Source
Code Library45 – the corresponding DOI will be updated and linked here in a future version of the paper.
A central feature of our approach is the construction of a baseline solution exclusively based on top-ranked calibrators
and tracers, as determined by agreement among all authors as representatives of their respective communities. This was
complemented by a suite of predefined variants, decided prior to conducting the analysis, which explore the sensitivity
of the result to alternative assumptions, datasets, or methodological choices. The resulting spread inH 0 values across
all variants is significantly smaller than the statistical uncertainty of any individual variant, confirming that no single
dataset or technique dominates the result and that the network solution is not driven by any particular methodology
or systematic effect. This is also confirmed by investigating routes through the network that are designed to not have
any elements in common, leading to results that are highly consistent with the baseline analysis.
Further scrutiny of systematics affecting Distance Network elements is both necessary and useful for further improve-
ments toH 0 accuracy. However, reconciling the Distance Network-based directH 0 measurement with the expectation
from ΛCDM would require an extremely unlikely alignment of systematics conspiring to overestimateH 0. The diver-
sified portfolio of methods and datasets incorporated into the Distance Network effectively protects against significant
bias and demonstrates that the Hubble tension cannot be eliminated by invoking as-yet unidentified systematics in
any single method or dataset.
Our result differs by more than 6σfrom the value predicted by the ΛCDM model calibrated toPlanckCMB
observations, by more than 7σfrom that calibrated to SPT+ACT CMB measurements, which are given asH 0 =
67.24±0.35 km s−1 Mpc−1 from Planck+SPT+ACT (Eq. (54) of E. Camphuis et al. 2025), and by about 5σfrom
the combination of BBN and DESI BAO constraints, which areH 0 = 68.51±0.58 km s −1 Mpc−1 (Tab. V of M.
Abdul Karim et al. 2025).
Since the Distance Network provides a conclusive directH 0 measurement with demonstrated control of systematics,
the resulting significant discrepancy retires the aforementioned expectation that identifying a simple systematic could
resolve the Hubble constant tension. In this vein, we advocate that the empirically determined value ofH 0 from the
Distance Network be used as a prior in cosmological analyses. This marks a significant shift in perspective: rather
than serving solely to constrain dark energy models, as envisioned a decade ago, the improved accuracy ofH 0 now
exposes a broader inconsistency within the standard cosmological framework and strengthens the case for new physics
or a deeper reassessment of early-Universe inferences. The evolving role ofH 0 has already reshaped our understanding
of precision cosmology, and further surprises may lie ahead.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to the ISSI for their hospitality and organization, and
especially for a critical role in enabling the scientific discussion and interactions that made this work possible. We are
grateful to Fabio Crameri for assistance with visualizations (Figs. 4, 5, 8, and 9).
This research has received support from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant Agreement No. 947660). RIA is funded by the Swiss Na-
45 https://ascl.net

===== PAGE 31 =====
31
tional Science Foundation through an Eccellenza Professorial Fellowship (award PCEFP2 194638). The research
leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (project UniverScale, grant agreement 951549). PK acknowledges
support from the Polish-French Marie Sk lodowska-Curie and Pierre Curie Science Prize awarded by the Founda-
tion for Polish Science. PK acknowledges financial support from the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche
(ANR), under grant ANR-23-CE31-0009-01 (Unlock-pfactor). AB thanks the funding from the Anusandhan Na-
tional Research Foundation (ANRF), Government of India, under the Prime Minister Early Career Research Grant
scheme (ANRF/ECRG/2024/000675/PMS). LV and HGM acknowledge support of Spanish MINECO under project
PID2022-141125NB-I00 MCIN/AEI, and Center of Excellence Maria de Maeztu Grant CEX2024-001451-M funded
by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033. LG acknowledges financial support from AGAUR, CSIC, MCIN and AEI
10.13039/501100011033 under projects PID2023-151307NB-I00, PIE 20215AT016, CEX2020-001058-M, ILINK23001,
COOPB2304, and 2021-SGR-01270. EDV is supported by a Royal Society Dorothy Hodgkin Research Fellowship.
NS acknowledges support from the Excellence Cluster ORIGINS which is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - EXC-2094 - 390783311, as well as
the funding through a Fraunhofer-Schwarzschild Fellowship at the LMU. MC acknowledges support from ASI–INAF
grant no. 2024-10-HH.0 (WP8420), the ESO Scientific Visitor Programme, and INAF GO-grant no. 12/2024. JJ
acknowledges support from NASA/STScI through grants HST-GO-17436 and JWST-GO-5989. SC and GA acknowl-
edge support from NASA/STScI through grants HST-GO-17098, JWST-GO-1685 and JWST-GO-2875. This article
is based upon work from COST Action CA21136 “Addressing observational tensions in cosmology with systematics
and fundamental physics” (CosmoVerse), supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology).
This research was supported by the International Space Science Institute (ISSI) in Bern/Beijing through ISSI/ISSI-BJ
International Team project ID #24-603 – “EXPANDING Universe” (EXploiting Precision AstroNomical Distance
INdicators in the Gaia Universe). This research was supported by the Munich Institute for Astro-, Particle and Bio-
Physics (MIAPbP) which is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)
under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC-2094 – 390783311.
Statement of individuals’ relevant expertise
Casertano–SN Ia, Cepheids, TRGB, network analysis
Anand–TRGB, HST, JWST, TF
Anderson–Cepheids, TRGB, star clusters, systematics of stellar standard candles
Beaton–TRGB, AGB, stellar populations
Bhardwaj–Cepheids, Miras, metallicity, clusters
Blakeslee–SBF
Boubel–TF relation
Breuval–Cepheids, metallicity, clusters
Brout–SN Ia, Pantheon+
Cantiello–SBF
Cruz Reyes–Cepheids, clusters
Cs¨ ornyei–SN II
de Jaeger–SN II
Dhawan–SN Ia, BayesSN
Di Valentino–cosmological analyses
Galbany–SN Ia, near-IR, SNooPy, SN II.
Gil-Mar´ ın–cosmological analyses
Graczyk–DEBs
Huang–Miras
Jensen–SBF
Kervella–Cepheids, metallicity, DEBs
Leibundgut–SN Ia, SN II
Lengen–Clusters
Li–JAGB, TRGB
Macri–Cepheids, Miras
Nota–Organizer

===== PAGE 32 =====
32
¨Oz¨ ulker–cosmological analyses
Pesce–Masers, Radio observations
Riess–SN Ia, Cepheids, HST, JWST
Romaniello–Cepheids, metallicity
Said-TF, FP, peculiar velocities
Sch¨ oneberg–cosmological analyses, BAO+BBN, CMB,H0 tension
Scolnic–SN Ia, Pantheon +
Sicignano–Cepheids
Skowron–DEBs, reddening maps
Uddin–SN Ia cosmology, Hubble constant analysis, CSP
Verde–cosmological analyses
REFERENCES
Abdul Karim, M., et al. 2025, Phys. Rev. D, 112, 083515,
doi: 10.1103/tr6y-kpc6
Adams, C., & Blake, C. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 3275,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa845
Aitken, A. C. 1935, Proc. Royal Soc. Edinburgh, 55, 42,
doi: 10.1017/S0370164600014346
Anand, G. S., Tully, R. B., Rizzi, L., Riess, A. G., & Yuan,
W. 2022, ApJ, 932, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac68df
Anand, G. S., Rizzi, L., Tully, R. B., et al. 2021, AJ, 162,
80, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac0440
Anand, G. S., Tully, R. B., Cohen, Y., et al. 2024a, ApJ,
973, 83, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad64c7
Anand, G. S., Riess, A. G., Yuan, W., et al. 2024b, ApJ,
966, 89, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2e0a
Anand, G. S., Tully, R. B., Cohen, Y., et al. 2025, ApJ,
982, 26, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adb399
Anderson, J. P., Contreras, C., Stritzinger, M. D., et al.
2024, A&A, 692, A95, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244401
Anderson, R. I. 2019, A&A, 631, A165,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201936585
Anderson, R. I. 2022, A&A, 658, A148,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202141644
Anderson, R. I., Koblischke, N. W., & Eyer, L. 2024, ApJL,
963, L43, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad284d
Anderson, R. I., & Riess, A. G. 2018, ApJ, 861, 36,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac5e2
Argon, A. L., Greenhill, L. J., Reid, M. J., Moran, J. M., &
Humphreys, E. M. L. 2007, ApJ, 659, 1040,
doi: 10.1086/512718
Baltay, C., Rabinowitz, D., Hadjiyska, E., et al. 2013,
PASP, 125, 683, doi: 10.1086/671198
Beaton, R. L., Bono, G., Braga, V. F., et al. 2018, SSRv,
214, 113, doi: 10.1007/s11214-018-0542-1
Bhardwaj, A., Matsunaga, N., Huang, C. D., Riess, A. G.,
& Rejkuba, M. 2025, ApJ, 990, 63,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adf20b
Bhardwaj, A., Rejkuba, M., de Grijs, R., et al. 2021, ApJ,
909, 200, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abdf48
Bhardwaj, A., Riess, A. G., Catanzaro, G., et al. 2023,
ApJL, 955, L13, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf710
Bhardwaj, A., Ripepi, V., Testa, V., et al. 2024, A&A, 683,
A234, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202348140
Blakeslee, J. P., Jensen, J. B., Ma, C.-P., Milne, P. A., &
Greene, J. E. 2021, ApJ, 911, 65,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abe86a
Boubel, P., Colless, M., Said, K., & Staveley-Smith, L.
2024a, MNRAS, 531, 84, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1122
Boubel, P., Colless, M., Said, K., & Staveley-Smith, L.
2024b, MNRAS, 533, 1550, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1925
Braatz, J., Greenhill, L., Reid, M., et al. 2007, in IAU
Symposium, Vol. 242, Astrophysical Masers and their
Environments, ed. J. M. Chapman & W. A. Baan,
399–401, doi: 10.1017/S1743921307013452
Braatz, J., Condon, J., Constantin, A., et al. 2015, in IAU
General Assembly, Vol. 29, 2255730
Braatz, J. A., Reid, M. J., Humphreys, E. M. L., et al.
2010, ApJ, 718, 657, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/718/2/657
Breuval, L., Riess, A. G., Kervella, P., Anderson, R. I., &
Romaniello, M. 2022, ApJ, 939, 89,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac97e2
Breuval, L., Kervella, P., Anderson, R. I., et al. 2020, A&A,
643, A115, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038633
Breuval, L., Riess, A. G., Casertano, S., et al. 2024, ApJ,
973, 30, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad630e
Breuval, L., Anand, G. S., Anderson, R. I., et al. 2025,
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2507.15936,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.15936

===== PAGE 33 =====
33
Brout, D., Scolnic, D., Popovic, B., et al. 2022a, ApJ, 938,
110, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8e04
Brout, D., Taylor, G., Scolnic, D., et al. 2022b, ApJ, 938,
111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8bcc
Burns, C. R., Stritzinger, M., Phillips, M. M., et al. 2011,
AJ, 141, 19, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/141/1/19
Calcino, J., & Davis, T. 2017, JCAP, 2017, 038,
doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2017/01/038
Camphuis, E., Quan, W., Balkenhol, L., et al. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2506.20707,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.20707
Cappellari, M. 2023, MNRAS, 526, 3273,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2597
Carr, A., Davis, T. M., Scolnic, D., et al. 2022, PASA, 39,
e046, doi: 10.1017/pasa.2022.41
Carrick, J., Turnbull, S. J., Lavaux, G., & Hudson, M. J.
2015, MNRAS, 450, 317, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv547
Casertano, S., Riess, A. G., Anderson, J., et al. 2016, ApJ,
825, 11, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/825/1/11
Ciardullo, R. 2006, in Planetary Nebulae Beyond the Milky
Way, ed. L. Stanghellini, J. R. Walsh, & N. G. Douglas,
79, doi: 10.1007/3-540-34270-2 10
Claussen, M. J., Reid, M. J., Schneps, M. H., et al. 1988, in
IAU Symposium, Vol. 129, The Impact of VLBI on
Astrophysics and Geophysics, ed. M. J. Reid & J. M.
Moran, 231
Cruz Reyes, M., & Anderson, R. I. 2023, A&A, 672, A85,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244775
Cs¨ ornyei, G., Anderson, R. I., Vogl, C., et al. 2023a, A&A,
678, A44, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346971
Cs¨ ornyei, G., Vogl, C., Taubenberger, S., et al. 2023b,
A&A, 672, A129, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245379
D’Andrea, C. B., Sako, M., Dilday, B., et al. 2010, ApJ,
708, 661, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/708/1/661
Davis, T. M., Hinton, S. R., Howlett, C., & Calcino, J.
2019, MNRAS, 490, 2948, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2652
Davis, T. M., Hui, L., Frieman, J. A., et al. 2011, ApJ, 741,
67, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/741/1/67
de Grijs, R. 2013, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 289, Advancing
the Physics of Cosmic Distances, ed. R. de Grijs,
351–360, doi: 10.1017/S1743921312021709
de Jaeger, T., & Galbany, L. 2024, in The Hubble Constant
Tension, ed. E. Di Valentino & Brout Dillon, 177–190,
doi: 10.1007/978-981-99-0177-7 10
de Jaeger, T., Galbany, L., Riess, A. G., et al. 2022,
MNRAS, 514, 4620, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1661
de Jaeger, T., Stahl, B. E., Zheng, W., et al. 2020a,
MNRAS, 496, 3402, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1801
de Jaeger, T., Gonz´ alez-Gait´ an, S., Hamuy, M., et al.
2017a, ApJ, 835, 166, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/835/2/166
de Jaeger, T., Galbany, L., Filippenko, A. V., et al. 2017b,
MNRAS, 472, 4233, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2300
de Jaeger, T., Zheng, W., Stahl, B. E., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 490, 2799, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2714
de Jaeger, T., Galbany, L., Gonz´ alez-Gait´ an, S., et al.
2020b, MNRAS, 495, 4860, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1402
DESI Collaboration, Adame, A. G., Aguilar, J., et al. 2024,
AJ, 168, 58, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad3217
Dessart, L., & Hillier, D. J. 2005, A&A, 439, 671,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20053217
Dey, A., Schlegel, D. J., Lang, D., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 168,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab089d
Dhawan, S., Thorp, S., Mandel, K. S., et al. 2023, MNRAS,
524, 235, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1590
Dhawan, S., Goobar, A., Johansson, J., et al. 2022, ApJ,
934, 185, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7ceb
Di Valentino, E., Mena, O., Pan, S., et al. 2021, Classical
and Quantum Gravity, 38, 153001,
doi: 10.1088/1361-6382/ac086d
Di Valentino, E., Said, J. L., Riess, A., et al. 2025, Physics
of the Dark Universe, 49, 101965,
doi: 10.1016/j.dark.2025.101965
Djorgovski, S., & Davis, M. 1987, ApJ, 313, 59,
doi: 10.1086/164948
Dressler, A., Lynden-Bell, D., Burstein, D., et al. 1987,
ApJ, 313, 42, doi: 10.1086/164947
Fitzpatrick, E. L., & Massa, D. 2007, ApJ, 663, 320,
doi: 10.1086/518158
Folatelli, G., Morrell, N., Phillips, M. M., et al. 2013, ApJ,
773, 53, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/773/1/53
Freedman, W. 2014,, HST Proposal ID 13691. Cycle 22
Freedman, W. L. 2018,, HST Proposal. Cycle 26, ID.
#15642
Freedman, W. L., & Madore, B. F. 2010, ARA&A, 48, 673,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082708-101829
Freedman, W. L., Madore, B. F., Hoyt, T., et al. 2021,,
JWST Proposal. Cycle 1, ID. #1995
Freedman, W. L., Madore, B. F., Hoyt, T. J., et al. 2025,
ApJ, 985, 203, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adce78
Freedman, W. L., Madore, B. F., Gibson, B. K., et al. 2001,
ApJ, 553, 47, doi: 10.1086/320638
Freedman, W. L., Madore, B. F., Hatt, D., et al. 2019, ApJ,
882, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2f73
Gaia Collaboration, Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., et al.
2016, A&A, 595, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629272
Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al.
2021, A&A, 649, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039657
Galbany, L., de Jaeger, T., Riess, A. G., et al. 2023, A&A,
679, A95, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244893

===== PAGE 34 =====
34
Gallenne, A., Pietrzy´ nski, G., Graczyk, D., et al. 2019,
A&A, 632, A31, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935837
Gao, F., Braatz, J. A., Reid, M. J., et al. 2016, ApJ, 817,
128, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/817/2/128
Garnavich, P., Wood, C. M., Milne, P., et al. 2023, ApJ,
953, 35, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ace04b
Gommers, R., Virtanen, P., Haberland, M., et al. 2025,,
v1.16.0 Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.595738
Graczyk, D., Pietrzy´ nski, G., Thompson, I. B., et al. 2018,
ApJ, 860, 1, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac2bf
Graczyk, D., Pietrzy´ nski, G., Thompson, I. B., et al. 2020,
ApJ, 904, 13, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abbb2b
Graziani, R., Courtois, H. M., Lavaux, G., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 488, 5438, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz078
Greenhill, L. J., Jiang, D. R., Moran, J. M., et al. 1995,
ApJ, 440, 619, doi: 10.1086/175301
Hamuy, M., & Pinto, P. A. 2002, ApJL, 566, L63,
doi: 10.1086/339676
Hamuy, M., Folatelli, G., Morrell, N. I., et al. 2006, PASP,
118, 2, doi: 10.1086/500228
Haschke, R., Grebel, E. K., & Duffau, S. 2011, AJ, 141,
158, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/141/5/158
Herrnstein, J. R., Moran, J. M., Greenhill, L. J., et al.
1999, Nature, 400, 539, doi: 10.1038/22972
Hinton, S., & Brout, D. 2020, J. Open Source Softw., 5,
2122, doi: 10.21105/joss.02122
Hoyt, T. J., Jang, I. S., Freedman, W. L., et al. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2503.11769,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.11769
Hoyt, T. J., Beaton, R. L., Freedman, W. L., et al. 2021,
ApJ, 915, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abfe5a
Hsiao, E. Y., Phillips, M. M., Marion, G. H., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 014002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae961
Huang, C. D., Riess, A. G., Hoffmann, S. L., et al. 2018,
ApJ, 857, 67, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab6b3
Huang, C. D., Riess, A. G., Yuan, W., et al. 2020, ApJ,
889, 5, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5dbd
Huang, C. D., Yuan, W., Riess, A. G., et al. 2024, ApJ,
963, 83, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad1ff8
Humphreys, E. M. L., Reid, M. J., Greenhill, L. J., Moran,
J. M., & Argon, A. L. 2008, ApJ, 672, 800,
doi: 10.1086/523637
Humphreys, E. M. L., Reid, M. J., Moran, J. M., Greenhill,
L. J., & Argon, A. L. 2013, ApJ, 775, 13,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/775/1/13
Jacoby, G. H., Branch, D., Ciardullo, R., et al. 1992, PASP,
104, 599, doi: 10.1086/133035
Jang, I. S., & Lee, M. G. 2017, ApJ, 836, 74,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/836/1/74
Jang, I. S., Hoyt, T. J., Beaton, R. L., et al. 2021, ApJ,
906, 125, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc8e9
Jensen, J. B., Blakeslee, J. P., Cantiello, M., et al. 2025,
ApJ, 987, 87, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/addfd6
Jensen, J. B., Blakeslee, J. P., Gibson, Z., et al. 2015, ApJ,
808, 91, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/808/1/91
Jensen, J. B., Blakeslee, J. P., Ma, C.-P., et al. 2021, ApJS,
255, 21, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac01e7
Jha, S., Garnavich, P. M., Kirshner, R. P., et al. 1999,
ApJS, 125, 73, doi: 10.1086/313275
Jones, D. O., Kenworthy, W. D., Dai, M., et al. 2023, ApJ,
951, 22, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acd195
Jorgensen, I., Franx, M., & Kjaergaard, P. 1995, MNRAS,
276, 1341, doi: 10.1093/mnras/276.4.1341
Kamionkowski, M., & Riess, A. G. 2023, Annual Review of
Nuclear and Particle Science, 73, 153,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-nucl-111422-024107
Kenworthy, W. D., Jones, D. O., Dai, M., et al. 2021, ApJ,
923, 265, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac30d8
Kenworthy, W. D., Riess, A. G., Scolnic, D., et al. 2022,
ApJ, 935, 83, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac80bd
Kerzendorf, W. E., & Sim, S. A. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 387,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu055
Khan, S., Anderson, R. I., Ekstr¨ om, S., Georgy, C., &
Breuval, L. 2025, A&A, 702, A235,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202555704
Khan, S., Anderson, R. I., Miglio, A., Mosser, B., &
Elsworth, Y. P. 2023, A&A, 680, A105,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347919
Kirshner, R. P., & Kwan, J. 1974, ApJ, 193, 27,
doi: 10.1086/153123
Kourkchi, E., Tully, R. B., Eftekharzadeh, S., et al. 2020,
ApJ, 902, 145, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abb66b
Krisciunas, K., Contreras, C., Burns, C. R., et al. 2017, AJ,
154, 211, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa8df0
Kuo, C. Y., Braatz, J. A., Reid, M. J., et al. 2013, ApJ,
767, 155, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/767/2/155
Kuo, C. Y., Braatz, J. A., Lo, K. Y., et al. 2015, ApJ, 800,
26, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/800/1/26
Kuo, C. Y., Hsiang, J. Y., Chung, H. H., et al. 2020, ApJ,
892, 18, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab781d
Laney, C. D., Joner, M. D., & Pietrzy´ nski, G. 2012,
MNRAS, 419, 1637,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19826.x
Lapack Contributors. 2021,, Astrophysics Source Code
Library, record ascl:2104.020
Leavitt, H. S., & Pickering, E. C. 1912, Harvard College
Observatory Circular, 173, 1
Lee, A. J., Freedman, W. L., Madore, B. F., et al. 2025,
ApJ, 985, 182, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adc8a1

===== PAGE 35 =====
35
Lengen, B., Anderson, R. I., Cruz Reyes, M., & Viviani, G.
2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2509.16331,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.16331
Li, S., Riess, A. G., Anand, G. S., et al. 2025a, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2504.08921,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.08921
Li, S., Riess, A. G., Casertano, S., et al. 2024a, ApJ, 966,
20, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2f2b
Li, S., Riess, A. G., Scolnic, D., Casertano, S., & Anand,
G. S. 2025b, ApJ, 988, 97,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/addd0c
Li, S., Riess, A. G., Scolnic, D., Casertano, S., & Anand,
G. S. 2025c, ApJ, 988, 97,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/addd0c
Li, S., Anand, G. S., Riess, A. G., et al. 2024b, ApJ, 976,
177, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad84f3
Lilow, R., & Nusser, A. 2021, MNRAS, 507, 1557,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2009
Lindegren, L., Bastian, U., Biermann, M., et al. 2021a,
A&A, 649, A4, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039653
Lindegren, L., Klioner, S. A., Hern´ andez, J., et al. 2021b,
A&A, 649, A2, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039709
Magnus, E., Groenewegen, M. A. T., Girardi, L., et al.
2024, A&A, 691, A350,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450677
Marion, G. H., Brown, P. J., Vink´ o, J., et al. 2016, ApJ,
820, 92, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/820/2/92
McQuinn, K. B. W., Boyer, M., Skillman, E. D., & Dolphin,
A. E. 2019, ApJ, 880, 63, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2627
Mermilliod, J. C., Mermilliod, M., & Hauck, B. 1997,
A&AS, 124, 349, doi: 10.1051/aas:1997197
Miyoshi, M., Moran, J., Herrnstein, J., et al. 1995, Nature,
373, 127, doi: 10.1038/373127a0
Morrell, N., Phillips, M. M., Folatelli, G., et al. 2024, ApJ,
967, 20, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad38af
Munari, U., & Zwitter, T. 1997, A&A, 318, 269
Murakami, Y. S., Riess, A. G., Stahl, B. E., et al. 2023,
JCAP, 2023, 046, doi: 10.1088/1475-7516/2023/11/046
Nugent, P., Sullivan, M., Ellis, R., et al. 2006, ApJ, 645,
841, doi: 10.1086/504413
Parada, J., Heyl, J., Richer, H., Ripoche, P., &
Rousseau-Nepton, L. 2021, MNRAS, 501, 933,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3750
Parada, J., Heyl, J., Richer, H., Ripoche, P., &
Rousseau-Nepton, L. 2023, MNRAS, 522, 195,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad965
Penrose, R. 1956, Mathematical Proceedings of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, 52, 17,
doi: 10.1017/S0305004100030929
Pesce, D. W., Braatz, J. A., Reid, M. J., et al. 2020a, ApJ,
890, 118, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab6bcd
Pesce, D. W., Braatz, J. A., Reid, M. J., et al. 2020b,
ApJL, 891, L1, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab75f0
Peterson, E., Kenworthy, W., Scolnic, D., et al. 2023, in
American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol.
241, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts,
424.08
Phillips, M. M., Contreras, C., Hsiao, E. Y., et al. 2019,
PASP, 131, 014001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae8bd
Pietrzy´ nski, G., Thompson, I. B., Graczyk, D., et al. 2009,
ApJ, 697, 862, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/697/1/862
Pietrzy´ nski, G., Graczyk, D., Gallenne, A., et al. 2019,
Nature, 567, 200, doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0999-4
Popovic, B., Brout, D., Kessler, R., & Scolnic, D. 2023,
Astrophys. J., 945, 84, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca273
Popovic, B., Brout, D., Kessler, R., Scolnic, D., & Lu, L.
2021, Astrophys. J., 913, 49,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abf14f
Reid, M. J., Braatz, J. A., Condon, J. J., et al. 2009, ApJ,
695, 287, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/695/1/287
Reid, M. J., Braatz, J. A., Condon, J. J., et al. 2013, ApJ,
767, 154, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/767/2/154
Reid, M. J., Pesce, D. W., & Riess, A. G. 2019, ApJL, 886,
L27, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab552d
Richmond, M. W., & Smith, H. A. 2012, JAAVSO, 40, 872,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1203.4013
Riess, A. 2002,, HST Proposal ID 9351. Cycle 11
Riess, A. 2005,, HST Proposal ID 10497. Cycle 14
Riess, A. 2006,, HST Proposal ID 10802. Cycle 15
Riess, A. G., Casertano, S., Anderson, J., MacKenty, J., &
Filippenko, A. V. 2014, ApJ, 785, 161,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/785/2/161
Riess, A. G., Casertano, S., Yuan, W., et al. 2021, ApJL,
908, L6, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abdbaf
Riess, A. G., Casertano, S., Yuan, W., Macri, L. M., &
Scolnic, D. 2019, ApJ, 876, 85,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1422
Riess, A. G., Kirshner, R. P., Schmidt, B. P., et al. 1999,
AJ, 117, 707, doi: 10.1086/300738
Riess, A. G., Li, W., Stetson, P. B., et al. 2005, ApJ, 627,
579, doi: 10.1086/430497
Riess, A. G., Strolger, L.-G., Casertano, S., et al. 2007,
ApJ, 659, 98, doi: 10.1086/510378
Riess, A. G., Macri, L., Casertano, S., et al. 2009a, ApJ,
699, 539, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/699/1/539
Riess, A. G., Macri, L., Li, W., et al. 2009b, ApJS, 183,
109, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/183/1/109
Riess, A. G., Macri, L. M., Hoffmann, S. L., et al. 2016,
ApJ, 826, 56, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/826/1/56

===== PAGE 36 =====
36
Riess, A. G., Casertano, S., Yuan, W., et al. 2018, ApJ,
855, 136, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaadb7
Riess, A. G., Yuan, W., Macri, L. M., et al. 2022a, ApJL,
934, L7, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac5c5b
Riess, A. G., Breuval, L., Yuan, W., et al. 2022b, ApJ, 938,
36, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8f24
Riess, A. G., Anand, G. S., Yuan, W., et al. 2023, ApJL,
956, L18, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf769
Riess, A. G., Scolnic, D., Anand, G. S., et al. 2024, ApJ,
977, 120, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad8c21
Riess, A. G., Li, S., Anand, G. S., et al. 2025, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2509.01667,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2509.01667
Ripoche, P., Heyl, J., Parada, J., & Richer, H. 2020,
MNRAS, 495, 2858, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1346
Rizzi, L., Tully, R. B., Makarov, D., et al. 2007, ApJ, 661,
815, doi: 10.1086/516566
Romaniello, M., Riess, A., Mancino, S., et al. 2022, A&A,
658, A29, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202142441
Roy, R., Kumar, B., Benetti, S., et al. 2011, ApJ, 736, 76,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/736/2/76
Sahu, D. K., Anupama, G. C., Srividya, S., & Muneer, S.
2006, MNRAS, 372, 1315,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10937.x
Said, K., Colless, M., Magoulas, C., Lucey, J. R., &
Hudson, M. J. 2020, MNRAS, 497, 1275,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2032
Said, K., Howlett, C., Davis, T., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 539,
3627, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf700
Sandage, A., Tammann, G. A., Saha, A., et al. 2006, ApJ,
653, 843, doi: 10.1086/508853
Schlafly, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2011, ApJ, 737, 103,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/737/2/103
Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ,
500, 525, doi: 10.1086/305772
Schmidt, B. P., Kirshner, R. P., Eastman, R. G., et al.
1994, ApJ, 432, 42, doi: 10.1086/174546
Scolnic, D., Boubel, P., Byrne, J., Riess, A. G., & Anand,
G. S. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2412.08449,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.08449
Scolnic, D., Brout, D., Carr, A., et al. 2022, ApJ, 938, 113,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac8b7a
Scolnic, D., Riess, A. G., Murakami, Y. S., et al. 2025,
ApJL, 979, L9, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ada0bd
Serenelli, A., Weiss, A., Cassisi, S., Salaris, M., &
Pietrinferni, A. 2017, A&A, 606, A33,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731004
Shah, P., Lemos, P., & Lahav, O. 2021, A&A Rv, 29, 9,
doi: 10.1007/s00159-021-00137-4
Smartt, S. J., Valenti, S., Fraser, M., et al. 2015, A&A, 579,
A40, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201425237
Stahl, B. E., Zheng, W., de Jaeger, T., et al. 2019,
MNRAS, 490, 3882, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2742
Strauss, M. A., & Willick, J. A. 1995, PhR, 261, 271,
doi: 10.1016/0370-1573(95)00013-7
Suyu, S. H., Treu, T., Blandford, R. D., et al. 2012, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:1202.4459, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1202.4459
Szalai, T., Vink´ o, J., K¨ onyves-T´ oth, R., et al. 2019, ApJ,
876, 19, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab12d0
Taylor, G., Lidman, C., Tucker, B. E., et al. 2021, MNRAS,
504, 4111, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab962
TDCOSMO Collaboration, Birrer, S., Buckley-Geer, E. J.,
et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2506.03023,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.03023
Teja, R. S., Singh, A., Sahu, D. K., et al. 2022, ApJ, 930,
34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac610b
Tonry, J., & Schneider, D. P. 1988, AJ, 96, 807,
doi: 10.1086/114847
Trentin, E., Catanzaro, G., Ripepi, V., et al. 2024, A&A,
690, A246, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450376
Tully, R. B., & Fisher, J. R. 1977, A&A, 54, 661
Tully, R. B., Rizzi, L., Shaya, E. J., et al. 2009, AJ, 138,
323, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/138/2/323
Turner, R. J., Blake, C., & Ruggeri, R. 2023, MNRAS, 518,
2436, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3256
Udalski, A., Kubiak, M., & Szymanski, M. 1997, AcA, 47,
319, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/9710091
Uddin, S. A., Burns, C. R., Phillips, M. M., et al. 2024,
ApJ, 970, 72, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3e63
Valdes, F., Gupta, R., Rose, J. A., Singh, H. P., & Bell,
D. J. 2004, ApJS, 152, 251, doi: 10.1086/386343
Verde, L., Sch¨ oneberg, N., & Gil-Mar´ ın, H. 2024, ARA&A,
62, 287, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-052622-033813
Verde, L., Treu, T., & Riess, A. G. 2019, Nature
Astronomy, 3, 891, doi: 10.1038/s41550-019-0902-0
Vogl, C., Kerzendorf, W. E., Sim, S. A., et al. 2020, A&A,
633, A88, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201936137
Vogl, C., Sim, S. A., Noebauer, U. M., Kerzendorf, W. E.,
& Hillebrandt, W. 2019, A&A, 621, A29,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833701
Vogl, C., Taubenberger, S., Cs¨ ornyei, G., et al. 2025, A&A,
702, A41, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202452910
Wang, C., Yuan, H., & Huang, Y. 2022, AJ, 163, 149,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac4dec
Wang, H., Xu, Y., Lin, Z., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 34,
doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad50d3
Wilson, R. E., & Devinney, E. J. 1971, ApJ, 166, 605,
doi: 10.1086/150986

===== PAGE 37 =====
37
Yuan, W., Macri, L. M., Riess, A. G., et al. 2022, ApJ, 940,
64, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac51db
Zgirski, B., Pietrzy´ nski, G., Gieren, W., et al. 2021, ApJ,
916, 19, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac04b2
Zheng, W., Dessart, L., Filippenko, A. V., et al. 2025, ApJ,
988, 61, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade0bf

===== PAGE 38 =====
38
APPENDIX
A.DATA
This section aims to discuss the various data sets employed within this work, giving for each one an overview of the
dataset, a description of the source of the data, the methodological details of how the data is obtained and analyzed,
possible systematic corrections to be applied, the most important assumptions going into the dataset or method, and
the connection to the network. Note that this section primarily describes the data itself—for an overview over the
respective working principles, see Section 3, and for an overview of the implementation within the Distance Network
set of equations, see Appendix B.
A.1.Geometric distances
A.1.1.Distances to Galactic Cepheids from trigonometric parallaxes
Overview.—Trigonometric parallaxes of Galactic Cepheids were measured with high signal-to-noise by the ESAGaia
mission ( Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016). TheGaiaspacecraft was in orbit around the Lagrange point L2 and traveled
together with the Earth around the Sun once per year. GivenGaia’s distance from the Earth and Earth’s distance to
the Sun,Gaia’s large baseline made it extremely sensitive and allowed it to measure, with observations of the same
star collected over a few years, the apparent shift (parallax) of stars that were withind<10 kpc.
Data Sources.—Parallaxes of Cepheids measured by the ESAGaiamission are published as part of the early third data
release (GEDR3, Gaia Collaboration et al. 2021; L. Lindegren et al. 2021b). Seven additional narrow-angle parallaxes
of Milky Way Cepheids measured by spatially scanningHST(A. G. Riess et al. 2014; S. Casertano et al. 2016) were
added from A. G. Riess et al. (2018).
Methodological Details.—“Field” Cepheids identify classical Cepheids in the Milky Way with direct trigonometric
parallax measurements. Cepheids in clusters have also been the focus of multiple studies: sinceGaiaprovides parallaxes
for all individual members, averaging them yields a value nearly three times more precise than for field Cepheids (L.
Breuval et al. 2020; A. G. Riess et al. 2022b; M. Cruz Reyes & R. I. Anderson 2023; H. Wang et al. 2024).
Systematic Corrections.—Well documented systematics of GEDR3 parallaxes were corrected using the formalism by L.
Lindegren et al. (2021a, L21), which considers source magnitude, color, and on-sky position (sine of ecliptic latitude). It
is also well documented that additional corrections (known as a residual parallax offsetϖ corr) are required at a sample
level to ensure unbiased parallaxes (e.g., S. Khan et al. 2023; C. Wang et al. 2022; A. Bhardwaj et al. 2021). A. G.
Riess et al. (2021) simultaneously solved for the fiducial absolute magnitude of Cepheids and forϖ corr for a sample
of 75 field Cepheids observed photometrically withHSTin the SH0ES Wesenheit index (a color-corrected magnitude,
mW
H ) and foundϖ corr =−14µarcsec. For cluster members (used to infer parallaxes of cluster Cepheids), A. G. Riess
et al. (2022a, R22) find no evidence for a residual parallax offset: the corrections from L. Lindegren et al. (2021a)
effectively mitigate the parallax bias, as cluster members fall within the color and magnitude range of the sources used
in its calibration. The cluster parallax uncertainty is a combination of the statistical uncertainty and the small-scale
angular covariance, with the latter being the dominant term. Table 1 of A. G. Riess et al. (2022b) presents the mean
parallaxes of 17 Cluster Cepheids from GEDR3 also observed photometrically with HST.
Assumptions.—For field Cepheids, we assume that the parallax as measured by GEDR3 has a normal distribution with
central value equal to the reciprocal of the true distance plus the fixed offsetϖ corr discussed above, and width given
by the nominal EDR3 parallax uncertainty for each source. The calibration of Milky Way Cepheids is obtained from
the aggregation of all the measured parallax values, including parallax, photometric, and systematic uncertainties, and
marginalized over the solution of the offset value. The uncertainty in the offsetϖ corr thus determined is therefore
included in the final calibration uncertainty. For cluster Cepheids, the distance to each cluster is estimated from
the aggregation of the parallax measurements for cluster stars; as noted above, cluster stars are generally within the
applicability parameters of the standard offset determined in L. Lindegren et al. (2021a). However, it is important to
note that parallax uncertainties within a small angular region are significantly correlated; this correlation is included
in the estimate of the combined uncertainty in A. G. Riess et al. (2022b). Thanks to the combination of multiple

===== PAGE 39 =====
39
sources, individual cluster parallaxes are typically a factor of three better than the nominal uncertainty for a single
bright Cepheid.
Connection to the Network.—Trigonometric parallaxes fromGaiaGEDR3 are used as an anchor of the distance ladder
and calibrate the Cepheid period-luminosity relation within the Milky Way.
A.1.2.Distance to NGC 4258 using Megamasers
Overview.—NGC 4258 is a nearby Seyfert 2 galaxy that is well-known for hosting the archetypal circumnuclear water
megamaser disk system (M. J. Claussen et al. 1988; L. J. Greenhill et al. 1995). VLBI mapping and spectral monitoring
of the water masers in this system reveal that they reside in an edge-on disk and appear to be executing nearly perfectly
Keplerian orbits within the centermost∼1 pc of the galaxy, where the gravitational potential is dominated by the
central SMBH (M. Miyoshi et al. 1995; J. R. Herrnstein et al. 1999). By modeling these maser orbits across∼3.5
years of VLBI monitoring data (collected by A. L. Argon et al. 2007; E. M. L. Humphreys et al. 2008, 2013), M. J.
Reid et al. (2019) determined a distance to NGC 4258 of 7.576 Mpc, with a statistical uncertainty of 0.082 Mpc and
a systematic uncertainty of 0.076 Mpc. For the analyses presented in this paper, we adopt a distance modulus of
µN4258 = 29.397±0.032 for this system (M. J. Reid et al. 2019).
Data Sources.—The NGC 4258 data used by M. J. Reid et al. (2019) come from 18 epochs of VLBI monitoring with
the Very Long Baseline Array, spanning 3.5 years and described by E. M. L. Humphreys et al. (2008) and E. M. L.
Humphreys et al. (2013).
Methodological Details.—The orbital motion of the masers is determined using a combination of spectral and spatial
information from the VLBI monitoring, which yields constraints on the sky-plane components of the masers’ positions
as well as the line-of-sight components of their velocities and accelerations. The orbital parameters for all masers are
modeled alongside global parameters describing the disk morphology, the mass and location of the central black hole,
its line-of-sight velocity, and the distance to the system.
Systematic Corrections.—None.
Assumptions.—It is assumed that the masers execute Keplerian orbits within a thin disk and that their orbital motion
is entirely determined by the gravity of an enclosed point mass. Additionally, the analysis assumes no significant
evolution of fundamental physical constants (e.g.,G,c,α) across space, time, or environment.
Connection to the Network.—The distance to NGC 4258 is used as an anchor in the network, where it calibrates the
Cepheid variable, TRGB, JAGB, and Mira variable methods.
A.1.3.Distances to the Magellanic Clouds from detached eclipsing binaries
Overview.—The eclipsing binary (EB) method is a spectrophotometric method that provides near-geometrical distances
to detached EB stars. The method serves both as a standard ruler, via absolute radii of EB components, and as a
standard candle, by means of the empirical surface brightness – color relations (SBCR). The method is applied to two
closest galaxies: the Large Magellanic Cloud (G. Pietrzy´ nski et al. 2019), giving a distance of 49.59 kpc, and the Small
Magellanic Cloud (D. Graczyk et al. 2020), giving a distance of 62.43 kpc. Both galaxies serve as geometrical anchors
of the extragalactic distance ladder. For the analysis in the present work we adopt distance moduli of 18.477±0.004
(stat.)±0.026 (sys.) mag and 18.977±0.016 (stat.)±0.028 (sys.) mag for the LMC and the SMC, respectively.
Data Sources.—Calibration of SBCR was based on near-infrared interferometry measurements of angular diameters
of 40 nearby red clump stars (A. Gallenne et al. 2019). Their optical photometry came from compilation by (J. C.
Mermilliod et al. 1997) and near-infrared magnitudes came after (C. D. Laney et al. 2012). Twenty detached EBs
containing non-active late-type giant stars were analysed in the LMC (D. Graczyk et al. 2018) and 15 similar systems
in the SMC (D. Graczyk et al. 2020). Data used in both papers comprised 20 years of ground-based optical photometry
from the OGLE project (A. Udalski et al. 1997), ground-based NIR photometry secured with SOFI instrument on
NTT telescope in La Silla Observatory and long-term spectroscopic follow-up with 6 and 8 meter class telescopes in
Las Campanas Observatory and Paranal Observatory carried out by the Araucaria project (e.g. G. Pietrzy´ nski et al.
2009).

===== PAGE 40 =====
40
Methodological Details.—Light curves and radial velocity curves were analysed simultaneously with the updated Wilson-
Devinney code (R. E. Wilson & E. J. Devinney 1971) in order to derive masses and radii of eclipsing binary components
with a precision better than 3 percent. Interstellar extinction corrected photometric indices were used to derive angular
diameters of components utilizing the SBCR calibrated by (G. Pietrzy´ nski et al. 2019). The geometric distance to a
particular EB results from dividing a radius of a component by its angular diameter. Reddenings were determined
by three independent methods using reddening maps (D. J. Schlegel et al. 1998; R. Haschke et al. 2011), the sodium
doublet (U. Munari & T. Zwitter 1997) and utilizing extinction-free photometric indices derived from analysis of
decomposed spectra of components.
Systematic Corrections.—None.
Assumptions.—The binary stars are assumed to follow Roche-lobe geometry in the modeling. No significant dependence
of the SBCR on metallicity is assumed for G- and K-type giant stars. A standard interstellar extinction curve is
used (E. L. Fitzpatrick & D. Massa 2007) withR V = 3.1. Grey extinction is assumed to be negligible.
Connection to the Network.—Distances to the Magellanic Clouds are used to calibrate the period-luminosity relation
(Leavitt Law) for the classical Cepheids within these galaxies.
A.2.Stellar standard candles
A.2.1.Cepheid Variables
Overview.—Cepheid type variables are yellow supergiants in the instability strip that follow a period-luminosity
relation, also called the Leavitt Law (H. S. Leavitt & E. C. Pickering 1912). They are considered primary distance
indicators and are commonly used to calibrate Type Ia supernovae (though in this paper their use extends to other
secondary distance indicators).
Data Sources.—Distances measured from Cepheids are adopted from the following sources:
•HST—Cepheids—SH0ES: All Cepheids in the four anchor galaxies were observed in the same three filters
(F160W,F555W,F814W) with the Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3) on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST).
A first study including 7 Milky Way field Cepheids with spatial scanning parallaxes and photometry were pre-
sented by A. G. Riess et al. (2018). Later, the photometry for a sample of 75 Milky Way Cepheids with accurate
GEDR3 parallaxes was obtained using the same spatial scanning mode to avoid saturation and is listed in Table
1 from A. G. Riess et al. (2021). The photometry for an additional 17 Milky Way Cepheids located in open
clusters can be found in Table 2 from A. G. Riess et al. (2022b). In the LMC, 70 Cepheids were measured in
Table 2 from A. G. Riess et al. (2019) in the same three filters. The SMC has a non-negligible depth along
the line of sight, therefore only Cepheids in the core regions were observed: a sample of 88 Cepheids with HST
photometry is given in Table 2 from L. Breuval et al. (2024). Finally, in the maser host galaxy NGC 4258, HST
photometry of 669 Cepheids in the optical (F555W,F814W) comes from Table 2 from W. Yuan et al. (2022)
and in the infrared (F160W) from A. G. Riess et al. (2022a). HST photometry for Cepheids in 37 SN Ia host
galaxies on the second rung are from A. G. Riess et al. (2022a).
•JWST—Cepheids—SH0ES: Due to the brightness of Cepheids and the high sensitivity of JWST, the most
practical and valuable set of measurements involves following up known Cepheids (discovered in the optical by
HST) with JWST NIRCAM in the hosts of SNe Ia and the maser host NGC 4258. Table A2 of A. G. Riess et al.
(2024) presents distances to 8 SN Ia hosts measured following this approach. See A. G. Riess et al. (2023) for
details of how these observations were made.
Methodological Details.—Cepheid pulsation periods are measured from HST optical broad band light curves (in host
galaxies) and from well covered ground based light curves in the Milky Way and Magellanic Clouds. The brightness
of each Cepheid is measured from optical and IR observations using HST or JWST, and epoch-corrected using the
estimated amplitude and phase of the light curve obtained from optical data. Periods are known at the 10 −4 day level
for Cepheids in the MW and Magellanic Clouds and to 1–2% precision for those determined with HST in more distant
hosts. A linear relation is fitted between the logarithm of the pulsation period and Cepheid brightness, which gives the
Period-Luminosity slope and intercept. Intercept differences between the period-luminosity relations in two galaxies
give their relative distance.

===== PAGE 41 =====
41
Systematic Corrections.—The intercept of the period-luminosity relation depends on the metallicity of Cepheids. Metal-
licity effects were incorporated by differences in oxygen abundances. Milky Way, LMC, and SMC oxygen abundances
of Cepheids were measured using high-resolution spectroscopy (M. Romaniello et al. 2022; A. Bhardwaj et al. 2023; L.
Breuval et al. 2024). Oxygen abundances of Cepheids in host galaxies were estimated using oxygen abundance gradients
determined via theR 23 strong-line method as described by A. G. Riess et al. (2022a, Sect. 3.5) and the galactocentric
distances of each Cepheid. The period-luminosity metallicity dependenceZ W =−0.217±0.046 mag/dex was adopted
from the global fit to the distance ladder in A. G. Riess et al. (2022a). Differences among direct measurements of
the metallicity intercept impactγin the recent literature 46 (e.g., L. Breuval et al. 2022; A. Bhardwaj et al. 2023; E.
Trentin et al. 2024; A. Bhardwaj et al. 2024; S. Khan et al. 2025; L. Breuval et al. 2025) were discussed in detail and
determined to be explained by specifics in methodology, without relevance for the distance network due to the limited
range of [O/H] among SN-host Cepheids (see Fig. 21 from A. G. Riess et al. 2022a). A variant usingZ W = 0 and
excluding low-metallicity anchors (LMC and SMC) was introduced to assess sensitivity to uncertainties inZ W and
possible mismatches between oxygen abundances determined using optical spectra andR 23. As described in A. G.
Riess et al. (2022a), statistical corrections for flux contributions due to cluster Cepheids occurring in hosts (R. I.
Anderson & A. G. Riess 2018) were included for HST Cepheids as a background effect. Systematic corrections for
time dilation were applied to measured periods of Cepheids in hosts (R. I. Anderson 2019, 2022).
Assumptions.—It is assumed that the period-luminosity relation of Cepheids does not depend on host galaxy properties
other than metallicity. While the period-luminosity relation can be qualitatively explained by stellar models, it is
empirically calibrated and does not rely on specific assumptions about stellar physics. The period–luminosity relation
is assumed to be linear over the period range 0.4<logP <2 (with periodPin days), and the slope of the period-
luminosity relation is considered to be independent of metallicity. There might be a mild metallicity dependence for
the slope but it has not been detected to be significant at more than 1σlevel (E. Trentin et al. 2024).
Connection to the Network.—Geometric distances of Cepheids in anchor galaxies are used to calibrate the period-
luminosity relation: GEDR3 parallaxes in the Milky Way, DEBs distances in the LMC and SMC, and the maser
distance to NGC 4258. Cepheids in hosts are then used to calibrate the respective secondary distance indicators.
A.2.2.Tip of the Red Giant Branch
Overview.—The tip of the red giant branch, as a distance indicator, relies on a well-known astrophysical phenomenon:
the onset of helium burning in the electron-degenerate helium core of an old, low-mass star (A. Serenelli et al. 2017).
The ignition in degenerate conditions results in a runaway process which leads to the helium flash. The core mass
at helium ignition varies negligibly over a wide range of stellar population ages, and in certain passbands, metallicity
effects are also small or can be standardized (A. Serenelli et al. 2017; R. L. Beaton et al. 2018; K. B. W. McQuinn
et al. 2019).
Data Sources.—We use TRGB distances derived from a number of sources and teams as follows:
•JWST – TRGB – SH0ES – The SH0ES JWST TRGB distances are drawn from the eight hosts of 10 SN Ia
in Table 2 of (S. Li et al. 2024b), which are based on observations from JWST Cycles 1 & 2 GO-1685 and
GO-2875 (PI: A. Riess). These observations were conducted in the JWST F090W and F150W filters. TRGB
reference magnitudes were measured using a Sobel-filter based approach, anchored to the NGC 4258 measurement
from G. S. Anand et al. (2024b), also using data from JWST Cycle 1 GO-1685.
•JWST – TRGB – CCHP – The CCHP JWST TRGB distances are measured for a sample of 10 galaxies, plus
the geometric anchor NGC 4258 (T. J. Hoyt et al. 2025; W. L. Freedman et al. 2025) based on observations from
JWST GO–1995 (W. L. Freedman et al. 2021). These measurements are made in near-infrared filters: F115W is
used as the primary filter, and F356W/F444W are used to measure colors. Given the notable tilt in the TRGB
in these near-infrared filters, the TRGB slope is taken into account when performing the measurements.
•JWST – TRGB – TRGB-SBF Project – The TRGB-SBF Project has measured distances to fourteen nearby
elliptical galaxies with JWST/NIRCam (G. S. Anand et al. 2024a, 2025). These TRGB measurements are
46 We distinguish here betweenZ W as a nuisance parameter included in the distance ladder, andγas the direct measurement of the
metallicity effect on the Leavitt law intercept determined by spectroscopy and geometric distances alone.

===== PAGE 42 =====
42
anchored to NGC 4258 using JWST observations in the F090W and F150W filters (G. S. Anand et al. 2024b).
The measurements are performed with maximum-likelihood algorithms which incorporate results from artificial
star experiments, although edge-detection measurements with a Sobel filter gives very similar results, on average.
•HST – TRGB – CCHP – The tip measurements are from W. L. Freedman et al. (2019), but updated with results
from T. J. Hoyt et al. (2021) that added a measurement for NGC 5643 and determined a direct measurement for
NGC 1404. We note that the tip measurements from W. L. Freedman et al. (2019) are a mix of values derived
from new observations collected for the CCHP program and those derived by I. S. Jang & M. G. Lee (2017)
and by W. L. Freedman et al. (2019) a single LMC-based TRGB calibration is used. The HST data are from
the following programs: GO-13691 (W. Freedman 2014), GO-15642 (W. L. Freedman 2018), GO-9351 (A. Riess
2002), GO-10497 (A. Riess 2005), and GO-10802 (A. Riess 2006). For the baseline, we elect to use a single
geometric anchor, NGC 4258, for which we take the calibration from I. S. Jang et al. (2021) that assumes no
color-term and adoptsM TRGB
F814W =−4.050±0.028 (stat)±0.048 (sys) mag. Thus, where needed we remove the
TRGB zero point used in the respective paper and then adopt the NGC 4258 result.
•HST – TRGB – EDD – The TRGB measurements from G. S. Anand et al. (2022) provide an independent check
on the CCHP TRGB measurements, using the same underlying HST data for their Type Ia supernova hosts.
The photometry is performed with distinct software, and the TRGB measurements are performed with a model-
fitting approach, as opposed to the edge-detection algorithms employed by the CCHP. NGC 4258 remains the
sole geometric anchor, but the TRGB absolute magnitude adopted here uses an added color calibration from L.
Rizzi et al. (2007) to account for metallicity effects.
•HST – TRGB – Li et al – We retrieve the distances from S. Li et al. (2025a), who adopted a Sobel filter approach
to measure the TRGB in five SNe Ia host galaxies observed by HST, as well as the result from S. Dhawan et al.
(2022) for NGC 7814 (which is referenced within S. Li et al. (2025a) and not contained in the other references
above).
Methodological Details.—TRGB magnitudes are identified using either edge-detection methods (e.g., Sobel filters) (cf.
R. I. Anderson et al. 2024 for methodological considerations) or model-fitting to the luminosity function of RGB
stars. Color-based calibrations are applied to account for metallicity effects, particularly in the near-infrared. All
measurements are anchored to the geometric distance to NGC 4258, with differing treatments of slope and zero point
depending on filter set and methodology.
Systematic Corrections.—Some teams adopt a color-based metallicity calibration to standardize the TRGB magnitude.
When a different zero point was originally assumed, it is replaced by the NGC 4258-based calibration to ensure
consistency.
Assumptions.—The different authors adopt distinct ways to deal with the metallicity dependence of the TRGB absolute
magnitude. The general consistency between distances from the various works imply that the effect of these assumptions
may be minor.
Connection to the Network.—The TRGB distances are geometrically anchored to NGC 4258 in both the native HST
and JWST systems. These TRGB distances then provide the ability to calibrate other secondary distance indicators,
such as for example the magnitudes of Type Ia supernovae or Surface Brightness Fluctuations.
A.2.3.Mira distances
Overview.—Mira variables are fundamentally-pulsating Asymptotic Giant Branch stars that, similar to Cepheids,
follow a period-luminosity Relation. Despite not being as widely-used or as well-understood as Cepheids, Miras still
have two major advantages as independent calibrators of Type Ia SNe: 1) they have larger near-infrared amplitudes
than Cepheids, allowing them to be characterized and detected using only near-infrared observations and 2) they are
ubiquitous since they have low-to-intermediate masses (stars with initial masses ranging from 0.8M⊙ <M <8M⊙ are
expected to undergo a Mira phase of evolution), allowing them to be detected in galaxies not reachable by Cepheids.
Miras are as bright as Cepheids in the near-infrared and brighter than all of the other commonly-used stellar distances
indicators such as Tip of the Red Giant Branch, J-region Asymptotic Giant Branch, and RR Lyrae.

===== PAGE 43 =====
43
Data Sources.—Data and distance measurements to NGC 4258, NGC 1559, and M101 using Miras originate from C. D.
Huang et al. (2018, 2020, 2024) respectively. All three galaxies were observed with HST WFC3/IR, primarily in the
F160Wbandpass. NGC 4258 and NGC 1559 also haveF125WandF110Wobservations used to obtain colors.
Methodological Details.—Mira periods are determined using at least 10–12 epochs of photometry spaced unevenly
over a minimum baseline of one year. In addition to applying cuts to remove non-variable objects, candidate O-rich
Miras are selected on the basis of their peak-to-trough amplitude (0.4 mag≲A≲0.8 mag), period of variability
(200≲P≲400 days), and approximate color. These cuts are intended to limit the contamination from Carbon-rich
Miras and other types of variables and Asymptotic Giant Branch stars. In each galaxy, the lower period bound is set
by an empirically-determined completeness limit and magnitude of contamination from Carbon-rich Miras is modeled
empirically using a mixture model based on the OGLE (Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment) Large Magellanic
Cloud observations of long-period variables. Although Miras in Milky Way star clusters and the LMC have also been
used as anchors in the literature (e.g. A. Bhardwaj et al. 2025), these were not adopted here to mitigate systematic
uncertainties related to ground-based to HST photometric transformations.
Systematic Corrections.—None.
Assumptions.—It is assumed that Oxygen-rich Miras with periods below approximately 400 days follow a linear
period-luminosity Relation. The slope and zeropoint of this relation, which are empirically calibrated, as well as the
amplitudes of the Miras themselves, are not expected to evolve as a function of the host environment. See C. D. Huang
et al. (2024) for further discussion.
Connection to the Network.—The zeropoint of the Mira period-luminosity Relation is calibrated using the water mega-
maser distance to NGC 4258. This relation is then used to determine Mira distances to NGC 1559 (host of SN 2005df)
and M101 (host of SN 2011fe) and calibrate secondary distance indicators in those hosts.
A.2.4.J-region AGB method
Overview.—The J-region asymptotic giant branch (JAGB) method is a statistical method that uses evolved stars that
are redder than the red giant branch in color-magnitude diagrams. The stars are identified using a color and magnitude
selection and the application of a statistic such as mean, median, or mode.
Data Sources.—We use JAGB distances derived from the following sources:
•JWST – JAGB – SH0ES – We draw our data for the SH0ES JAGB host galaxy distance measurements from S.
Li et al. (2024a) and (S. Li et al. 2025c), which are based on observations from both JWST Cycle 1 & 2 programs
GO-1685 and GO-2785 (PI: A. Riess). These observations were obtained in the JWST NIRCAMF150Wand
F277Wfilters.
•JWST – JAGB – CCHP – We use distances from W. L. Freedman et al. (2025) for the CCHP JAGB distances.
These distances are based on JWST NIRCAM observations from program GO-1995 (PI: W. Freedman) in the
F115W,F356W, andF444Wfilters.
Methodological Details.—The JAGB reference magnitude can be measured using the mode, mean, median, or a model
fit, as currently used in the literature. To account for systematic differences in selecting any one particular statistic, (S.
Li et al. 2024a) adopted the middle, or median, of the JAGB reference magnitudes across several measurement variants
and use the spread in JAGB magnitude across these variants as a systematic uncertainty. The CCHP distances use
exclusively the mode.
Systematic Corrections.—For the SH0ES dataset, crowding corrections were applied using artificial star tests, as de-
scribed in S. Li et al. (2024a) and are measured in the ‘outer disk,’ where the crowding bias is less than 0.05 mag
in both filters used for the measurement. The values from the CCHP dataset do not apply crowding corrections but
seeks to minimize the effects of crowding by also making the measurement in the outer disk.
Assumptions.—The JAGB method, as currently described in the literature, assumes that the population of stars in
the J-region are homogeneous such that the mean magnitude (or alternatively the median or mode) for all stars in this
region remain constant. However, this may not be the case, as noted by P. Ripoche et al. (2020); J. Parada et al. (2021,
2023); S. Li et al. (2024a, 2025c); such effects can manifest via asymmetry of the J-region luminosity function, which

===== PAGE 44 =====
44
causes difference between the JAGB magnitude measured using different statistics. Systematics from this asymmetry
can be quantified through the systematic uncertainty adopted via measurement variants.
Connection to the Network.—The JAGB is calibrated using the water maser distance in NGC 4258 and is used to
further calibrate other secondary distance indicators in the respective hosts.
A.3.Supernovae
A.3.1.Type-Ia Supernovae
Overview.—Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are thermonuclear explosions of white dwarf stars in binary systems. They are
among the best-established standardizable candles in cosmology due to their consistent intrinsic luminosities after em-
pirical corrections. This allows them to serve as precise distance indicators at cosmological scales. In the local distance
ladder, SNe Ia constitute the third rung, calibrated by nearby objects with independent distance measurements.
Data Sources.—We use SNe Ia distances derived from the following sources:
•Pantheon+ (optical):The Pantheon+ sample of 1701 light curves of 1550 spectroscopically confirmed SNe Ia
compiled from 18 different surveys. The sample itself and light curves are detailed in D. Scolnic et al. (2022),
is cross-calibrated in D. Brout et al. (2022b), and host-galaxy assignments and redshifts are updated in A. Carr
et al. (2022). Pantheon+ utilize the SALT2 SN Ia model from G. Taylor et al. (2021) and apply bias corrections
to the observed light-curve quantities following B. Popovic et al. (2021, 2023). The entire analysis pipeline for
Pantheon+ is automated in S. Hinton & D. Brout (2020) which facilitated the systematic uncertainties described
in D. Brout et al. (2022a) that are utilized for this work.
•CSP-I&II (optical+NIR):The Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP; M. Hamuy et al. 2006) obtained high-quality
light-curves of SNe Ia inuBgVriYJHbands from two observing campaigns between 2004 and 2015. The first
observing campaign (CSP-I) ran from 2004 to 2009, and the second campaign (CSP-II) ran from 2011 to 2015.
Light-curves from CSP-I are published in K. Krisciunas et al. (2017), and spectroscopic analysis is described
in G. Folatelli et al. (2013). While CSP-I followed up SNe Ia mostly from targeted search, CSP-II followed
SNe Ia that are discovered from rolling search, primarily from La Silla Quest (C. Baltay et al. 2013). CSP-II is
described in E. Y. Hsiao et al. (2019) and in M. M. Phillips et al. (2019). Spectra of SNe Ia are published in N.
Morrell et al. (2024), and individual light-curves will be published (N. Suntzeff et al. 2026, in preparation) soon.
An extensive analysis of Hubble constant using various distance calibrators is presented in S. A. Uddin et al.
(2024), where light-curve fitting parameters obtained from SNooPy (C. R. Burns et al. 2011)max modelmethod
are available.
•Template-independent distances in the NIR:A compilation of all publicly available SNe Ia with NIR observations
was presented in L. Galbany et al. (2023). These were selected for having pre-maximum data so the peak
magnitude could be derived by simple Gaussian Process fitting. The sample include 19 SNe Ia in galaxies with
Cepheid-based distances from SH0ES, and 55 SNe Ia in the Hubble flow (z >0.01). From those, all 19 SNe Ia
in the calibrator sample haveJ-band light curves, however only 16 have light-curves with enough quality in the
Hband. Similarly, for the Hubble-flow sample, while 52 SNe Ia have goodJ-band light-curves, 40 haveH-band
light-curves that permit the determination of the peak-brightness. For theH 0 determination, an intrinsic scatter
ofσ int of 0.125 mag was included in quadrature to the observed peak magnitude uncertainty. From the baseline
analysis presented in L. Galbany et al. (2023), in this paper we removed the term accounting for the SH0ES
ladder in the systematic uncertainty budget (0.51 km s −1 Mpc−1), so the total systematic uncertainty here is
1.35 km s−1 Mpc−1 instead of the 1.44 km s−1 Mpc−1 used in L. Galbany et al. (2023).
•BayeSN (optical+NIR):An inference of the SN Ia “distance,” i.e. a normalised peak magnitude, based on optical
and NIR data (the latter where available), was presented in (S. Dhawan et al. 2023). The sample included 42
SNe Ia with Cepheid distances and 18 with TRGB distances. The SN Ia data is compiled from the literature
(individual SN references are in Tables 1 and 2). To restrict the sample to the original training set of BayeSN,
we used 67 Hubble flow SNe Ia. The uncertainties include the fit errors on each objects and the intrinsic scatter
was fitted in the MCMC code used to inferH 0. When comparing optical only to optical + NIR, the finalH 0
error improved by∼10%. For the case with az min = 0.023, the error inH 0 was 1.135 km s−1 Mpc−1.

===== PAGE 45 =====
45
•SNe Ia in Coma:A sample of 13 SNe Ia located in the Coma Cluster was recently compiled by (D. Scolnic et al.
2025), using data from multiple modern surveys including ATLAS and YSE. These SNe Ia were selected to be
hosted by passive galaxies in the Coma cluster and are located at effectively the same redshift, providing a local
standard-candle ensemble. Light curves are calibrated following the Pantheon+ framework.
Systematic Corrections.—Systematic uncertainties include photometric calibration, light-curve model assumptions,
and corrections for selection biases. These are treated internally within each analysis and propagated into the final
uncertainties onH 0 .
Assumptions.—SNe Ia are assumed to be standardizable candles, and the standardization is empirically-calibrated.
Therefore, it is assumed that there is no evolution of SNe Ia properties as function of time/distance and no dependence
on properties of the host such as mass or metallicity beyond what is modeled in the standardization, see e.g., D. O.
Jones et al. (2023) for a discussion.
Connection to Network.—SNe Ia are used as tracers of cosmic expansion in the distance network.
A.3.2.Type-II supernovae—standard candle method
Overview.—Type II supernova luminosities can be standardized using the Standard Candle Method (SCM; M. Hamuy
& P. A. Pinto 2002), an empirical technique based on correlations with photospheric velocity and color. This allows
SNe II to be used as distance indicators beyond the local Universe.
Data Sources.—The Type-II supernova sample used to derive distances through the SCM is almost the same as that
in T. de Jaeger et al. (2022). This sample consists of 89 objects withz >0.01 from various surveys, including the
Carnegie Supernova Project-I (CSP-I; J. P. Anderson et al. 2024), the Lick Observatory Supernova Survey (LOSS; T.
de Jaeger et al. 2019), the Sloan Digital Sky Survey-II SN Survey (SDSS-II; C. B. D’Andrea et al. 2010), the Supernova
Legacy Survey (SNLS; P. Nugent et al. 2006), the Dark Energy Survey Supernova Program (DES-SN; T. de Jaeger
et al. 2020b), and the Subaru Hyper Suprime-Cam Survey (SSP-HSC; T. de Jaeger et al. 2017b). Filters used include
multiple optical bands (e.g.,B,V,R,I,g,r,i). We exclude a total of four SNe II with Cepheid distances from the
list in T. de Jaeger et al. (2022). The distances to three supernovae (SN 1999em, SN 1999gi, and SN 2012aw) were
based on Cepheid measurements using optical images. These objects were removed for consistency with our baseline,
for which all the Cepheid distances were derived using NIR images. Furthermore, SN 2005ay (NGC 3938) was also
removed from the sample because it used the Cepheid distance to NGC 3982—both galaxies are part of the Ursa Major
groups but are located in different subgroups (South and North, respectively). We add SN 2023ixf (W. Zheng et al.
2025) which exploded in M101, a galaxy for which a Cepheid distance is available (A. G. Riess et al. 2022a). Finally,
the four galaxies NGC 628, NGC 5194, NGC 6946, and NGC 7793 (5 SNe II used by T. de Jaeger et al. 2022) with
TRGB measurements were re-scaled to the distances from G. S. Anand et al. (2022), which uses NGC 4258 as the
TRGB zeropoint. Therefore, to calibrate the SN II absolute magnitude, we use a total of ten calibrators: four objects
with Cepheid measurement, five SNe II with TRGB distances, and one in NGC 4258 with geometric maser distance.
Methodological Details.—We follow the methodology of T. de Jaeger et al. (2020b) to derive SN velocities, magnitudes,
and colors. Expansion velocities are obtained using H β absorption via cross-correlation between observed spectra and
an SN II template library. Light curves are modeled using hierarchical Gaussian Processes with the George Python
library, allowing accurate interpolation of magnitudes and colors at fixed epochs (43 days post-explosion).
Systematic Corrections.—Magnitude corrections include Milky Way extinction, K-correction, and S-correction (T. de
Jaeger et al. 2020a, 2022). CMB redshifts are taken from the NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database and corrected for
peculiar velocities using the model of Carrick et al. (2015). A residual peculiar-velocity uncertainty of 250 km s −1 is
included.
Assumptions.—SNeII are assumed to be standardizable candles, and the standardization is empirically-calibrated.
Therefore it is assumed that there is no significant evolution of the indicator with redshift and no environment-
dependent bias (e.g., host mass, metallicity).
Connection to the Network.—In the distance ladder, SNe II are used as a tracer in the Hubble flow as secondary distance
indicators calibrated using primary distance indicators.

===== PAGE 46 =====
46
A.3.3.Type-II supernovae—spectral modeling-based approach
Overview.—Type II supernovae also offer a unique opportunity for a single-step distance estimation without the use
of primary distance indicators. This path makes use of the tailored Expanding Photosphere Method (tailored EPM,
L. Dessart & D. J. Hillier 2005; C. Vogl et al. 2020, 2025), which is a significantly improved version of the classical
EPM (R. P. Kirshner & J. Kwan 1974; B. P. Schmidt et al. 1994). The method employs spectral modeling, which
allows for the precise estimation of physical parameters of the supernova at each epoch. The latest implementation of
the fitting and the distance estimation is described in C. Vogl et al. (2025) and G. Cs¨ ornyei et al. (2023a).
Data Sources.—The currently published set of Type II supernovae with astrophysical modeling distances consists of
19 supernovae: ten withz >0.01 which were used for the recentH 0 determination of C. Vogl et al. (2025), four SNe
sharing two host galaxies atz∼0.01 from the SN sibling consistency check of G. Cs¨ ornyei et al. (2023b), and five
more supernovae from three additional nearby galaxies from G. Cs¨ ornyei et al. (2023b) and G. Cs¨ ornyei et al. (2023a).
The spectra modeled in C. Vogl et al. (2025) were collected by the PESSTO survey (S. J. Smartt et al. 2015) at the
New Technology Telescope of the European Southern Observatory, while G. Cs¨ ornyei et al. (2023b) used data collected
across the literature, including data from M. Hamuy et al. (2006); D. K. Sahu et al. (2006); R. Roy et al. (2011); T.
Szalai et al. (2019); R. S. Teja et al. (2022). The observed spectra have been recalibrated to the photometry through
the estimation of synthetic colours to rule out potential contaminations. The exact procedure of the analysis and the
applied steps are described in C. Vogl et al. (2025).
Methodological Details.—The main improvement of this technique over the traditionally used classical EPM is the
use of radiative transfer modeling, which solves the outstanding issue of continuum flux dilution and the associated
correction factors, which increased the systematic errors of this method in the past (for details, see L. Dessart &
D. J. Hillier 2005). The radiative transfer models used for the physical parameter estimation were derived using the
radiative transfer code TARDIS (W. E. Kerzendorf & S. A. Sim 2014; C. Vogl et al. 2019). These models are fit to
the spectra on aχ 2 basis employing the emulator and fitter described in C. Vogl et al. (2020). The estimated physical
parameters are combined with the photometry to derive the absolute flux, total reddening, and the distance of the
supernova following the procedure described in C. Vogl et al. (2025).
Systematic Corrections.—None.
Assumptions.—Since the method is based on an astrophysical model, a relatively large number of assumptions are
required for modeling the physics of SNe II. The current estimation makes use of the TARDIS radiative transfer
code, which assumes a spherical supernova, without time-dependent effects, but including bound-bound, bound-free
transitions, and Thomson scattering as the sources of the opacity. The full setup is described by C. Vogl et al. (2019).
These assumptions hold well for a fully or almost fully ionized ejecta, and the results agree well with codes that include
time-dependent effects. A further modeling assumption is made for the density profile of the supernova ejecta, modeled
with a power-law profile, which was shown to provide adequate results in the past, but is a potential simplification.
Finally, while the method allows for the estimation of the reddening, the total-to-selective extinction ratioR V has to
be assumed for the distance estimation. For the modeling, anR V of 3.1 was assumed. A more comprehensive list of
assumptions and their potential impacts is available in the discussion section of (C. Vogl et al. 2025).
Connection to the Network.—The SN II tailored EPM method can be used to directly determine distances to objects
in the Hubble flow. Currently, there is no overlap between the host galaxies used for the distance network and the
SNe II modeling approach, however, they could serve as a calibrator in the future. An overlap between the network
and the modeling of SNe II can be created by either finding new SNe II in host galaxies, by estimating further precise
standard candle distances to hosts of modelable SNe II, or by observing siblings of SNe Ia and SNe II in the same host
galaxy. All of these options will open new avenues in the distance network and are being actively pursued.
Comments—Given the assumptions used in the spectral modeling, not all Type II supernovae can be modeled in the
current framework: the radiative transfer models can only fit spectra reliably in a specific epoch range, and only for
sufficiently normal Type II supernovae. These can be selected in advance based on the appearance of the spectra;
however, a pre-selection is needed to limit exposure to systematic effects.

===== PAGE 47 =====
47
A.4.Surface Brightness Fluctuations
Overview.—The Surface Brightness Fluctuation (SBF) technique is a statistical distance indicator that measures pixel-
to-pixel variance in the unresolved stellar populations of early-type galaxies. The variance of fluctuations, normalized
to the galaxy surface brightness, scales inversely with distance squared, making the galaxy appear smoother as distance
increases (J. Tonry & D. P. Schneider 1988). The SBF signal, which is dominated by red giant branch stars, can be
reliably measured in nearby calibration galaxies and as a tracer of universal expansion well into the Hubble flow (∼100
Mpc with HST, and potentially several times farther with JWST).
Data Sources.—In 2024, JWST/NIRCam observed 14 giant elliptical galaxies to simultaneously measure both their
TRGB brightnesses and SBF magnitudes (G. S. Anand et al. 2024a, 2025), enabling a high-precision absolute cali-
bration of the near-IR SBF distance zero point. The TRGB distances were calibrated using the geometric distance to
the megamaser galaxy NGC 4258 (G. S. Anand et al. 2024b). This approach provides a zero point for the WFC3/IR
F110W SBF distance scale that is entirely independent of the Cepheid distance scale. The new TRGB-based calibra-
tion was applied to SBF measurements of 61 galaxies from J. B. Jensen et al. (2021) and J. P. Blakeslee et al. (2021),
using updated optical (g−z) color measurements, to determine the distances used here (J. B. Jensen et al. 2025). 47
The distant galaxy SBF sample spans distances up to 100 Mpc. In summary, the key measurements for the adopted
SBF-based distances in this study come from:
•JWST/NIRCam imaging of 14 elliptical galaxies used for both SBF and TRGB measurements (G. S. Anand
et al. 2024a, 2025). Eight of these galaxies have HST WFC3/IR SBF data, and the full set provided a distance
calibration for the Fornax and Virgo clusters that connects the JWST TRGB calibration to the HST IR SBF
sample of J. B. Jensen et al. (2015).
•JWST/NIRCam TRGB distance to the anchor galaxy NGC 4258 (G. S. Anand et al. 2024b).
•HST/WFC3-IR imaging of 61 early-type galaxies in the F110W filter (J. B. Jensen et al. 2021; J. P. Blakeslee
et al. 2021).
Methodological Details.—SBF distances are derived from the amplitude of spatial brightness fluctuations in galaxies,
quantified by fitting the Fourier spatial power spectrum with a scaled power spectrum of the image point-spread
function. Accurate SBF relative distances are obtained using an empirical calibration adjusted for stellar population
age and metallicity variations based on optical colors. The recent JWST/TRGB calibration of the absolute SBF
magnitude, M, as a function of the observed (g−z) color has replaced the earlier Cepheid-based calibration, which
had been used in almost all previous SBF-based distance estimates.
Systematic Corrections.—The absolute fluctuation magnitude calibration depends on galaxy color, and for this study,
a new calibration with updated optical colors and slope was derived (J. B. Jensen et al. 2025). The SBF zero point is
anchored to TRGB distances that were calibrated using the geometric distance to NGC 4258. To convert distances into
Hubble-flow velocities, peculiar velocity corrections were applied based on group assignments from both the Cosmic
Flows 3 database (R. Graziani et al. 2019) and the 2M++ flow model (J. Carrick et al. 2015), following the approach
of J. P. Blakeslee et al. (2021) and G. S. Anand et al. (2025). Standard corrections for foreground extinction were also
applied using the prescription from E. F. Schlafly & D. P. Finkbeiner (2011).
Assumptions.—The main assumptions behind the SBF method are that stellar population variations between galaxies
are adequately accounted for by color corrections (i.e.,Mvs. (g−z) color calibration), and — for the analysis presented
in this work — that the TRGB stars in the spiral megamaser galaxy NGC 4258 at a given color are representative of
those in the 14 giant elliptical galaxies used to calibrate SBF.
Connection to the Network.—SBF distances are calibrated by TRGB distances from JWST/NIRCam, which are an-
chored to the geometric distance to NGC 4258. Additionally, SBF can be used to calibrate other distance indicators,
thereby adding another rung to the cosmic distance ladder. The published SBF distance to one galaxy in the Coma
cluster (J. B. Jensen et al. 2021) was used to provide a calibration of the Fundamental Plane (FP) method used to
measure distances to thousands of elliptical galaxies (K. Said et al. 2025). SBF has also been used to provide an
47 https://github.com/jjensen-uvu/sbf distances 2021

===== PAGE 48 =====
48
alternate calibration of type Ia SNe (P. Garnavich et al. 2023). However, this latter path was not included in the
baseline network for this study.
Comments and Known Issues.—While SBF is robust for early-type galaxies, its use is limited in spiral galaxies where
star formation, clumpy dust, intermediate age asymptotic giant branch and young massive stars can all affect the
RGB-based SBF fluctuation signal useful for determining the distance. The accuracy of SBF distances also depends
on high-quality imaging and precise knowledge of the point spread function. The SBF method is potentially sensitive to
calibration systematics from (i) the uncertainty in the slope of the stellar population correction arising from the limited
number of calibrators and their color range, and (ii) the systematic uncertainty in the zero point calibration from
TRGB measured in a single anchor galaxy (NGC 4258), and the potential differences between the TRGB brightness
in that spiral galaxy and in the elliptical galaxies used to calibrate SBF.
A.5.The Fundamental Plane calibrated in Coma
Overview.—The Fundamental Plane (FP) is a three-dimensional scaling relation for early-type galaxies that connects
their effective radius, surface brightness, and central velocity dispersion, working as a secondary distance indicator
that can measure galaxy distances with 20−25% precision (S. Djorgovski & M. Davis 1987; A. Dressler et al. 1987).
The FP relation uses two observables of elliptical galaxies that don’t require any knowledge of distances, the mean
surface brightness (Ie) and the central velocity dispersion (σ0), to infer the physical effective radius (Re), which requires
distances to measure. Comparing the physical radius to the angular radius (θe) allows for the measurement of distances.
In the distance ladder, the FP acts as a secondary distance indicator: it requires calibration through absolute distance
measurements to nearby galaxy clusters, after which it can trace distances to more distant early-type galaxies in the
Hubble flow, making it valuable for measuring peculiar velocities and constraining cosmological parameters likeH 0 (K.
Said et al. 2025; D. Scolnic et al. 2025) and the growth rate of cosmic structure (C. Adams & C. Blake 2020; K. Said
et al. 2020; R. J. Turner et al. 2023).
Data Sources.—Building the FP relation requires combining two complementary datasets: photometric and spectro-
scopic observations. The photometric component draws from the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys (A. Dey et al. 2019),
which provide multi-band imaging across the DESI footprint, while the spectroscopic data come from the Early Data
Release of the DESI survey ( DESI Collaboration et al. 2024). The FP analysis included 4191 early-type galaxies
within the redshift range 0<z <0.1, with central velocity dispersion measurements from DESI spectra (K. Said et al.
2025). Photometric parameters, including angular effective radius and mean surface brightness, were obtained from
the DESI Legacy Imaging Surveys Data Release 9.
Methodological Details.—The DESI FP methodology employed a maximum likelihood approach to fit a three-
dimensional Gaussian model in the parameter space defined by logR e =alogσ 0 +blogI e +c. Central velocity
dispersions were measured from DESI spectra using pPXF (M. Cappellari 2023) with stellar templates from the Indo-
U.S. Coud´ e Feed Spectral Library (F. Valdes et al. 2004). Photometric parameters were derived from DESI Legacy
Survey imaging.
Systematic Corrections.—Several systematic corrections were applied to ensure robust distance measurements. For the
DESI FP analysis, a photometric zero-point correction of +0.0234 mag was applied to northernr-band magnitudes
to account for systematic differences between BASS and DECaLS surveys (K. Said et al. 2025). Velocity dispersion
measurements were compared with SDSS pPXF values to assess potential systematic offsets, which were incorporated
into the total systematic error budget rather than applied as corrections. Aperture corrections were applied using the I.
Jorgensen et al. (1995) formula to convert to standard aperture sizes. A redshift cut ofz >0.023 was implemented to
minimise peculiar velocity contamination, and peculiar velocity corrections were applied using pvhub 48 velocity field
maps.
Assumptions.—Several key assumptions are made in the application of these distance measurement methods. For the
Fundamental Plane analysis, the primary assumptions include: (1) negligible evolution of the FP relation over the
redshift range 0.0<z <0.1, with only a modest evolution correction of 0.85zapplied to account for stellar population
aging; (2) universality of the FP relation across different galaxy environments, from field galaxies to dense cluster
48 https://github.com/KSaid-1/pvhub

===== PAGE 49 =====
49
cores; and (3) adoption of a flat ΛCDM cosmology with fixed deceleration parameterq 0 =−0.55 and jerk parameter
j0 = 1, fitting only for the Hubble constantH 0 due to the limited redshift range of the data (K. Said et al. 2025).
Connection to the Network.—Within the distance ladder, the Fundamental Plane operates as a tracer that requires
calibration from other distance indicators. The precise linkage is further discussed in Appendix B.3.8.0, and is based
primarily on SNe Ia distances, with a sub-leading fixed SBF calibration also employed. In the future it might be
feasible to extend the FP approach to a full tracer, allowing for consistent modeling of expansion parameters (likeq 0,
j0) and peculiar velocities within the context of the Distance Network. For now, we only rescale theH 0 values of K.
Said et al. (2025); D. Scolnic et al. (2025), see Appendix B.3.8.0.
A.6.Tully-Fisher relation
Overview.—The Tully-Fisher (TF) relation is an empirical scaling relation connecting the rotational velocity of spiral
galaxies to their intrinsic luminosity, serving as a secondary distance indicator in the cosmic distance ladder. First
used as a distance indicator by R. B. Tully & J. R. Fisher (1977), the relation enables distance measurements to spiral
galaxies by comparing their observed apparent magnitude to absolute magnitudes predicted from measured HI line
widths. The TF relation is a secondary distance indicator that requires calibration from primary distance indicators
to establish its absolute zero-point. The current largest TF catalogue is Cosmicflows-4 (E. Kourkchi et al. 2020)
containing∼10 000 spiral galaxies with HI line widths, redshifts, and photometry.
Data Sources.—The primary dataset for TF measurements is Cosmicflows-4 (CF4; E. Kourkchi et al. 2020), which
represents the largest TF catalogue to date with approximately 10 000 spiral galaxies distributed across the full sky,
out of which we only use around 3 400 with complete infrared photometry (as recommended by P. Boubel 2025, priv.
comm.). The CF4 sample combines data from multiple surveys, incorporating HI line widths from various sources,
optical photometry from the SDSS in thei−band, and infrared photometry from WISE in the W1-band.
Methodological Details.—The Tully-Fisher model assumed for this dataset is typically a linear relation with a quadratic
term introduced at the bright end and an intrinsic scatter that decreases linearly with rotation velocity / luminosity (E.
Kourkchi et al. 2020; P. Boubel et al. 2024a). In the Distance Network implementation, the distances of the calibrators
are solved for explicitly in the same way as all other calibrators.
Systematic Corrections.—The TF analysis applies corrections for galaxy inclination. Magnitude selection functions
are modeled as a Gaussian drop-off beyond magnitude limits to account for high flux limit effects. Peculiar velocity
corrections are applied through a simultaneous fit of velocity field parameters, including bulk flow and external dipole
components.
Assumptions.—The TF relation assumes that spiral galaxies follow a universal relation between rotational velocity
and luminosity with no significant evolution over the redshift range used (z <0.1). The method assumes that HI
line widths provide accurate tracers of rotational velocity after inclination corrections, and that the intrinsic scatter
in the relation is primarily astrophysical rather than systematic. The peculiar velocity model assumes that large-scale
motions can be described by a linear velocity field with bulk flow and external bulk flow components.
Connection to the Network.—The TF relation serves as a tracer of the Hubble flow in the Distance Network, requiring
calibration from primary distance indicators.
A.7.Megamasers in the Hubble flow
Overview.—AGN accretion disk megamasers similar to those in NGC 4258 are also observed in more distant galaxies,
where they can be used to make single-step measurements of the Hubble constant (J. Braatz et al. 2007). D. W.
Pesce et al. (2020b) combined and updated these distance measurement.
Data Sources.—The Megamaser Cosmology Project (MCP) has carried out an extensive survey of several thousand
AGN (J. Braatz et al. 2015; C. Y. Kuo et al. 2020), identifying a number of megamaser systems that are suitable for
precise (≲10% uncertainty) geometric distance measurements. VLBI mapping and spectral monitoring observations
conducted by the MCP have to date yielded such measurements for five megamaser-hosting galaxies: UGC 3789 (M. J.
Reid et al. 2009; J. A. Braatz et al. 2010; M. J. Reid et al. 2013), NGC 6264 (C. Y. Kuo et al. 2013), NGC 6323 (C. Y.
Kuo et al. 2015), NGC 5765b (F. Gao et al. 2016), and CGCG 074-064 (D. W. Pesce et al. 2020a). For the analyses
presented in this paper, we adopt the distance and velocity measurements from D. W. Pesce et al. (2020b), with the

===== PAGE 50 =====
50
distance measurements reprocessed as constraints on distance modulus. These galaxies span a range of distances from
∼50–130 Mpc, and the MCP observations have utilized the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope, the Karl G. Jansky
Very Large Array, and the Very Long Baseline Array.
Methodological Details.—For each megamaser-hosting galaxy, the orbital motion of the masers is determined using a
combination of spectral monitoring and VLBI mapping, which yield constraints on the sky-plane components of the
masers’ positions, as well as the line-of-sight components of their velocities and accelerations. The orbital parameters
for all masers are modeled alongside global parameters describing the disk morphology, the mass and location of the
central black hole, its line-of-sight velocity, and the distance to the system. The distance and velocity are combined
to constrainH 0 .
Systematic Corrections.—A variety of peculiar velocity corrections have been tested for the megamaser sample, as
detailed in D. W. Pesce et al. (2020b). For the analyses presented in this paper, we adopt the 2M++ peculiar velocity
correction as primary; one of the variant solutions use the velocity in the CMB frame, without peculiar velocity
corrections.
Assumptions.—The analysis assumes that the masers execute Keplerian orbits within a thin disk and that their orbital
motion is entirely governed by the gravitational influence of an enclosed point mass. It also assumes that fundamental
physical constants (e.g.,G,c,α) do not vary across space, time, or environment.
Connection to the Network.—The megamasers are used directly as tracers in the Hubble flow and do not require further
calibration.
B.THE SYSTEM OF EQUATIONS AND THE COVARIANCE MATRIX
The system of equations that constrains the parameters of the Distance Network consists of several different types of
equations (some involving only individual sources, others global), constraining a number of optimization parameters.
Within the approximations of the present analysis, all equations are linear (or linearized) in these parameters, and all
probability distributions are Gaussian in magnitude, distance modulus, or log 10(H0). The optimization procedure is
therefore appropriate to a generalized linear least squares problem, which—within the stated assumptions—provides
the Best Linear Unbiased Estimator (BLUE) for the solution (A. C. Aitken 1935). Given the linearized nature of
the equations, different methods of solving the equations generally return the same parameter constraints—computing
Bayesian credible intervals using MCMC sampling methods or constructing Frequentist confidence intervals would give
the same answers.
Critically, we do include several off-diagonal terms in the covariance matrix of all equations, reflecting the fact
that their uncertainties are correlated. The solution process also returns the covariance matrix for the optimized
parameters, including the Hubble constant (more precisely, its logarithm).
B.1.Linearity and Gaussianity
In our approach, we adopt equations that are linear in distance modulus and linearized in the logarithm of quantities
non-linearly related to distances, such as redshifts andH 0. We also assume that the probability distribution function of
all measured quantities is Gaussian in this description, and therefore is fully described by a (non-diagonal) covariance
matrix. Unfortunately, many original papers do not provide a full PDF for the quantities they measure, and they
implicitly describe the errors as Gaussian; even if asymmetric confidence intervals are given, the lack of a full description
of the PDF makes it challenging to go beyond the Gaussian approximation. However, most measured quantities have
small enough fractional errors that the Gaussian approximation is accurate, especially in the aggregate; those with
large fractional errors (and typically more non-Gaussian profiles) contribute only little to the final results. Finally,
we note that most published data are already processed, incorporating uncertainties e.g. due to the underlying
anchor. Therefore, we make sure to include the appropriate (see below) covariances for the published data according
to how they were obtained from the original measurements. The most direct validation we have for all of the above
approximations is our ability to recover the original results for all the examples considered in Appendix C. We note
that the linearization naturally implies that results going out to many>5σshould be interpreted with this caveat in
mind. However, only slight changes could be introduced by these approximations, and we believe that our qualitative
statements remain true even in more careful implementations.

===== PAGE 51 =====
51
B.2.Solution procedure
Given the measured data vectorYwith its associated (non-diagonal) covariance matrixCwe can construct a
likelihood function as follows
−2 lnp(Y|X) =χ 2 = (Y−AX) TC−1(Y−AX).(B1)
wherep(Y|X) is the likelihood, and our linear model has the theory prediction of the data asY theory =AXwith some
coefficient matrixAthat we determine below. We immediately recognize that this is a formulation of a generalized
least squares problem, as indicated in the introduction of this Section B. For a problem of this kind, it is well known
that Bayesian approaches with flat (unbounded) priors will generally give the same results as Frequentist minimum
likelihood estimation approaches. Within this work we will mostly follow the Frequentist view, but we stress that, due
to the properties of multivariate Gaussian distributions, our conclusions apply equivalently to the Bayesian approach.
The generalized least squares problem seeks to minimize a quadratic formQin the residualsY−AX:
Q= (Y−AX) TW(Y−AX) (B2)
for some positive-definite, symmetric weight matrixW; here () T indicates the transpose. By the Gauss-Markov
theorem, the result of this minimization has the lowest variance if the weight matrixWis the inverse of the covariance
matrixCof the data (A. C. Aitken 1935); in this case the quadratic form corresponds to the usualχ 2 in Equation (B1).
However, a difficulty can arise in that the set of these equations is generally not linearly independent. The reason
is that the same measured quantities can be combined in different ways to obtain constraints (i.e., equations); if the
number of constraints exceeds the number of independent measurements, some of these constraints must be equivalent
to a combination of others. For example, consider the case of Cepheid-related distance constraints based on different
anchors. If we have, say, 30 host galaxies with measured intercepts of the Leavitt law, and 3 calibrations based on
different anchors, we have a total of 33 independently measured quantities: the apparent magnitude of the intercept
in the 30 host galaxies, and the calibrated absolute magnitude of the intercept in the three anchors. However, these
result in 90 separate equations for the host distances, one for eachcombinationof host and anchor (see also Section
B.3.2 below); these equations are by necessity linearly dependent. Other dependencies are more subtle, and result
from using the same host distance constraint for different types of calibrators. As a result, the covariance matrixC,
as constructed, is generally singular, as evidenced by extremely small (numerically consistent with zero) elements in
the diagonal matrix of its singular-value decomposition. In our baseline case, we have 255 equations, but only 183
distinct measurements, resulting in 72 superflous/overconstrained equations.
To address the issue, we replace the standard matrix inversion for the covariance matrix with its Moore-Penrose
inverse (R. Penrose 1956), also called pseudoinverse, computed, e.g., via thepythonroutinescipy.linalg.pinv(see,
e.g., R. Gommers et al. 2025). In this implementation, the Moore-Penrose inverse is computed via singular value
decomposition, but the singular values that are numerically consistent with zero are ignored, i.e., their inverse is set to
zero. Other languages have similar implementations, and this computation can also be implemented using LAPACK
routines (see, e.g., Lapack Contributors 2021). The effect of using the Moore-Penrose inverse of the covariance matrix
in Equation B1 is to ignore linearly-dependent equations in the computation of theχ 2, and reduce the problem to
only linearly independent equations; this obviates the need to carry out a detailed analysis of all constraints.
We stress, however, that this numerical solution is completely equivalent to analytically making sure that only
linearly independent equations are used. However, the current approach has several advantages, such as readability of
the code and simplicity of the ensuing system of equations which also simplifies future modifications.
B.3.Equations and covariance matrix
Above we have described generally how the problem is set up. Within this section we aim to describe our specific
setup of the equations. For this, we introduce a few additional pieces of notation. We minimize the residuals
NparX
j=1
AieqjXj−Yieq (B3)
whereY i are theN eq data values, corresponding also to the number of equations to be solved, withi eq = 1,...,N eq the
data indices, andX j are theN par optimization parameters, andj= 1,...,N par the parameter indices. We note that
the matrixAis very sparse; each equation typically involves only one or two parameters. For convenience below we

===== PAGE 52 =====
52
write the equations in the formAX=Y, understanding that we are actually implementing the least square solution
to the corresponding residuals of that equation.
The form of each equation depends on which data and which parameters are involved. We have four main types
of equations: host distance equations; host-group equations; calibrator equations; and Hubble flow equations. The
host distance equations (Section B.3.2) relate the distance of each host to several published measurements, which are
typically not independent; their correlations are accounted for in the covariance matrix, as discussed in the following.
Host-group equations (Section B.3.3) relate the distance of each host in a group to the common distance of that
group (or cluster). Calibrator equations (Section B.3.4) relate the absolute calibration of one of the secondary distance
indicators—such as SNe Ia, SNe II, Surface brightness fluctuations, Tully-Fisher relation, and so on—to the distance of
a host system obtained via the primary calibration method. Hubble Flow equations (Section B.3.5) relate the distance
(typically a luminosity or angular diameter distance) of a calibrated secondary distance indicator to its redshift, and
thus provides the connection to the Hubble constant. Some methods bypass some of these equations; for example,
megamaser distances are calibrated directly, and directly provide a Hubble Flow equation without intermediate steps.
Similarly, astrophysically calibrated SNe II (using the Expanding Photosphere method) connect directly to the Hubble
flow. In such cases, the equations are modified accordingly; for example, Hubble flow equations for directly calibrated
distances will not involve a host distance—see also Section B.3.8 for these special cases.
B.3.1.Optimization parameters
We begin our discussion of the equations by formally writing down the list of all parameters that will be optimized.
For this, we quickly revisit the general notation we adopt.
The quantityµ H is the distance modulus of the hostH. This is defined on the basis of the geometric luminosity
distance alone; the apparent magnitudem H is expected to follow the simple relationm H =M H +µH, with any
corrections due to extinction, redshift effects, and other standardization terms absorbed in the definition of the apparent
or absolute magnitude, as appropriate. The reference absolute magnitudeM ref,T for calibrator typeTis defined so
that for each calibratorC, the observed magnitudem C is expressed as
mC =M ref,T[C] +µC.(B4)
For a calibratorCwithin a given hostH[C], this equation is used to determine theµ host,H[C].
The parameters to be optimized include the following:
•µ host,H (H= 1,...,N hosts): the distance modulus for each system treated as a host
•M ref,T (T= 1,...,N types): the reference magnitude for each type of calibrator used in the solution. Calibrator
types include SNe Ia, SNe II (calibrated empirically), SBF, and Tully-Fisher. For the sake of brevity, we
synonymously refer to these asM Ia ≡M ref,SNe Ia ,M II ≡M ref,SNe II ,M off
SBF ≡M ref,SBF,M off
TF ≡M ref,TF,
respectively.
•µ G, the distance modulus to any groups (G) included in the host data (see Section B.3.3).
•µ Coma if the FP is used in the Distance Network.
•log 10(H0).
These are collectively indicated asX j in Equation B3. Other parameters—e.g., those describing the metallicity
dependence of a class of calibrators, or other standardization parameters—can in principle be included. However, in
the spirit of this study, we generally adopt whatever conventions and standardizations have been used in the original
papers, and eschew re-characterizing the behavior of calibrators.
B.3.2.Host distance equations
For every measurements of the distance of a nearby host, we include an equation relating the distance modulus for
that host with a specific anchor and method. Separate equations are given for the same host measured by different
methods, using different anchors, or by different collaborations/groups (source). Amethodin this context refers to
the combination of a type of primary distance indicator (e.g., Cepheids) observed using a given instrument (e.g.,
HST). The equations are thus characterized by the method used, the anchors they refer to, and the source of the

===== PAGE 53 =====
53
measurement; collectively we refer to these asMAS(Method, Anchor, Source) and denote them withM[i eq] for the
ieq-th equation. Data with different MAS are considered separately, although they can be correlated. We additionally
define the host involved in thei eq-th asH[i eq] and the anchor asA[i eq] – noting that different equations can have
the sameHand/orA. Finally, for convenience we also define unique combinations of the host, the method, and the
source (HMS) and denote them withP[i eq] for thei eq-th equation – where a host calibrated by the same group using
the same method but with a different anchor can cause thePof different equations to agree. Only theMis unique
to thei eq-th equation.
The host equationi eq can then be written as:
µH[ieq] =µ ieq (B5)
with correspondinglyA ieq,j =δ j,H[ieq] for thisi eq, andδ ij = 1 ifi=jand 0 otherwise. In order to construct
the covariance for this set of equations, we note that the uncertainty of each measurement combines the measured
uncertainty of the distance indicator (e.g., the TRGB magnitude or the Cepheid intercept) in the host,σ H[ieq]|P[i eq];
the uncertainty of the same measurement in the anchor,σ A[ieq]|M[ieq]; and the uncertainty in the distance modulus of
the anchor itself,σ A[ieq]. Therefore the diagonal element of the covariance matrix is:
Cieq,ieq =σ 2
H[ieq]|P[i eq] +σ 2
A[ieq]|M[ieq] +σ 2
A[ieq] (B6)
The covariance between different equationsi eq,j eq depends on which elements they have in common. If the anchor
is the same, then the covariance includes the anchor distance uncertainty. If the MASMis the same, then the
uncertainty of the measurement of the distance indicator in the anchor is in common. If two equations share the
same host measured by the same method and source (P) then the covariance includes the uncertainty of the distance
indicator measurement within the host. Therefore:
Cieq,jeq =δA[ieq],A[jeq]·σ 2
A[ieq] +δM[ieq],M[jeq]·σ 2
A[ieq]|M[ieq] +δP[i eq],P[j eq]·σ 2
H[ieq]|P[i eq] (B7)
B.3.3.Host-group equations
In some cases, especially for the Surface Brightness Fluctuations method, a distance estimate for a calibrator or host
can come from its membership in a group or cluster. Most of the SBF calibrators are either in Fornax or in Virgo;
some of them have direct distance estimates from TRGB, others do not. The assumption is that all objects within
each of those clusters are at approximately the same distance, with a dispersion reflecting the estimated spatial extent
of the cluster.
This situation can be handled by introducing an additional class of parameters: the distance to a group or cluster.
In keeping with the distance network concept, this distance is estimated from all members of the group with a direct
distance measurement, and is applied to the members that do not have a direct measurement. For the members with
a measurement, their distance is also partially constrained by the other group members.
The equations representing these constraints involve the parameters of the group distance estimate,µ G, and the
distance to each member,µ H. If a hostHis a member of a groupG, we write the simple equation:
µH[ieq]−µG[ieq] = 0 (B8)
with correspondinglyA ieq,j =δ j,H[ieq]−δj,G[ieq] andY ieq = 0 in this case. The uncertainty associated to this equation
is the estimated dispersionσ H,G of the distance modulus of hostHwith respect to the distance of the groupG. This
value can in principle be different for every member of the group; however, currently we assign the same uncertaintyσG
to all hosts in the group, and assume the hosts are randomly distributed within that group (no non-diagonal elements
in the covariance matrix). In the current treatment, this type of equation has no covariance with any other equation.
B.3.4.Calibrator equations
For every calibratorC, we include an equation relating the distance modulus of its host and the quantity being
calibrated, the reference magnitudeM ref,T , with the standardized apparent magnitudem C. This quantity can be the
reference magnitude for TF or SBF, the standardized absolute magnitude of a SN Ia or SN II in the appropriate band,
or (in the case of BayesSN) a reference magnitude for the SN. These equations have in general negligible covariance in
the data, but it is critical that the intrinsic dispersion in each calibrator’s distance estimate (e.g., the intrinsic variance

===== PAGE 54 =====
54
in SNe Ia absolute magnitude, or the internal dispersion of the TF relation) be included in the uncertainty of each
source. These uncertainties are reduced by using more calibrators.Distance calibrationuncertainties are propagated
from the uncertainty of the host distance modulus, which is derived from the distance network, and therefore are not
included in thedatacovariance matrix.
The calibrator equations have the form:
µH =mC−M ref,T (B9)
whereµ H is the distance modulus parameter of the hostHin which the calibratorCis located, which will be
optimized from the global solution of the generalized least-squares problem. This equation can be recast in the form
of Equation B3 as follows:
Mref,T[i eq] +µH[ieq] =mC[ieq].(B10)
with correspondinglyA ieq,j =δ j,T[i eq] +δj,H[ieq].
The variance associated with these quantities includes not only the contribution from the direct measurement
process, such as the photometric uncertainty, but also the variance resulting from measurements of the standardization
parameters, such as color and light curve width for SNe Ia, or the velocity width for Tully-Fisher. Those uncertainties
are those reported in the original papers, unless otherwise stated. Critically, the variance must also include the intrinsic
dispersion in that distance indicator—e.g., the scatter in standardized SN luminosities. or the dispersion in the velocity-
based luminosity indicator from Tully-Fisher. This term is not always included explicitly in the uncertainties provided
by the original sources, and in such cases it must be added in quadrature to the stated uncertainties. We assume that
these equations have a diagonal covariance structure.
B.3.5.Hubble flow
In principle each tracer in the Hubble flow would add its own equation, and with the potentially hundreds to
thousands of objects in the Hubble flow, this would greatly increase the size of the problem. Luckily, the additional
equations are highly similar, and therefore allow a great simplification of the overall problem. Since the equations
for this part of the problem are uncorrelated to the remaining system of equations (the covariance matrix is block-
diagonal), this sub-problem can be treated independently. Additionally, the similarity of the equations can be expressed
mathematically precisely as a rank deficiency of the coefficient matrix. We therefore first analyze such rank-deficient
cases in general, and then apply our knowledge to the Hubble flow tracer equations.
If the coefficient matrixAis rank-one, i.e.,A=ba T , then we can write
χ2 = (AX−Y) TF(AX−Y) = (X Ta)(bTFb)(aTX)−2(X Ta)(bTFY) + (Y TFY) (B11)
= (XTa−y)f(a TX−y) + ∆χ 2 .(B12)
This establishes the equivalence between the full problem with coefficient matrixA, parameter vectorXand data
vectorYwith inverse covariance matrixF=C −1 and a smaller condensed problem with coefficient vectoraand a
single data pointywith inverse covariancef. Heref= (b TFb) andy= (b TFY)/(b TFb) are both scalars – the new
condensed covariance matrix and data point. Additionally ∆χ 2 = (Y TFY)−fy 2 is a parameter-independent offset
of theχ 2 function and correspondingly does not impact the overall parameter estimation. This means that instead
of solving the full problem with many data pointsY, one can solve the reduced problem with a single data pointy.
Interestingly the value of the scalaryis the solution to the independentχ 2 optimization problem
χ2 = (bˆy−Y)TF(bˆy−Y) (B13)
which has the solutionµ ˆy=yand the varianceσ 2
ˆy=f. As such, we can first solve the reduced problem of Equation B13,
and then use the mean solution and its variance as inputs for the condensed problem of Equation B12. In summary, a
full problem with a rank-deficient coefficient matrix can be decomposed into a separate optimization problem, whose
solution can be used to construct only a single additional equation for the original problem.
The equations for tracers in the Hubble flow could generally be expressed as
mi =M ref,T +µi =M ref,T −5 log 10(H0) + 5f(zi) (B14)
withm i the observed standardized magnitude of thei-th tracer,M ref,T the common reference absolute magnitude for
the tracer typeT, andµ i the distance modulus of thei-th tracer, which we decompose asµ i =−5 log 10(H0) + 5f(zi).

===== PAGE 55 =====
55
Therefore, in our case we can identify two parametersX={M ref,T,log 10(H0)}and the data vectorY i = 0.2mi−f(zi).
The rank deficient coefficient matrix is thenA=ba T withb= 1 Ntracer being a vector of ones with length equal to the
number of tracers (of a given type) in the Hubble flow, anda T ={−0.2,1}is a vector of length 2. We thus can use
the techniques for a rank-deficient matrix and first solve theχ 2-minimization reduced sub-problem with equations of
the type
aT + 5 =f(z i)−0.2m i (B15)
where ˆy=aT + 5 is the so-called Hubble intercept for tracer typeT. For these reduced equations we use in analogy
with Equation B13 the full covariance matrix of them i with possible peculiar velocity corrections (see below). For
our full problem we can then reduce the additional equation to only
log10(H0)−0.2M T =aT + 5 (B16)
withA ieq,j =δ j,logH 0−0.2δj,T[i eq], wherea T is the solution to the Hubble intercept sub-problem and its covariance
is used for the full problem according to Equation B12. Solving the equations determining the Hubble flow then boils
down to solving the Hubble flow intercept problem of Equation B15. We quickly note that the condensation procedure
can be repeated independently for the independent tracer types, leading to one additional Hubble intercept equation
and one independent Hubble intercept minimization problem per tracer typeT; the form of the equation will differ
for SBF and TF because of the form of their luminosity calibration.
B.3.6.The intercept equations
For the intercept Equations B15 we have two distinct cases. When the tracer objects are standard candles (SNIa,
SNII, etc) we need to use the luminosity distance for the distance modulus, and for standard ruler objects we can use
the same equations, replacing the luminosity distance with the angular diameter distance. Therefore we only treat the
case of standard candles below, noting that since the two are assumed to be related asD A =D L/(1 +z) 2, we only
need to insert the correct factors of (1 +z) 2 at relevant locations (which we explicitly indicate below) to treat both
cases.
The more problematic aspect of the Hubble flow intercept equations is that the measured redshiftsz i are impacted
by Doppler shifting from the peculiar motion of the tracer objects. Albeit this effect can be minimized by choosing
corresponding tracer objects that are distant enough to minimize the relative influence on the velocity, we still aim to
consistently account for these effects, allowing us to also use relatively nearby tracers such as megamasers.
We note thatµ i∝5 log 10(D) andD∝H −1
0 (whereDcan be either the luminosity or angular diameter distance),
and thereforef(z i) is by design independent ofH 0 , independently of which precise expansion rate a specific model
has. While it would also be possible to parameterize the distance functionalf(z) using a specific cosmology, we choose
a cosmographic expansion for our baseline results due to its model-independence, and given the low redshift range
z <0.15 we typically consider for the tracers in the Hubble flow.
In general the expression forf(z i) must take into account also the corrections to the observed redshift from peculiar
velocities (both of the earth as well as the individual tracer objects). We therefore differentiate between the cosmological
redshift that a comoving object would havez HD,i, the actually observed redshiftz i, and the redshift corrected into the
heliocentric frame (removing earth’s peculiar motion) asz hel,i. We discuss these corrections further in Section B.3.7
below. The expression of the distance modulus can then be written as T. M. Davis et al. (2011); J. Calcino & T. Davis
(2017)
µi = 5 log10(D(zi)/Mpc) + 25 = 5 log10

D(zHD,i)· 1 +z hel,i
1 +z HD,i

+ 25.(B17)
Together with Equation B14 this leads to the expression
f(zi) = log10
D(zi)H0
km/s

+ 5 (B18)
The distance can further be expressed using a cosmographic expansion within the desired redshift range, namely
DL(z)≈ cz
H0

1 + 1
2(1−q 0)z− 1
6(1−q 0−3q 2
0 +j 0)z2 +...

≡ vL(z)
H0
(B19a)
DA(z)≈ cz
H0

1− 1
2(3 +q 0)z+ 1
6(11 + 7q0 + 3q2
0−j 0)z2 +...

≡ vA(z)
H0
(B19b)

===== PAGE 56 =====
56
leading to the corresponding expansions forf(z i) that can be used for Equation B16 to compute the intercept.
Here we have used the acceleration and jerk parametersq 0 andj 0 defined respectively as the evaluations today of
q(a) =−¨aa/˙a2 andj(a) = ...aa 2/˙a3, which can be used to re-express the redshift Taylor expansions of the distance
expressions. According to T. M. Davis et al. (2019), this approximation is adequate out toz∼0.3; additional correction
for deviations from a flat Universe are negligible. The use of Equation B19 is the only direct cosmological dependence
of our results. We adopt the fixed valuesq 0 =−0.55 andj 0 = +1, following A. G. Riess et al. (2016); the value for
q0 differs slightly from that adopted by P. Boubel et al. (2024a) (q 0 =−0.5275). Changes toq 0 andj 0 do not have
a significant impact in the resulting value ofH 0; even a change inq 0 from−0.55 to−0.50 would reduce the baseline
value ofH 0 by less than 0.1 km/s/Mpc. This description of distances assumes the validity of the cosmological principle,
statistical isotropy and homogeneity (effectively a FRWL metric) and the Etherington relation—that is the (1 +z) 2
scaling forD L/DA, which of course assumes photon number conservation in General Relativity. We also assume a
given level of smoothness of the expansion history within the given redshift range such that the given expansion is
applicable.
The variance of each data itemmi−5f(zi) combines: the measurement error for the indicator (typically a photometric
error); the variance in the velocity function due to the uncertainty of the redshift (including any uncertainty in the
peculiar velocity corrections); and the intrinsic width of the distance indicator, expressed in magnitudes. These
variances are considered uncorrelated and added together. The elements entering the different intercept equations can
(and typically do) have correlated errors; for example, uncertainties in the standardization parameter will propagate
to all elementsiin ways that depend on how their properties were standardized, and sources from the same survey
could have survey-systematics in common. However, this information is not always available. We have included
covariance terms between SNe Ia according to the prescriptions of Pantheon+, resulting in a minor impact on the
results; the change inH 0 between including and excluding off-diagonal covariance terms is less than 0.1 km/s/Mpc
(see V00 vs V27 in Table 4). In practice, for all secondary distance indicators in use the intrinsic dispersion of the
calibration is significantly larger than any systematic covariance terms; only with very large number of sources could
these covariances, which are not abated by simply increasing the number of sources, come into play. The uncertainty
in the absolute calibration itself is part of the distance network system and is accounted as part of the default system
of equations; it need not be included explicitly in the covariance matrix of the separated intercept equations.
B.3.7.Peculiar velocities
Peculiar velocities are typically on the order of hundreds of km/s. At low redshifts especially (typically below
cz= 3000 km/s, i.ez <0.01), the scatter introduced to the Hubble diagram by peculiar velocities becomes dominant;
we generally consider tracers only atz >0.01 (D≳40Mpc), though preferentially atz >0.023 (D≳100Mpc).
In the linear regime, a smoothed density field mapped from a galaxy redshift survey can be used to predict the
peculiar velocity field, up to a normalization and any influences external to the survey volume (often approximated as
a residual bulk flow) (M. A. Strauss & J. A. Willick 1995). This method has been applied to the 2M++ (J. Carrick
et al. 2015) and Two-Micron All-Sky Redshift Survey (2MRS) redshift surveys (R. Lilow & A. Nusser 2021) to predict
the density and velocity fields. For the 2M++ model, the normalization parameter and external bulk flow were re-
measured by K. Said et al. (2020) using peculiar velocity measurements from 6dFGS and SDSS, and by P. Boubel
et al. (2024a) using peculiar velocity measurements from the Tully-Fisher Cosmicflows-4 catalog. The uncertainty in
these model predictions,σ v is dominated by the residuals between the non-linear observed field and the predicted
linear field, and its value spans∼150–250 km/s depending on the specific flow model.
Peculiar velocity corrections made using these models have previously been successful at reducing scatter in the
redshift-distance relation. In this paper, we adopt the 2M++ model for peculiar velocity corrections in the baseline
determination ofH 0 . Previous studies have found it to be at least as good as other representations. For example, E.
Peterson et al. (2023) found it produced the smallest uncertainties in cosmological parameters includingH 0 . These
peculiar velocities are adopted in all intercept equations, as well as for objects directly linked to the Hubble flow.
In all cases we decompose the observed redshift as
1 +zi = (1 +z HD,i)·(1 +z earth)·(1 +z pec,i) (B20)
wherez HD,i would be the redshift if the object was comoving in the Hubble flow and was measured by a comoving
observer,z earth is the Doppler redshift due to earth’s motion with respect to a comoving frame, andz pec,i is the
Doppler redshift caused by the peculiar velocity of the given object with regard to a comoving frame, which can be

===== PAGE 57 =====
57
computed by
zpec =
s
1 +v pec/c
1−v pec/c (B21)
Finally we denotez hel,i asz hel,i = 1+zi
1+zearth
−1.
B.3.8.Special cases
The previous Sections describe the equations associated with a typical distance ladder: distance estimates for nearby
(host) galaxies, calibration constraints, and secondary distance indicators applied to objects in the Hubble flow, leading
toH 0 constraints. However, there are some distance estimates that do not fit neatly into this three-rung scheme, and
are discussed in the following.
Direct distance estimates for sources in the Hubble flow—If the distance of a source far enough to be in the Hubble
flow can be estimated directly, then the equivalent of Equation B19 can be written for that source. In such a case
the equation will not involveM ref,T — which for other systems is used to estimate the distance on the basis of the
observed apparent magnitude. Rather, the directly measured quantity is the distanceD i, typically in the form of
either a luminosity or an angular diameter distance. The equation can simply be written as
log10(H0) = log10(v(zHD,i))−log 10(Di).(B22)
where the coefficient matrix hasA ieq,j =δ j,log10(H0) andy ieq = log10(v(zieq))−log 10(Dieq), whereD ieq is the object’s
measured distance andv(z) is eitherv A(z) orv L(z) from Equation B19, depending on the nature of the object. Note
that the redshift needs to be corrected for peculiar velocities, as discussed in Section B.3.7.
We include two such categories: megamasers, the distance of which is determined by fitting Keplerian orbital
parameters and matching the physical and angular orbital radii (thus yielding an angular diameter distance); and
astrophysically-calibrated SNe II, for which the absolute luminosity is estimated from a model of their expanding
photosphere, yielding a luminosity distance for each object. In the latter case, all SNe II thus measured share a
common modeling uncertainty; however, this term is not clearly defined in the reference material, and is likely small
in comparison with the (rather large) internal dispersion of the distance estimate. See Section A for more details.
The Fundamental Plane of elliptical galaxies and the Coma cluster—Another special case is the measurement of the
parameters of the so-called Fundamental Plane of elliptical galaxies, which is a tight relation between size, surface
brightness, and velocity dispersion of bright ellipticals. In this case we make use of the analysis first performed in
K. Said et al. (2025) and updated in D. Scolnic et al. (2025). We simply re-scale the estimate anchored to Coma
by the distance to Coma determined self-consistently from the global solution of the network. For this we primarily
implement the following equations:
µComa +M Ia =m ieq (B23)
with Coma distance modulusµ Coma, SNIa reference magnitudeM Ia, and individual supernovae magnitudesm ieq ,
where we use the following list of 13 supernovae as part of the Coma cluster: [2019bkh, 2020ags, 2021dch, 2021lxb,
2022frn, 2023aakj, 2023czd, 2023epj, 2024ana, 2021oat, 2010ai, 2013ag, ASASSN-15jt]. Their absolute magnitude
uncertainties include intrinsic dispersion but we do not model their correlations within Coma or with other calibrators.
Following K. Said et al. (2025), we consider only the YSE measurement of SN 2021lxb.
In addition to the SNe Ia-derived distance we also allow for a constraint on the Coma distance from SBF measure-
ments. However, in this case we do not employ the full Distance Network (yet), and simply use the distance modulus
valueµ SBF,fixed = 34.98±0.1345 (see K. Said et al. (2025); D. Scolnic et al. (2025) for details):
µComa =µ SBF,fixed (B24)
Finally, the Coma distance is coupled to the Hubble flow via the rescaling equation
log10(H0) + 0.2µComa = log10([H0D]FP) + 5 (B25)
with [H 0D]FP being the fundamental plane value of (76.05·99.1) with a uncertainty assigned to the logarithm of
0.00742, see K. Said et al. (2025); D. Scolnic et al. (2025). In the future we are planning to directly compute intercept
equations also in the case of the FP method.

===== PAGE 58 =====
58
AnH 0 estimate without Hubble flow SNe Ia—W. D. Kenworthy et al. (2022) published an analysis of measured Cepheid
distances to SNe Ia host galaxies that did not rely on a calibration of SNe Ia in the Hubble Flow, essentially bypassing
secondary distance indicators. Their solution used a more in-depth analysis of peculiar velocity corrections to mitigate
their impact. While significantly less accurate, their estimate ofH 0 had the significant methodological advantage
of being independent of any potential systematics in the properties of SNe Ia. Since this analysis does not use
additional independent data, it is not included in our formalism; however, we note here this approach for methodological
completeness. If direct distances to more distant galaxies are measured in the future, this approach may be worth
renewed consideration.
B.4.The system of equations in matrix form
The following equatons show formally how the equations for hosts, calibrators, and Hubble flow objects fit into
the system of equations for the distance network. Which equations are included of course depends on the specific
variant chosen; for simplicity, we show the case in which Hubble flow objects in the same class are grouped in via their
correspondingαO value.
1 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
0 ··· 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 ··· 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
0 ··· 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 ··· 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 ··· 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 0 ... ...
0 ··· 0 1 0 0 0 ... 1 ... 0 0
0 ··· 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 −0.2 0 0 0 1 0
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 −0.2 0 0 1 0
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 −0.2 0 1 0
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 −0.2 1 0
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 ... ...
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0.2




A=
µ1 ··· ··· µγ µg,1 µg,2 MIa MII Moff
TF Moff
SBFlog10H0 µCX=
 
Host Distances Groups ——Absolute magnitudes—— H0 µcoma
Hosts
Groups
Calibrators
H0,M Calib
MM/EPM
Coma SN
CSBF
H0,C
µhost,1
...
µhost,n−1
µhost,n
0
...
0
0
m0B,1
...
m0B,k−1
m0B,k
αIa + 5
αII + 5
αTF + 5
αSBF + 5
log10(H0)MM,1
...
log10(H0)EPM,m
m0,Coma,1
...
m0,Coma,p
µComaSBF
log10(H0)C + 0.2µC




=Y

===== PAGE 59 =====
59
C=
σ2
tot,1 ··· σ2
HMAS 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
σ2
HMAS ··· σ2
tot,n 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 σ2
g,1 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
0 ··· 0 0 ··· σ2
g,2 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 σ2
1 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· σ2
k 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 σ2
αIa 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 σ2
αII 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 σ2
αTF 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 σ2
αSBF 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 σ2
1 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· σ2
m 0 ··· 0 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 σ2
1 ··· 0 0 0
... ... ...
... ... ...
... ... ...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
... ... ...
...
...
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· σ2
p 0 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 σ2
Cs 0
0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 0 0 0 0 ··· 0 0 ··· 0 0 σ2
C




Hosts
Groups
Calibrators
Intercepts
MM/EPM
Coma SN
CSBF
H0,C
Hosts Groups Calibrators Intercepts MM/EPM Coma SN CSBF H0,C
System of equations and covariance matrix adopted within this work.
C.LITERATURE COMPARISON
Given that the distance network is an extension of the distance ladder framework, it is only natural, and an important
test, that we should be able to reproduce various literature results using this framework. A few caveats to this arise
from the simplifications we made in order to build the distance network, as well as possibly different treatments of
objects in the Hubble flow (e.g., different peculiar velocity treatments). However, these are not expected to cause
significant differences (≲0.3 km s−1Mpc−1) in the final determination ofH 0.
C.1.Literature Replication and Comparison for SNe Ia
Given the dominant role of the SNe Ia in previous claims of a Hubble tension, we focus in this part of the appendix
on the agreement of the SNe Ia-derived results by exploring a broader range of SN Ia light curve fitters and SN Ia
calibration samples than those included in the main variants Section 5 that may help explain the origin of differences
inH 0 compared to literature studies.
First, we compare our distance network in the case that we only use type Ia supernovae as secondary distance
indicators and in the Hubble flow. For this case, we can compare to three references, namely A. G. Riess et al. (2022a);

===== PAGE 60 =====
60
All sample
55 calibrator SNe
174 indiv. calibrations
R22 sample
42 calibrator SNe
164 indiv. calibrations
CSP/U24 sample
35 calibrator SNe
127 indiv. calibrations
TRGB sample
35 calibrator SNe
122 indiv. calibrations
F25 sample
24 calibrator SNe
92 indiv. calibrations
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
∆ H0 [km/s/Mpc]
Changing calibrator samples
Pantheon+
Snoopy post v2.7
SALT3
BayesSN
Snoopy pre v2.7
Figure 14.Comparison of the impact of supernova type Ia calibrator samples (sets of hosts) on the Hubble constant inference
H0 , each one relative to the baseline result, for the various light curve fitting codes. The triangle shows a case where for the
bayesSN fitter only 52 out of the 55 hosts was calibrated due to several missing supernovae in the fit, and the cross one where
only 32 out of 35 hosts were calibrated. For details on the pie charts, see Fig. 13. In this case we take 100% of the pies to be
the case involving all supernovae data instead of the baseline.
SN Sample/Calibration (SN count) Pantheon+ SNooPy post v2.7 SALT3 BayesSN SNooPy pre v2.7
All/All (55) 73.49±0.87 73.37±1.10 73.39±0.88 (73.58±1.03) ∗ —
R22/All (42) 73.80±0.91 73.80±1.19 73.72±0.91 74.92±1.09 —
R22/Cepheids (42) 73.17±0.96 73.33±1.23 73.06±0.96 74.67±1.14 —
CSP in U24/All (35) 72.54±0.95 72.99±1.23 72.33±0.95 72.80±1.08 71.47±1.20
CSP in U24/TRGB (27) 71.61±1.53 72.62±1.75 71.50±1.52 71.44±1.57 70.99±1.70
TRGB HST-JWST/All (35) 72.73±0.96 73.31±1.23 72.67±0.96 (72.55±1.09) + —
TRGB HST-JWST/TRGB (35) 72.18±1.48 72.66±1.64 72.13±1.48 (71.55±1.55) + —
F25/All (24) 72.63±1.06 73.20±1.40 72.38±1.06 72.22±1.16 71.44±1.36
F25/TRGB (24) 71.09±1.63 72.05±1.85 70.97±1.63 71.00±1.66 70.31±1.80
T able 5.Comparison of Hubble constant values (in km s −1Mpc−1) from different supernova sets and calibrators. Note that
for the same calibrator sets differences in the uncertainty stem mostly from the number of objects in the Hubble flow. SNooPy
pre v2.7 is the one used in U24/F25.
∗ In this case only 52 out of the 55 calibrators could be matched with the given set of fitted SNeIa.
+ In this case only 32 out of the 35 calibrators could be matched with the given set of fitted SNeIa.
S. Dhawan et al. (2023); W. L. Freedman et al. (2025). This comparison is graphically summarized in Figure 14
and Figure 16 , and the corresponding numbers can be found in Tables 5 and 9. We observe that all comparisons
agree between the publication and the Distance Network emulation within less than 0.15σon the inferred value of
H0 . In particular, when using only the 42 calibrators of A. G. Riess et al. (2022a) for Pantheon+ supernovae and
adopting only the Cepheid calibration as in that study, we findH 0 = 73.17±0.96 km s −1 Mpc−1 where they find
H0 = 73.15±0.97 km s−1 Mpc−1 (0.02σdifference, 1% smaller uncertainty). Note that we compared to the results of
A. G. Riess et al. (2022b), as the Distance Network also includes the cluster Cepheids that tighten the calibration in
the anchors. When comparing to the Cepheid-based results of S. Dhawan et al. (2023) based on BayesSN supernovae,
we find in this caseH 0 = 74.67±1.14 km s −1 Mpc−1 where they findH 0 = 74.82±1.28 km s −1 Mpc−1 (−0.12σ
difference, 11% smaller uncertainty). In this case, there is an additional caveat that S. Dhawan et al. (2023) only

===== PAGE 61 =====
61
used 41 calibrators whereas with the BayesSN supernova fitter we used 42 Cepheid calibrators in this case. Finally,
when comparing to the 24 TRGB-calibrated SN Ia results of W. L. Freedman et al. (2025) (from HST or JWST), we
findH 0 = 70.31±1.80 km s−1 Mpc−1 where they findH 0 = 70.39±1.22(stat)±1.33(sys)±0.70(σ SN) km s−1 Mpc−1
(−0.06σdifference, 0.3% smaller uncertainty when comparing the relevant uncertainties in quadrature). We can also
compare the values of the calibration in these cases, finding for A. G. Riess et al. (2022a)M B =−19.260±0.027
(−0.18σcompared toM B =−19.253±0.027), for S. Dhawan et al. (2023) ∆M B = 0.039±0.027 (+0.4σcompared to
∆MB = 0.030±0.023, with one additional calibrator), and for W. L. Freedman et al. (2025)M B =−19.186±0.053
(−0.11σcompared toM B =−19.18±0.04(statonly)). We thus take as a noteworthy conclusion that the DN can
accurately reproduce the individual distance ladder results based on the host distances, standardized SN magnitudes,
and geometric calibrations used in these studies.
C.2.Understanding differences inH 0 for past SN Ia-based ladders
Since we can reproduce the literature results within our framework, we can also investigate the sources of differences
inH 0 which may be attributed to specific analysis choices and datasets.
C.2.1.Refitting with new, SNooPy v2.7.0
An immediate challenge to comparing and extending the SN Ia results that make use of the SNooPy fitter (used
in all CSP and CCHP studies) is both the absence of many useful SN calibrators in the S. A. Uddin et al. (2024)
(hereafter U24) the compilation that was used in W. L. Freedman et al. (2025) (hereafter F25) as well as the update
to the SNooPy fitter to version v2.7.0 or later (since Aug 27, 2024)– with the prior version which we dub “pre v2.7”
(the prior release was 2.5.3 Jan 29, 2020) that was used in U24 not readily accessible nor recommended for further
use by its author. According to C. Burns who supports SNooPy development (private communication, 2025) current
studies are advised to use the latest, v2.7.0. The most relevant update in v2.7 involves the method used by SNooPy
to extrapolate the light curve templates beyond the training sample (s(B−V)<0.3 ands(B−V)>1.27). Such
SN Ia have light curves and inferred luminosities near the extrema of the distributions (often going by the name
“91bg-like” at the faint and fast side and ”91T-like” at the bright and slow/high stretch side). This has very little
affect on the calibrator sample (which are often pre-selected to be normal or near the middle of the distribution, see
R22). However, the Hubble flow sample, and specifically the CSPII sample has a surprising abundance of “high-
stretch” or 91T-like SNe Ia (U24). We find 18 supernovae in CSPII and 5 in CSP I (so 23 in all). Such SNe Ia
will generally haves(B−V)≥1.15 for which the impact from the version update is quite large. The prior SNooPy
version (pre v2.7) was found to over-correct these, motivating the revision to the fitter. For the updated SNooPy
v2.7, prior fits withs(B−V)∼1.15 are lowered on average tos(B−V)∼1.0 (the fitted, apparent peak magnitudes
are hardly impacted) and the implied reddening inB−Vis increased by∼0.04 mag. The net change comparing
old and new follows as ∆m≈0.9·(1.15−1.0)−2.9·(−0.04)≈0.25 mag (neglecting a small quadratic term in
s(B−V) for this illustration) for the highs(B−V) supernovae with the new standardized magnitude being brighter
(since a brightness previously attributed to over-luminosity and low extinction is now reflected in the newly, brighter
standardized magnitudes). Specific examples which all haves(B−V)>1.1 include CSP12G, CSP13Z, CSP13aad,
LSQ12agd, LSQ12gef, LSQ12hxx, LSQ13dqh, and PTF14uo which all change by 0.2-0.3 mag in the same, brighter
direction. As 91T’s represent∼8% of the CSP sample, we might expect a mean change of∼0.02 mag which is similar
to the actual change from the new version of∼0.03 mag (which includes error weighting). This appears as an increase
in the Hubble flow intercept ofa B = 0.6843±0.0025 toa B = 0.6895±0.0026 (+2σ). As a resultH 0 increases by 1.0
km s−1Mpc−1 due only to the change in the measurement of the Hubble flow for CSP from the new SNooPy.
An independent consideration is that it is also necessary to use the newer SNooPy v2.7 to fit additional SN Ia
calibrators not included in the U24 compilation produced from pre v2.7 SNooPy. New SNooPy v2.7 fits were thus
made by C. Burns (private communication, 2025) using the versions of the light curves in the Pantheon+ light curve
database, most of which are not CSP light curves. In the process a number of discrepancies were identified from the
prior SNooPy fits in U24 and W. L. Freedman et al. (2019) (hereafter F19). These were either the use of an older
data release when a newer and better one was available (e.g.,Cfa Ifrom A. G. Riess et al. (1999) did not employ host
subtraction which was applied and released in A. G. Riess et al. (2005, 2007)), an inconsistency in a filter function
definition (i.e., when older published data were provided after transformation to the Landolt/Bessel system, not the
“natural” system, e.g., 1998bu and 2002fk) or the use of a broader set of optical light curves was available.
These differences tend to pertain to older light curves fromCfA IorLOSS, with changes in either direction, as
tabulated in Table 6.

===== PAGE 62 =====
62
T able 6.Differences in SN Ia lightcurve data adopted in F19/U24/F25 compared to the best available data.
SN Used in F19/U24/F25 Best Available Improvement Difference ∆B corr
1992A (Cfa I) Suntzeff (1996) Suntzeff (1996) fit to UBVRI (not BV) 0.08 mag
1994ae (Cfa I) A. G. Riess et al. (1999) (a) A. G. Riess et al. (2005) host subtraction, 4x phot cal. 0.02 mag
1995al (Cfa I) A. G. Riess et al. (1999) A. G. Riess et al. (2009b) host subtraction, 4x phot cal. 0.29 mag
1998bu (Cfa I) S. Jha et al. (1999) S. Jha et al. (1999) filter function 0.25 mag
2002fk (LOSS) A. G. Riess et al. (2009b) A. G. Riess et al. (2009b) filter function−0.06 mag
2012cg (LOSS) G. H. Marion et al. (2016) B. E. Stahl et al. (2019) final reduction−0.28 mag
2005cf (LOSS) Open Source Catalogue B. E. Stahl et al. (2019) final reduction−0.06 mag
2005cf (LOSS) Open Source Catalogue B. E. Stahl et al. (2019) final reduction−0.04 mag
2013dy (LOSS) Open Source Catalogue B. E. Stahl et al. (2019) final reduction 0.35 mag
2017cbv (LOSS) Open Source Catalogue B. E. Stahl et al. (2019) final reduction−0.10 mag
2011fe M. W. Richmond & H. A. Smith (2012) LOSS coverage 0.04 mag
Note—(a) Reference F19 claims that 1994ae used the version of the light curve from A. G. Riess et al. (2005) , but C. Burns, who performed the
fit, sourced the data from the Open Source Catalogue, which instead used A. G. Riess et al. (1999). We further confirm that the value in S. A.
Uddin et al. (2024) matches A. G. Riess et al. (1999), not A. G. Riess et al. (2005)
Due to the rarity of NIR light curves for calibrators which span decades and require data before NIR observations
were common, to avoid introducing a systematic error (from the difference between optical and NIR calibration) we
did not include NIR data for the CSP Hubble flow (in practice we found this difference is negligible). See however 5.1
for variants that specifically use only NIR information for both calibrators and Hubble flow.
The net change from SNooPy pre-v2.7 to post-v2.7 makes the mean calibrator fainter inM B by 0.026 mag for
the F25 sample of 24 SNeIa and 0.019 mag for the full in-common sample of 35 SNeIa.Overall, compared to
prior SNooPy fits, the fits of the current version (SNooPy v2.7) raiseH 0 for the same SN samples by
∼1.7 km s−1 Mpc−1 (e.g., from 70.31 for the F25 sample to 72.05).This difference is caused then primarily
from improvements to SNooPy and to a lesser degree from better, later versions of the SN Ia calibrator data, see
Table 7.
T able 7.Dependence ofH 0 on SNooPy Fitter version and SN Sample for TRGB Ladder
Result/differenceH 0 Notes
F25 (SNooPy pre v2.7, F25 sample)70.39±1.80 (N= 24) F25 as published (without additional SN calibration error)↰No change to SNooPy version or sample 70.31±1.80 (N= 24) Reproduced within our network↰SNooPy post v2.7, F25 sample 72.05±1.85 (N= 24) New SNooPy raisesH 0
↰SNooPy pre v2.7, all available pre v2.7 sample 71.40±1.72 (N= 28) SN in U24 not included in F25 raisesH 0
SNooPy post v2.7, all available post v2.7 sample72.66±1.64 (N= 35) combination, new SnooPy+all SNe with TRGB
Note.Differences with F25 for Same Ladder , NGC 4258→HST+JWST TRGB→CSP SN Ia w/ SNooPy
SNooPy pre v2.7 is from Uddin+24 and also limited to sample available there. SNooPy post v2.7 includes current version
of SNooPy with refits of best data versions by C. Burns as described in text. There is no difference in peculiar velocity
treatment across entries.
C.2.2.Differences with Calibrator Sample Size
Lastly, within the use of every SN fitter, increasing the sample size from the smallest, selected study (the F25 sample
of 24 calibrators) to the full available sample of 55 calibrators shows a clear trend towards increasingH 0—as evident
from Figure 14 and Table 5. It increases by 0.9 km s−1 Mpc−1 for Pantheon+ fitting, by 0.2 km s−1 Mpc−1 for SNooPy
post-v2.7 fitting, by 1.0 km s−1 Mpc−1 for Salt 3 fitting, and by 1.4 km s −1 Mpc−1 for BayesSN fitting—a mean of
+0.9 km s−1 Mpc−1. This difference due to calibrator sample is even greater between the F25 sample and that from
R22, about 1.2 km s−1 Mpc−1 in the mean, agreeing with the findings of A. G. Riess et al. (2024). This is shown in
Figure 14. It seems reasonable to expect greater convergence in estimates ofH 0 as sample sizes increase.

===== PAGE 63 =====
63
M101
M66
M96
N5643
N4666
N4536
N4424
N7814
N4526
N4457
N4414
N1448
N1365
N1316
N1404
N1380
N1559
N1344
N1375
IC2006
N1374
N1399
N2442
N7250
N3982
N4038
N3972
N4639
N5584
N2525
N3447
N5861
N3370
N3021
N5917
N3254
N1309
N4680
N7541
N1015
N2608
N3583
U9391
N0691
N5728
M1337
N5468
N3147
N7329
N7678
N0976
N0105
Object identiﬁer
29
30
31
32
33
34Distance modulus from network µ
F25 sample (24)
TRGB available
Full sample (55)
0 5 10
Calibrator count
Figure 15.The full network sample (blue) and the F25 sample of calibrator hosts (red) in comparison. The grey region marks
the maximal extent of the F25 sample. The green stars mark hosts with TRGB distances available. The left hand side shows an
ordered scatterplot of the distance moduli, while the right hand side shows the corresponding histogram. Note that while F25
calibrates 24 SN Ia, these are located in only 20 hosts (hence only 20 points are marked red). The 11 additional hosts marked
with green stars would correspond to potentially 10 additional SNe Ia (with the 11th host NGC 1399 calibrating SBF, not
SNe Ia). One additional SN Ia (2021pit) is present in an already F25-calibrated host (N5643) but not within the CSP sample.
In total that makes 24+10+1=35 calibrators that are available for SNe Ia calibrated through TRGB. Even within the sample
of the CSP I&II supernovae only, there would still be 4 additional CSPI&II calibrators to be gained using TRGB observations
of nearby hosts within the range of the F25 sample—with 7 additional TRGB-calibratable SNe Ia not present within the CSP
I&II samples. The 4 “missing” TRGB-F25 calibrators are 2012ht in NGC 3447, 1998aq in NGC 3982, 1992A in NGC 1380, and
ASAS14-lp in NGC 4666.
We note that the F25 sample is not a natural sample selection from the perspective of the Distance Network—it
cannot be constructed from simple cuts in redshift/distance or calibrator type. As such, we do not consider it as a
variant (according to the methodology laid out in Section 2.1.4, those should be based on physical assumptions or
hypotheses). We analyze it here to provide for a direct comparison with W. L. Freedman et al. (2025). We show the
distribution in distance of the F25 (N= 24) and full samples (N= 55) according to the network in Figure 15—which
shows that 37 of the 55 objects would have to be included if a cut was made in distance modulus to retain the full
F25 sample. The smaller F25 sample is at a mean distance moduli ofµ host = 31.13±0.85, and the remaining sample
is at a mean distance moduli ofµ host = 32.01±0.73, which are thus a little further away on average (though not very
significantly).
For this purpose we can also look at Figure 16, which shows the differences between calibrator sets for the same
supernovae standardizations and datasets. In each case we take the same supernovae to be used for calibration,
but vary with which primary distance indicators the distances to their hosts are calibrated, for example using only
HST Cepheids vs using all methods, or using only the TRGB (JWST and HST) vs using all methods, or using only
the TRGB calibrations adopted in F25 vs using all methods. These differences are typically compatible with the
uncertainty at∼1σ, with shifts around−1 km s −1 Mpc−1 in central value. We also see that the reduced calibrations
agree nicely with the results reported in the literature.
C.3.Literature comparison for other distance indicators
Next, we compare our distance network to the case where we use other distance indicators. The results can be found
in Figure 17 and Table 9. These results are generally very consistent with the literature results, deviations typically
staying at 0.1σor less, once the same configuration is enforced.
The SNII standard candle method naively appears to give discrepant results “out-of-the-box” in the distance network
compared to the results from T. de Jaeger et al. (2022). However, this is due to the change in calibration described
in Appendix A.3.2, where we only use 9 out of the 13 possible supernovae as described in that appendix. If we adopt

===== PAGE 64 =====
64
R22 sample
42 calibrator SNe
(111 vs 164) indiv. calibrations
(Cepheids vs All)
TRGB sample
35 calibrator SNe
(41 vs 122) indiv. calibrations
(all TRGB vs All)
F25 sample
24 calibrator SNe
(26 vs 92) indiv. calibrations
(TRGB from F25 vs All)
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
∆ H0 [km/s/Mpc]
Changing calibration kinds
Pantheon+
Snoopy post v2.7
SALT3
BayesSN
Snoopy pre v2.7
Figure 16.Comparison ofH 0 between different ways of calibrating a given set of hosts and a gievn SN fitter. It is computed as
the result with the hosts calibrated through any means minus the result with the hosts calibrated through a specific calibration
type (such as only Cepheids, only TRGB, or only F25 TRGB). The results with the star mark the literature results for the
given (reduced) set of calibrating a given set of hosts. The triangle shows a case where for the BayesSN fitter only 32 out of the
35 hosts were calibrated due to several missing supernovae.
SNIa (R22) SNIa (bayesSN) SNIa (CCHP) SNII SC (our) SNII SC (dJ22) Megamasers
(no N4258)
SBF SNII EPM Coma
(SBF only)
Coma
(R22 only)
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
∆ H0 [km/s/Mpc]
Figure 17.All literature comparisons for the given configuration/method (see x-axis label and main text). The light red
results are the results for the given configuration/method coming from the Distance Network, while the dark red results are
those available in the literature (differences are always zero but illustrates literature uncertainties), see also Table 9.
the precise calibration of T. de Jaeger et al. (2022), we recover their value very closely. For the megamasers of D. W.
Pesce et al. (2020b), we recover the value without any changes. However, it is important to compare with the correct
value, as our baseline employs 2M++ velocity corrections, and does not include N4258 as a non-anchor megamaser.
For surface brightness fluctuations (SBF), it is important to correct the literature value for the impact of peculiar
velocities manually, which we do by using the difference from peculiar velocities from J. P. Blakeslee et al. (2021)
(which is ∆H0 = +0.27 km s−1 Mpc−1) and applying that to the value of K. Said et al. (2025), correcting the central
value from 73.9 to 74.17 km s −1 Mpc−1. We assume no further changes in the uncertainty. For the astrophysical
modeling of type II supernovae (using the tailored expanding photosphere method (EPM)), we can directly reproduce
the literature value within great agreement. For the Coma-derived value we check both values derived using only the
SBF calibration or using only the supernovae from A. G. Riess et al. (2022a). In both cases the result has excellent
agreement with the literature value. Finally, we note that we did not manage to recover the literature value of the
Tully-Fisher relation, but private communication with P. Boubel revealed that there might have been an issue in their
code, leading to an incorrect value. This only affects P. Boubel et al. (2024a); future work will be based on the data
in earlier publications, which were not available to us at the time of this analysis.

===== PAGE 65 =====
65
T able 8.Comparison between Recent Literature Results and DN Emulation with the Same Data
Configuration Literature Reference value Our (DN) value
SNIa (Pantheon+, R22 sample) A. G. Riess et al. (2022b) 73.17±0.96 73.15±0.97
SNIa (BayesSN, R22 sample) S. Dhawan et al. (2023) (74.92±1.09) ∗ 74.82±1.28
SNIa (SNooPy pre v2.7, F25 sample) W. L. Freedman et al. (2025) 70.31±1.80 70.39±1.80
SNII standard candle (SC), our calibration T. de Jaeger et al. (2022) 75.4 +3.8
−3.7 73.14±4.72
SNII standard candle (SC), literature calibration T. de Jaeger et al. (2022) 75.4 +3.8
−3.7 75.02±4.29
Megamasers (no N4258, 2M++ velocities) D. W. Pesce et al. (2020b) 72.1±2.7 71.77±3.01
SBF (corrected) J. B. Jensen et al. (2025) 74.17±2.40 74.33±2.22
SNII EPM C. Vogl et al. (2025) 74.9±1.9 74.83±1.85
DESI Fundamental plane (Coma via SBF-TRGB) K. Said et al. (2025) 76.05±4.90 76.05±5.05
DESI Fundamental plane (Coma via SN-Cepheid) D. Scolnic et al. (2025) 76.5±2.2 76.45±2.13
T able 9.Comparison of literature values with non-SNIa determinations of the Hubble constant from the distance network.
∗ In this case only 41 out of the 42 SNe Ia were fit in the reference.
D.SENSITIVITY OF BASELINE TO DISTANCE TO NGC 4258
Given the prominent role of NGC 4258 in the distance network, it may be of interest to consider the degree to which
the baseline results depend on the accuracy of the distance to NGC 4258. Such a change is easily evaluated using the
distance network by shifting distances with direct trace to NGC 4258 calibration. For the baseline, the distance to
NGC 4258 ofD= 7.58±0.11 Mpc comes from M. J. Reid et al. (2019). In Table 10 we show extreme cases of raising or
lowering the distance by±5% and±10% (many times the stated uncertainty while retaining the uncertainty). These
would lower/raiseH 0 by 1.3% and 2.6%, respectively, or approximately 25% of the change in the distance to NGC
4258. The relative size of the change inH 0 compared to that of the anchor distance is mitigated by the availability
of the other anchors from Gaia parallaxes and DEBs in the Magellanic Clouds (i.e., it would be a 33% change inH 0
of the change in distance for NGC 4258 if these 3 anchors had equal weight). More importantly, such large shifts are
strongly disfavored by the distance network goodness of fit as in either case theχ 2 increases significantly, by 15 for
the increased distance and by 38 for the decreased distance as shown in Figure 18. This is consistent with the finding
of variant V12, which removes NGC 4258 from the baseline resulting inH 0=73.1±0.92 km s −1 Mpc−1, representing
only a small decrease of 0.4 km s −1 Mpc−1 and an increase in the error by only 15%. This shows that the literature
N4258 distance is compatible with the remainder of the Distance Network and strong deviations are incompatible, and
the presence of the N4258 anchor is not crucial for the Distance Network.
We conclude that the Hubble tension is relatively insensitive to the stated accuracy of NGC 4258 alone.
T able 10.Sensitivity of baseline to large changes in NGC 4258 distance
V ersion NGC 4258 Distance (Mpc)H 0 (km s −1 Mpc−1) Errorχ 2 (Ndof)
baseline 7.58 73.48 0.80 117.6 (119)
increased 10% 8.4 71.58 0.78 160.7 (119)
decreased 10% 6.8 75.43 0.83 155.1 (119)
increased 5% 8.0 72.53 0.79 129.1 (119)
decreased 5% 7.2 74.45 0.82 126.3 (119)
Exclude N4258 — 73.08 0.92 41.7 (47)
E.CODE AVAILABILITY AND REPRODUCING OUR RESULTS
The analysis code that underlies the results presented here is available in the repository https://github.com/
StefCas789/H0DN/.49 The original version of the code is in IDL; a python version preserving all the main func-
49 This repository will be made public when the paper is formally published.

===== PAGE 66 =====
66
Figure 18.Trial values for the distance to NGC 4258 and associatedχ 2 values. Besides the M. J. Reid et al. (2019) measure
atD= 7.58±0.11 Mpc (shown as grey band) we also tried increasing or decreasing the distance by±5% and 10% (black
crosses). The result its a large internal inconsistency in the distance network (due to other geometric anchors) which is highly
significant. See also Table 10 for impact toH 0. The global minimum (vertex) is marked by a red cross.
tionality is also available. All the data files needed to run the code as well as corresponding instructions are also
available in the repository.
The code is driven by configuration files that determine which data sets are included and other processing parameters.
Configuration files corresponding to all the variants presented in Table 4 and many of the other tests are provided.
Summary results for each run are provided in the form of text files; in addition, the user has the option of saving the
main data, equation coefficients, and covariance matrices in FITS files for more detailed perusal. 50 It is our intent to
update the code and data files with new options and published measurements as they become available.
F.ADDITIONAL DETAILS FROM THE DISTANCE NETWORK: CALIBRATION PARAMETERS AND
HOST/CALIBRATOR DISTANCES
The main result of the Distance Network analysis is of course the value and uncertainty ofH 0, reported in Table 4
for all variants, together with the value of the totalχ 2 to evaluate the quality of the fit. In addition, the Distance
Network process can provide more detailed information on each class of calibrators and on host and the calibrated
distances.
F.1.Calibration parameters
The Distance Network approach can include several secondary distance indicators whose calibration is determined
simultaneously with all other parameters of the solution; each can be used to constrainH 0 via tracers in the Hubble
Flow. For each variant, Table 11 provides the resulting calibration parameter, the Hubble Flow intercept, and the
number of calibrators for each of the main secondary distance indicators: SNe Ia, SBF, SNe II, and TF. For SNe Ia and
50 The IDL version can also be run using command-line parameters, and has options to provide more detailed output if desired.

===== PAGE 67 =====
67
SN II, the calibration parameter is generally the reference absolute magnitude of a standardized SN in the appropriate
passband; the exception is the BayesSN method, which uses a different definition. For SBF and TF, the calibration
parameter is reported as thedifferencewith respect to the published value, as described in Section A. In all cases, the
reported uncertainty is marginalized over all other parameters in the Distance Network.
The Hubble Flow intercept is the parametera T defined in Equation B15 and discussed in Section B.3.5. It is
expressed in units of log(H 0) (numerically equivalent to 0.2 mag); the reported uncertainty includes the intrinsic and
measurement error for the tracers, but does not include the calibration uncertainty. For some versions of SNe Ia, the
reported uncertainty includes covariance terms between different tracers, as reported in the original sources.

===== PAGE 68 =====
68
T able 11. Additional fitted parameters for all variants
V ariant Calibration parameter (mag) (a) Hubble flow intercept (b) Number of calibrators
SN Ia SBF SN II TF SN Ia SBF SN II TF SN Ia SBF SN II TF
V00−19.252±0.022−0.023±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V01−19.252±0.022−0.024±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V02−19.252±0.022−0.023±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V03−19.252±0.022−0.021±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V04−19.251±0.022−0.023±0.027−16.760±0.044 — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 0.219±0.008 — 55 14 9 0
V05−19.246±0.021−0.017±0.025 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V06−19.241±0.022−0.012±0.026 —−0.076±0.024 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 —−3.116±0.001 55 14 0 74
V07−19.257±0.022−0.029±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V08−19.282±0.038−0.051±0.040 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 35 14 0 0
V08B−19.271±0.025−0.041±0.029 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 35 14 0 0
V09−19.249±0.024 — — — 0.716±0.002 — — — 42 0 0 0
V09B−19.243±0.023−0.020±0.028 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 42 14 0 0
V10−19.249±0.026−0.020±0.030 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V11−19.257±0.024−0.028±0.028 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V12−19.262±0.026 — — — 0.716±0.002 — — — 42 0 0 0
V12B−19.246±0.024 — — — 0.716±0.002 — — — 42 0 0 0
V13 —−0.029±0.052 — — —−3.128±0.003 — — 0 14 0 0
V14−19.255±0.023 — — — 0.716±0.002 — — — 55 0 0 0
V15−19.248±0.023−0.020±0.028 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V16−19.244±0.038−0.017±0.040 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 24 14 0 0
V16B−19.236±0.026−0.009±0.030 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 24 14 0 0
V17−19.267±0.024−0.039±0.029 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 13 0 0
V18−19.246±0.023−0.019±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 48 14 0 0
V19−19.249±0.022−0.027±0.027 — — 0.713±0.002−3.130±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V20−19.255±0.023 — — — 0.716±0.002 — — — 55 0 0 0
V21−19.254±0.023 — — — 0.712±0.003 — — — 55 0 0 0
V22−19.122±0.027−0.030±0.031 — — 0.689±0.003−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V23(c) 0.014±0.029−0.017±0.033 — —−3.135±0.004−3.128±0.003 — — 50 14 0 0
V24−19.293±0.022−0.024±0.027 — — 0.724±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V25−18.354±0.030−0.055±0.034 — — 0.529±0.004−3.128±0.003 — — 14 14 0 0
V26−18.567±0.033−0.048±0.036 — — 0.574±0.004−3.128±0.003 — — 17 14 0 0
V27−19.251±0.022−0.026±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V28−19.264±0.022−0.036±0.027 — — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 — — 55 14 0 0
V99−19.243±0.020−0.011±0.024−16.749±0.042−0.075±0.021 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 0.219±0.008−3.116±0.001 55 14 9 74
V99A−19.251±0.020−0.019±0.025−16.757±0.042 — 0.716±0.002−3.128±0.003 0.219±0.008 — 55 14 9 0
(a) Absolute magnitude for SNe, offset to the nominal calibration for SBF and TF. Uncertainty is marginalized over all other parameters.
(b) In units of log 10 (H0 ). Uncertainty includes only Hubble Flow terms, and does not include the calibration uncertainty .
(c) Calibration and intercept for SNe Ia measured with the BayesSN method have a different, internally consistent definition.

===== PAGE 69 =====
69
F.2.Host and calibrator distances
One of the secondary results of the Distance Network approach is an optimized set of distance moduli for all hosts
and calibrators included in the Network. These distances are based not only on the multiple measurements included
in the Distance Network, but also on the consistency equations for the various classes of calibrators to which they
belong. They represent the values of the distances that, together, produce the best-fitting solution to all of the Distance
Network equations. As a result, the estimated distances for each host will differ slightly depending on which classes
of calibrators are included in the solution, even when no additional measurements are introduced.
Table 12 reports the best distance estimate for each of the hosts (or host/calibrators) included in two solutions,
Baseline (V00) and “Everything,” the solution including all methods (V99). Since hosts not tied to any calibrators are
excluded from each solution, many of the hosts do not have a distance estimate in the Baseline version. SN calibrators
are not included, since their distances are not separate parameters; they are assumed identical to the distances to their
host, which as a consequence are also affected by the SN calibration via the (one or more) SNe they host. On the other
hand, SBF calibrator galaxies in Fornax and Virgoareincluded individually; their distances are allowed to deviate
from the group distance, because of depth effects, and are affected by their SBF luminosity measurements via their
global calibration. The quoted distance uncertainties are marginalized over all parameters of the respective Distance
Network solution, and therefore arenotindependent.
T able 12. Distance moduli and statistical uncertainties
for host and calibrator systems in the Distance Network.
Name Baseline solution “Everything” solution
Value Error Value Error
IC 2006 31.469 0.048 31.457 0.046
M 33 — — 24.847 0.075
M 64 — — 28.219 0.042
M 66 30.200 0.045 30.202 0.044
M 81 — — 27.901 0.081
M 96 30.287 0.045 30.289 0.044
M 101 29.120 0.026 29.125 0.023
M 104 — — 29.851 0.041
Mrk 1337 32.930 0.082 32.922 0.082
NGC 24 — — 29.315 0.036
NGC 105 34.507 0.119 34.501 0.119
NGC 247 — — 27.854 0.036
NGC 253 — — 27.844 0.036
NGC 300 — — 26.592 0.058
NGC 628 — — 29.897 0.122
NGC 672 — — 29.288 0.084
NGC 691 32.836 0.089 32.821 0.085
NGC 891 — — 30.005 0.074
NGC 976 33.566 0.087 33.553 0.085
NGC 1015 32.600 0.062 32.593 0.062
NGC 1309 32.498 0.044 32.498 0.043
NGC 1316 31.385 0.042 31.386 0.041
NGC 1344 31.439 0.049 31.427 0.047
NGC 1365 31.335 0.035 31.332 0.029
NGC 1374 31.479 0.049 31.466 0.048
NGC 1375 31.457 0.052 31.445 0.051
NGC 1380 31.417 0.037 31.406 0.036
NGC 1399 31.504 0.039 31.493 0.037
NGC 1404 31.407 0.037 31.396 0.035
NGC 1448 31.308 0.028 31.313 0.025
NGC 1559 31.423 0.030 31.422 0.026
NGC 1560 — — 27.539 0.148
T able 12continued on next page

===== PAGE 70 =====
70
T able 12(continued)
Name Baseline solution “Everything” solution
Value Error Value Error
NGC 2188 — — 29.618 0.050
NGC 2403 — — 27.528 0.058
NGC 2442 31.499 0.049 31.530 0.036
NGC 2525 31.929 0.052 31.912 0.051
NGC 2608 32.648 0.115 32.560 0.111
NGC 2683 — — 29.979 0.057
NGC 2903 — — 29.817 0.049
NGC 2915 — — 28.191 0.076
NGC 2976 — — 27.822 0.050
NGC 3021 32.242 0.049 32.237 0.048
NGC 3109 — — 25.712 0.094
NGC 3147 33.094 0.084 33.086 0.083
NGC 3254 32.396 0.057 32.410 0.055
NGC 3368 — — 30.245 0.036
NGC 3370 32.189 0.036 32.193 0.035
NGC 3432 — — 29.929 0.161
NGC 3447 31.956 0.029 31.951 0.027
NGC 3583 32.783 0.064 32.782 0.063
NGC 3621 — — 29.224 0.042
NGC 3627 — — 30.259 0.042
NGC 3972 31.718 0.051 31.716 0.050
NGC 3982 31.600 0.053 31.599 0.052
NGC 4038 31.672 0.030 31.673 0.029
NGC 4144 — — 29.194 0.042
NGC 4151 — — 31.036 0.070
NGC 4236 — — 28.298 0.050
NGC 4242 — — 29.403 0.076
NGC 4244 — — 28.184 0.075
NGC 4298 — — 30.842 0.167
NGC 4414 31.264 0.081 31.249 0.078
NGC 4424 30.910 0.034 30.909 0.033
NGC 4455 — — 29.120 0.076
NGC 4457 31.076 0.086 31.074 0.086
NGC 4458 31.097 0.056 31.085 0.055
NGC 4472 31.088 0.039 31.078 0.037
NGC 4489 31.002 0.056 30.990 0.055
NGC 4517 — — 29.663 0.135
NGC 4526 30.936 0.066 30.937 0.066
NGC 4536 30.892 0.034 30.906 0.028
NGC 4552 30.978 0.041 30.968 0.040
NGC 4559 — — 29.733 0.042
NGC 4565 — — 30.415 0.036
NGC 4592 — — 29.749 0.050
NGC 4605 — — 28.723 0.036
NGC 4631 — — 29.333 0.036
NGC 4636 31.111 0.039 31.100 0.038
NGC 4639 31.772 0.048 31.728 0.035
NGC 4649 31.071 0.040 31.060 0.038
NGC 4666 30.903 0.057 30.903 0.057
NGC 4680 32.510 0.146 32.508 0.146
NGC 4697 30.347 0.041 30.337 0.039
NGC 4945 — — 27.765 0.058
NGC 5023 — — 28.926 0.058
T able 12continued on next page

===== PAGE 71 =====
71
T able 12(continued)
Name Baseline solution “Everything” solution
Value Error Value Error
NGC 5055 — — 29.773 0.036
NGC 5194 — — 29.619 0.059
NGC 5204 — — 28.443 0.216
NGC 5398 — — 30.320 0.185
NGC 5468 33.050 0.031 33.050 0.030
NGC 5584 31.853 0.030 31.861 0.026
NGC 5643 30.535 0.027 30.533 0.023
NGC 5728 32.842 0.102 32.819 0.094
NGC 5861 32.171 0.064 32.176 0.062
NGC 5907 — — 31.179 0.057
NGC 5917 32.343 0.077 32.339 0.077
NGC 6503 — — 28.997 0.066
NGC 6744 — — 29.861 0.066
NGC 6946 — — 29.206 0.089
NGC 7090 — — 29.887 0.058
NGC 7250 31.603 0.048 31.570 0.036
NGC 7329 33.269 0.069 33.264 0.068
NGC 7541 32.579 0.089 32.577 0.089
NGC 7640 — — 29.652 0.066
NGC 7678 33.300 0.082 33.295 0.082
NGC 7793 — — 27.788 0.053
NGC 7814 30.926 0.071 30.948 0.068
PGC 6574 — — 29.360 0.076
PGC 9962 — — 28.535 0.036
PGC 11139 — — 28.844 0.036
PGC 13163 — — 28.966 0.042
PGC 16957 — — 27.891 0.199
PGC 45084 — — 28.937 0.067
PGC 47847 — — 29.211 0.050
PGC 54392 — — 27.283 0.103
PGC 64181 — — 29.838 0.122
PGC 65603 — — 28.699 0.058
UGC 1281 — — 28.615 0.036
UGC 9391 32.818 0.056 32.817 0.056
UGCA 319 — — 28.853 0.050
