===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
Sustained Coherence Characteristics of Failure Process of 
Shallow Buried Tunnel under Multiple Explosive Loads based on 
Persistent Homology 
Shengdong ZHANG1  Shihui YOU*1  Longfei CHEN2  Xiaofei LIU2 
1. College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Zaozhuang University 277160; 
2. College of Civil Engineering and Mechanics, Xiangtan University 411105 
Abstract: The damage characteristics of a shallow buried tunnel under multiple explosive loads is an important 
research issue in the design and evaluation of protective engineering. It is of great significance to develop a 
method for early warning of the safety of the shallow buried features. The discrete element method is used to 
establish a mechanical model of the shallow buried tunne l. The South Load Equivalent Principle treats blast 
loads as a series of dynamic forces acting uniformly on the surface. Based on the discrete element method, the 
dynamic response after each blast load and the damage evolution process of the surrounding ro ck of the tunnel 
are obtained. The strength reduction method is used to obtain the surrounding rock of the tunnel. Introduce the 
theory of continuous homology, and use the mathematical method of continuous homology to quantitatively and 
qualitatively analyze the failure characteristics of the discrete element model under multiple explosive loads. The 
results show that the method of continuous homology can accurately reflect the topological characteristics of the 
surrounding rock of the tunnel The maximum on e-dimensional bar code connection radius can effectively warn 
tunnel instability. This provides a new mathematical method for tunnel safety design and disaster prediction 
research. 
Key words: Persistent homology; Shallow buried tunnel; Discrete element; Multiple explosive loads 
 
1 Introduction 
The safety of underground civil air defense engineering, protection engineering and subway tunnel under the 
action of explosion  load is an important issue related to the survival and support ability of underground 
engineering under the conditions of war or accidental explosion [1]. It is of great theoretical and practical 
significance to study the sustained coherence characteristi cs of tunnel structure failure process under explosion 
load. Because the structure of tunnel surrounding rock is often cut by weak structural planes such as bedding 
plane and joint surface, its structure presents discontinuity, so scholars mostly  use discrete element method to 
study the damage evolution of tunnel surrounding rock [2 -6]. In recent years, persistent homology method h as 
been introduced by scholars into Large Data, Artificial Intelligence, Intelligent Manufacturing, Materials genome 
project, machine learning and deep learning and other fields [7 -13]. At present, there is little research on the 
persistent homology characterist ics of tunnel failure process at home and abroad. However, the topology 
optimization of tunnel plays an important role in protection and design.  Shen Caicai et al. [14] carried out 
topology optimization analysis on tunnel excavation by introducing topological theory. Lai Hongpeng et al. [15] 
carried out topology optimization research on lining structure of single arch tunnel and multi arch tunnel  with 
different stress fields based on the structural optimization theory and finite element method of continuum. 
However, there are some problems in previous studies, such as complex operation and lack of consideration 
under external force . Persistent homology is a powerful general technology to describe the ge ometry, structure 
and topology of data. It can continuously adjust the coverage scale, get the network at all scales, and then 
                                                        
*Corresponding author 
E-mail address: 101434@uzz.edu.cn

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
 
calculate the change of topological invariants of homology group "from birth to death". Especially, it has the 
advantage of accur ate image processing. Using the images obtained by ground penetrating radar (GPR) in 
underground engineering, the persistent homology  can accurately describe the structural characteristics and 
evolution law of tunnel rock mass, and can lead the topological  information to machine learning and artificial 
intelligence. In the field of tunnel engineering, it is a new and efficient analysis method . In this article , the 
dynamic response of surrounding rock is studied by using UDEC software. The topological characteristics of 
tunnel surrounding rock under multiple explosion loads are analyzed  by the method of persistent homology, and 
the damage evolution law of tunnel surrounding rock is described based on the parameters of dimension bar 
code. 
2 Basic principles of persistent homology 
Persistent homology is originated from Morsel theory, is a method used to calculate topological features at 
different spatial resolutions. Persistent homology can dete ct more continuous features on a wide spatial scale. 
These features are independent of the filter scale and can better represent the true characteristics of underlying 
space. It is an efficient and rigorous method to calculate different spatial topological features 
2.1 Simplicial Complexes 
Simplex: Any finite set of vertices, the rank of the m aximum independent vector is n. If the dimension is n, then 
the simplex V can be expressed as: 
        
 niV i ,...0,v                                  （1） 
A geometric simplicial complex K is a finite set of geometric simplices that satisfy two essential conditions:  
1. Any face of a simplex from K is also in K. 
2. The intersection of any two simplices in K is either empty or shares faces. 
2.2 Homology group 
Suppose 
）（ nvvv ,..., 10  is the vertex of n-dimensional simplex A, and set the permutation 
 , then: 
),...,,()(),...,, 1010 nn vvvsignvvv （
                    （2） 
The edge is obtained and generalized to the general case: 
),...,,...,,()1(),...,, 10
0
10 ni
n
i
i
n vvvvvvv 

（
                   （3） 
where 
）（ ni vvvv ,...,..., 10  is the n-1-dimensional oriented simplex obtained by removing vertex 
iv . Let A be a 
finite simple complex, and let all directed q-dimensional simple complexes on a be set 
 miqQ i ,...1,  , Then, 
on the set, a free commutative group consisting of linear combinations of integers as coefficients is formed,  
Recorded as 
)(AGq . 
       

  

m
i
iq ZiqAG
1
0,)(                             (4) 
)(AGq
 is called the q-dimensional chain group of A, according to the definition of edge, a h omomorphism is 
defined as edge homomorphism, that is: 
       
)()( 1 AGAG qq ：                              (5) 
Let the edge of a single vertex be zero and 
01- ）（AG . .Because the kernel of homomorphism 
  is a closed

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
 
chain group, that is, the elements in the kernel of homomorphism 
  are all closed chains of 
)(AGq , which is 
denoted as 
)(AZq . Edge closed chain means that a closed chain is the edge of its high one -dimensional chain, 
Get the chain of 
)(AGq  by finding the edge of the chain in 
)(1 AGq . The group formed by edge closed chain is 
called edge closed chain group, which is called
)(ABq , then the q-dimensional homology group is defined as: 
        
)(
)(),( AB
AZAXH
q
q
q                                 (6) 
2.3 persistent homology 
For v ertex set  
 nvvvV ,...,, 10 , let vertex set be point cloud set , i t can be quantified . Now we introduce the 
concept of connected radius ε (if the distance between two points is less than ε, then we call the connection 
between two points as connectivity). Each ver tex in V is the center of the circle and the radius is ε / 2. If the 
intersection of P balls is not empty, then these p vertices constitute a p-1-dimensional simple complex. With the 
increase of ε, the number of simplex forms of the complex increases, this forms a complex flow 
nAAA  ,...,10 , 
then we find the homology ,groups of complex flow at different times  is 
)(),...,(),( 10 nppp AHAHAH ,, that is 
persistent homology. 
2.4 Bar code image 
The bar code plots is used to reflect the topological characteristics of the complex filtration duration of the point 
cloud set in the process of increasing the connected radius. It is a collection of finite intervals on the real axis R, 
which can generally be expressed as [a,b] or [a ,+∞], where a,b ∈R. The following is a simple example of 
persistent homology. Figure 1 is the topological invariant Betty number, 0 -dimensional Betty number b0 is the 
number of connected bodie s, 1 -dimensional Betty number b1 is the number of one -dimensional holes, 
two-dimensional Betty number b2 is the number of three -dimensional cavities or spaces, and so on , as shown in 
Fig.1. 
 
Fig.1 Betty numbers of different dimensions[16] 
Figure 1 shows the Betty number of a point, a circl e, an empty sphere and a torus. For a torus, two auxiliary 
rings are added to explain b1 = 2.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
 
 
 
Fig.2 simple complex and its corresponding barcode[16] 
Figure 2 is a demonstration of the topological characteristics of data from point cloud to bar code graph, (a) 
represents the points in the spac e and forms a metric space ; (b) is the corresponding b 0 bar code graph. The 
ordinate is the number of points and the abscissa is the connected radius ; (d) is a bar code graph of metric space 
(c), its upper, middle and lower coordinates are 
210 ,, bbb . When we take different ε, we get the simple complex 
structure, the first bar code in (d) represents the number of connected bodies,  when the ε is small, the ordinate 
represents the number of its points, but with the increasing of ε, b0 becomes 1, which can be understood as there 
is only one "point" with the increase of connecting radius;  In (d), the second bar code diagram represents the 
number of one -dimensional holes, and the third bar code diagram represents the number of three -dimensional 
cavities or sp aces, when 0< ε<3.82, b1=0,b2=0; when 6.46< ε<6.70, one-dimensional hole, a three -dimensional 
cavity or space is formed, b1=1,b2=1; when ε>8.2, b1=0,b2=0. 
3 Simulation analysis of tunnel stability under multiple explosion loads 
3.1 Establishment of discrete element model 
The discrete element model is established by referring to the actual situation of Ch ongqing Wukou subway 
station [17]. The starting and ending point mileage of Wukou tunnel with large -span section breaking normal is 
dk60 + 920.559-dk61 + 255.889, and the total length of the tunnel is 105.33m. The mining method is adopted for 
construction. The vault of the tunnel is about 16m from the ground, and the excavation section is 20.40m wide 
and high After exploration, most of the surrounding rock of the tunnel is sandstone, belonging to grade 4.  
Considering the influence of tunnel depth and boundary effect on tunnel surrounding rock deformation, and 
according to the actual engineering data, a discrete element calculation model for this st udy is established, as 
shown in Fig. 3. The width of model is l=140m, height is  h=76.5m, top buried depth of tunnel excavation is 
f=16m, section width of tunnel excavation is l1=20.59, height of tunnel excavation is h1=17.94m. The mechanical 
parameters and joint mechanical parameters of tunnel surrounding rock are shown in Table 1 and table 2. The 
mechanical parameters and joint mechanical parameters of surrounding rock are selected strictly according to the 
material parameters corresponding to the surrounding rock grade in the engineering geological report . In the 
simulation, blasting will cause deformation of rock mass, so Mohr Coulomb criterion is used to set rock mass 
and joint. According to reference [1 7], when the joint plane spacing is 5m, the failure area, plastic area  and 
average displacement of surrounding rock are the largest, therefore, this thesis selects two joints with a joint 
spacing of 5m and an inclination angle of 50° /110°  through the surrounding rock of the tunnel. In order to ensure 
that the model boundary does not affect the accuracy of the simulation, viscous boundary conditions are applied 
to the bottom and both sides of the model after reaching the equilibrium state under the action of gravity, and the

===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
 
horizontal constraints are applied to both sides, and the vertical constraints are applied to the bottom. 
 
Fig.3 Model size 
Tab.1 Mechanical parameters of tunnel surrounding rock 
Density/kg·m3 Bulk 
modulus/GPa 
Shear 
modulus/GPa 
Angle of internal 
friction/° 
Cohesive 
force/MPa 
Tensile 
strength/MPa 
2300 4.17 1.92 35 0.5 1.0 
Tab.2 Joint mechanics parameters 
Normal 
stiffness/GPa 
Tangential 
stiffness/GPa 
Angle of internal 
friction/° 
Cohesive 
force/MPa 
Tensile 
strength/MPa 
10 10 20 0.04 0 
The simulation assumes that the ground directly above the tunnel is impacted by explosion, and the specific 
model uses the explosion load to simulate the effect of the ground explosion on the unsupported tunnel. 
According to the research in reference [1 8], when simulating the tunnel under the action of ground explosion 
load, it is equivalent to applying a uniform load varying with time on the top of the model [1 8]. In the process of 
numerical simulation, the time histo ry curve of explosion load is mainly treated as triangle and exponential type 
[19]. In this thesis, the triangle form is adopted, and the duration of explosion load is generally considered to be 
1.0× 10-6~0.1s [20]. The comprehensive consideration model is shallow tunnel and discrete element calculation. 
Compared with the calculation method of continuum mechanics, the internal transmission process of stress wave 
is relatively slow, the duration of explosion load is 35 ms, in which the pressure rise time is 5  ms and the positive 
pressure action time is 30 ms. At the same time, the value of explosion load is relatively large to simulate the 
maximum damage. 
The explosion load is equivalent uniform load, the calculation formula is as follows: 
0
2 PL
RP 
                                （7）
 
Where P is the equivalent uniform load, R is the blast hole radius, and L is the hole spacing. In this thesis, the 
value of the blast hole spacing in the model is 1.25m, and P0 is the load produced by a single blast hole. 
)()( tfPtP m
                               （8） 
 
62
8
1
ccm DP
                          （9）
 
Where f(t) is the exponential function of the explosion load with time, Pm is the peak value of the explosion load, 
D is the detonation degree of the explosive, ρc is the charge density, Кc is the decoupling coefficient, and η is the

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
 
expansion multiple of the hole wall pressure affected by the detonation gas. The value of this model is 9. 
Therefore, the formula of uniform load is as follows: 
)(4
62 tfDL
RP cc   
                        （10）
 
According to the reference [1 8] No.2 rock parameter, the explosive detonation velocity is 3.5km/s, the charge 
density is 1000 kg/m 3, the blast hole radius is 0.055m, and the charge uncoupling coefficient is 1.447. After  
calculation, Pm=1.5× 109Pa, P=1.38× 108 f(t). 
3.2 Dynamic response of tunnel under multiple explosion loads 
Under the natural state of gravity and initial boundary conditions, the mechanical state of tunnel surrounding 
rock tends to be stable. The maximum displacement of the model and the displacement of the collapse area of 
the upper part of the tunnel are 0.232m and 0. 208m respectively. After applying the first to the fifth explosion 
load on the model, the vector and cloud images of velocity and displacement are analyzed, and the following 
four tables are obtained (Tab.3, Tab.4, Tab.5,Tab,6)： 
Tab.3 Maximum displacement of model 
burst/times 1 2 3 4 5 
displacement(m) 0.389 1.149 1.997 3.028 4.758 
Tab.4 Model maximum speed 
burst/times 1 2 3 4 5 
speed(m/s) 17.42 20.76 27.07 38.87 46.47 
Tab.5 Displacement of the upper collapse zone of the tunnel 
burst/times 1 2 3 4 5 
displacement(m) 0.272 0.804 1.389 2.121 3.331 
Tab.6 Speed of collapse zone in upper tunnel 
burst/times 1 2 3 4 5 
speed(m/s) 10.45 14.54 16.24 23.32 27.88 
It can be seen from the table of the maximum displacement of the model (Ta b.3) and the displacement table of 
the collapse area at the upper part of the tunnel (Tab.5). It can be seen that with the increase of blasting times, the 
increase of displacement is more and more large. After the first blasting load was applied, the descending 
displacement of the top part of the tunnel increased by 0.064m and the maximum displace ment of the tunnel 
increased by 0.157m compared with the displacement under natural state.  After the first explosion, the 
descending speed of the collapse area at the upper part of the tunnel acce lerates. With the increase of the number 
of explosions, the descending displacement of the top part of the tunnel increases by 0.596 m, 1.181 m, 1.913 m 
and 3.123 m, respectively. However, compared with table 3 and table 5, it can be found that the upper p art of the 
tunnel is not the place with the maximum collapse displacement, and the maximum displacement of the tunnel is 
on the left and right sides of the bottom of the tunnel .The left and right bottom of the surrounding rock of the 
road is also the larg est stress position.  By analyzing the maximum velocity table of the model (Tab .4) and the 
velocity table of the collapse area at the upper part of the tunnel (Tab .6), we can know that the velocity is 
relatively large because the explosion load is relativel y large, but the actual model is a shallow tunnel. In the first 
explosion, the maximum speed of the tunnel is 17.42m/s, and the maximum speed of the collapse area at the 
upper part of the tunnel is 10.45m/s. With the increase of the number of explosions, t he speed of the surrounding

===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
 
rock of the tunnel is also faster and faster. After the first blasting, the speed of the rock mass has a very large 
increase, which shows that the more the number of blasting, the more obvious the damage effect on the stability 
of rock mass 。 However, in view of the fact that the displacement characteristics of surrounding rock block are 
mainly selected in this thesis, and the failure speed of explosion in tunnel surrounding rock is also related to the 
size of explosion load and mechanical parameters of surrounding rock, so it is not studied in depth. 
 
  
     （a）                                        （b） 
 
       （c）                                       （d） 
 
  
           （e）                                      （f） 
Fig.4 Displacement cloud images of one to five explosions and tunnel under natural conditions 
Fig.4 (a ~ f) shows the tunnel displacement nephogram after 1 to 5 times of explosion load and under natural 
state. When the foundation soil and tunnel structure are fixed, the maximum displacement of tunnel s tructure 
increases with the increase of explosion load intensity and time, and decreases with the increase of tunnel buried 
depth, showing an approximate linear relationship [2 1]. Combined with the factors in this thesis, such as large 
and multiple blastin g loads, no support and reinforcement of tunnel surrounding rock, and sandstone 
characteristics of rock mass, it can be seen that the tunnel will produce large deformation. It can be seen from the 
figure that the tunnel has collapsed seriously after five t imes of explosive loading . According to the research of 
Zheng Yingren et al. [2 2], it is found that the strength reduction method has been applied  to the judgment of 
tunnel stability. After calculating the overall safety factor of the tunnel surrounding rock, the potential slip 
surface is obtained, which provides a reliable basis for the subsequent tunnel stability evaluation. The tunnel 
model studied in this thesis is a shallow tunnel, so the main failure mode is slip.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
 
For the Mohr Coulomb model which studied in this article, when the structural plane does not slide or open, the 
tensile strength and shear strength are: 





tanmax
max
n
c
t
c
FcAF
TAT
                          
（11） 
Where Tmax is the maximum tensile force,  T is the tensile strength of t he structural plane, Ac is the contact area, 
tFmax
 is the shear strength of the structural plane, Fn is the normal stress, c and ϕ are the cohesion and internal 
friction angle of the structural plane respectively. 
When the surrounding rock of the tunnel is sliding, its tensile strength and shear strength are:  





tansmax
resmax
n
cidualre
n
idual
FACF
TT
                       
（12） 
Where, 
reaidualT is the residual tension, 
nFmax is the residual sh ear, 
idualreC s  is the residual cohesion, 
cA  is 
the contact area. 
UDEC program can reduce the strength parameters of deformation body and structural plane. When the tunnel is 
unstable, the built-in strength reduction calculation program can calculate the overall safety factor of the  tunnel. 
According to the calculation, when the reduction coefficient is 1.52, the tunnel is in the limit state.  
 
Fig.5 Node graph of shear limit after the first blasting 
It can be seen from the node graph (Fig. 5) that the boundary of the collapse area has reached the shear strength 
limit after the first blasting. Fig. 4 displacement nephogram after each explosion shows that after the first 
explosion load is applied, the collapse of surrounding rock of tunnel becomes more and more obvious with the 
increase of explosion times. After the first explosion load, the collapse area has reache d the shear strength limit, 
and then a large area of collapse occurs. 
4 Persistent homology characteristics of tunnel surrounding rock under multiple 
explosion loads 
The mathematical method of persistent homology is introduced to analyze the stability of tunnel surrounding 
rock under multiple explosion loads. When studying the block displacement of tunnel surroun ding rock under 
the action of explosion load, we first divide the surrounding rock into images composed of numerous blocks, and 
we regard the block as a point cloud in European space. Figure 6 is the scatter diagram of the surrounding rock 
block of the tunnel in the natural state of excavation, that is, the point cloud of the surrounding rock of the tunnel 
under the natural state.

===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
 
 
Fig.6 Scattered Point Map of Tunnel Block in Natural State 
42 blocks which around the surrounding rock of the tunnel and whose displacement is greater than 0.01m under 
the explosion load are selected as the point clouds, and the relevant parameters of the persistent homology  
topological characteristics are obtained by using javeplex software. 
  
  
（a）                                      （b） 
Fig.7 Natural state and 1 to 5 times of exploding tunnel surrounding rock block 
10 / bb barcode 
Fig. 7 (a) is a bar code graph of 0 -dimensional Betty number. I t can be seen from the graph that most of the 
connecting radius between blocks is in the range of 0 ~ 12. From the natural state to 1 to 5 explosions, the 
maximum value of ε has little change. When the selected block area is fixed, the displacement of the edge block 
is relatively small due to the size of the explosion load. When ε is less than 1, B0 from excavation to the fifth 
explosion is 42. At this time, from natural state to 1 -5 explosion, due to the relatively small connection radius, 
the number of ve rtical coordinates also shows the number of blocks selected in the tunnel space;  When 1 < ε < 
11.65, with the increase of blasting times, the upper layer of 0 -dimensional Betty  number shows a trend of 
"thinning" and decreasing, which indicates that the spacing of tunnel surrounding rock blocks is narrowing, 
which is due to the increase of blasting times, which causes the tunnel surrounding rock to collapse to the middle;  
When 11.65 < ε, all the blocks are connected to form a connected body.  However, from the beginning of the

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
 
explosion, the ε began to decrease gradually, which is because the surrounding rock of the tunnel began to 
collapse and the "hole" of the tunnel began to be compressed. At this time, part of the ε began to decrease.  It can 
be seen from the 1-D Betty number bar code in Fig. 7 (b), with the increase of explosion times, ε always changes 
in an interval, 8 < ε < 25, with the natural state to multiple times of e xplosive loading, the longest straight line ε 
of 1D barcode gradually decreases, which indicates that the diameter of 1D "holes" formed between blocks is 
gradually decreasing. This "hole" is caused by the position relationship of blocks or their geometric structure in 
European space. Of course, there are not only one "hole", but also many small "holes" , which belongs to the bar 
code noise, we can ignore it.  
 
Fig.8 One-dimensional bar code graph 
  maximum change with the number of explosions 
Fig. 8 is the curve of the maximum value of one -dimensional bar code ε in Fig. 7 (b) from the natural state to the 
application of explosive load for 1 to 5 times. It can be seen from the figure that t he maximum value of ε 
decreases with the increase of explosion times, and the maximum value of ε under natural state is 21.82. With the 
increase of blasting times, the collapse of tunnel is becoming more and more serious, and the tunnel is shrinking. 
After the first explosion, the maximum value of ε is 21.78, and the variation is 0.04. The maximum value after 
2-5 times of blasting is 2.17, 3.84, 5.4 and 5.7 respectively, which indicates that with the increase of blasting 
times, the connecting radius of hole s is decreasing . After the first explosion load is applied, the change of ε is 
small. When the second explosion load is applied, compared with the first explosion load, the change of ε is 53 
times. According to Fig. 4, F ig. 5 and Fig. 8, after the first blasting l oad is applied, the surrounding rock of the 
tunnel reaches the shear limit, that is, the tunnel begins to collapse violently. After the collapse area reaches the 
shear limit, the holes formed between blocks begin to shrink, and the maximum value of ε changes rapidly and 
becomes smaller and smaller. At this time, it can be seen that the shear limit of tunnel surrounding rock can be 
established with the maximum value of ε in one-dimensional bar code diagram . When the surrounding rock of 
the tunnel breaks thro ugh the shear limit under the explosion load, the tunnel begins to collapse, and the 
maximum value of ε begins to decrease, and the degree of reduction is linear with the collapse speed.  With the 
increase of explosion times, the displacement of collapse increases, and the maximum "hole" formed between 
blocks is reduced. According to the above inference, the collapse area of tunnel surrounding rock reaches the 
limit of shear strength after the first explosion load, and then ε = 21.78 . When ε is less than 21.78, the tunnel will 
be damaged. If the explosion load is applied to  the tunnel, the maximum value of ε will decrease rapidly and the 
damage of surrounding rock will increase rapidly. It can be seen that the safety factor of tunnel surrounding rock 
can be expressed by the maximum value of ε in one -dimensional bar code diagram. When the maximum value of 
ε exceeds the limit value, the tunnel begins to lose stability and the maximum value of ε begins to decrease.

===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
 
 
Fig.9 Total number of "holes" formed during explosion 
Fig.9 shows the number of ordinates of one -dimensional bar code diagram under natural state and after one to 
five times of blasting, i.e. the total horizontal line of Fig .7 (b). Fig .9 shows the number of "holes" continuo usly 
formed in the surrounding rock of the tunnel during the process of increasing the connecting radius.  In natural 
state, the total number of "holes" in 1D barcode map is 8, and 8 "holes" are formed. At this time, the redundant 
holes are caused by removing some holes with small displacement and small area in calculation. After the 
explosion load was applied, it increased rapidly to 13 and then changed from 13 to 14. Under the explosion load, 
the tunnel will be destroyed, and the surface protruding block and internal block displacement will be formed, 
and the number of "holes" wi ll increase rapidly with the application of explosion load, that is to say, the number 
of "holes" will increase when the explosion load is applied, and the overall trend is increasing.  
5 Conclusion 
A new mathematical method, persistent homology, is introduced into the research field of tunnel safety design 
and disaster prediction. The feasibility and accuracy of applying persistent homology to tunnel engineering are 
proved by studying the failure characteristics of a tunnel model under multiple explosion loads  
Based on the discrete element method (DEM), the dynamic response and the damage evolution process of tunnel 
surrounding rock are obtain ed after each explosion load. The results show that: with the increase of blasting 
times, the 0 -dimensional Betty number changes a little, that is, blasting changes the distribution of surrounding 
rock structure, and the overall 0 -dimensional ε decreases, which reflects that the blasting makes the surrounding 
rock collapse close, and from the "hole" number of 1-dimensional Betty number, it can be seen that the explosion 
load will increase the number of "holes", and the overall trend is increasing; the safet y factor of tunn el 
surrounding rock can be used . When the maximum value of ε in one -dimensional bar code diagram breaks 
through the limit value, the tunnel begins to lose stability and the maximum value of ε also begins to decrease. 
The maximum value of ε in one -dimensional bar code diagram can be used to judge whether the tunnel 
surrounding rock reaches the maximum shear strength limit, so as to determine the zero point of tunnel 
surrounding rock collapse 
Using the method of persistent homology to study shallow buried tunnel under explosion load can be combined 
with the current research i n tunnel engineering field and ground penetrating radar and other means to obtain the 
geometric structure of underground tunnel engineering, that is, the topological characteristics of the tunnel can 
be analyzed by the method of persistent homology, and th e data can be used in machine learning fields such as 
support vector machine and BP neural network. It provides a new idea for the study of tunnel design and safety. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the Project Funded by Jiangxi Provincial Department of Science and Technology 
(No. 20192BBEL50028).

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 
 
References 
[1] BULSON P S.Explosive loading of engineering structures[M]. London：Spon Press，1997. 
[2] Zhang Liang，Guan Xiaoming，Zhang Chunwei，Li Meng, Li Yang ，Xiong Yisi，Wang Yushan， Qi 
Lu.Vibration Response of Horseshoe-shaped Pipeline under Tunnel Blasting[J]. Blasting，2019（02）-0117-09，
（in chinese） 
[3] LI Xiuru ，GUO Eedong ，ZHANG WenJing et al .Simulation study on the failure of deep tunnel under 
blasting load[J]. Journal of Catastrophology，2019，34(1)：87-93.（in chinese） 
[4] Wang Chengbing .Laboratory and numerical investigation on failure process of tunnel constructed in 
homogeneous rock[J]. Rock and Soil Mechanics，2012(01)-0103-06.（in chinese） 
[5] Osouli A ，Moradi Bajest ani B .The interplay between moisture sensitive roof rocks and roof falls in an 
Illinois underground coal mine[J].Conputers and Geotechnics，2016，80：152-166. 
[6] Shreedharan S ，Kulatilake P H S W .Discontinuum-Equivalent Continuum Analysis of the Stability of 
Tunnels in a Deep Coal Mine Using the Distinct Element Method [J] .Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering ，
2016，49(5)：1903-1922. 
[7] Zhang Jingliang ，Zhai Xianmeng .Application of Continuous Coherence in Image Classification and 
Recognition[J]. Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computational Mathematics ， 2017(12)： 494-508.(in 
chinese） 
[8] Mustafa Hajij，Bei WANG，Carlos Scheidegger ，Paul Rosen.Visual Detection of Structural Changes in 
Time-Varying Graphs Using Persistent Homology . 2018 IEEE Pacific Visualiza tion Symposium(PacificVis) ，
2018. 
[9] M Kramar，A Goullet，L Kondic，K Mischaikow．Persistence of force networks in compressed granular 
media[J]．PHYSICAL REVIEW E，2013，87，042207. 
[10] Yasuaki Hiraoka，Takenobu Nakamura，Akihiko Hirata,Escolar，Emerson G，Kaname Matsue，Yasumasa 
Nishiura．Hierarchical structures of amorphous solids characterized by persistent homology[J] .Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A，2016，Vol.113，No.26，pp7035-7040. 
[11] Takenobu Nakamura，Yasuaki HIraoka，Akihiko Hirata，Emerson G. Escolar，Kaname Matsue，Yasumasa 
Nishiura．Description of Mdeium-Range Order in Amorphous Structures by Persistent Homology[J] ．Condensed 
Matter，2015．arXiv：1501．03611v1[cond-mat.soft] 15 Jan 2015． 
[12] Akihiko Hirata ， Kaname Matsue ， Mingwei Chen ． Structural Analysis of Metallic Glasses with 
Computational Homology．Springer，2016． 
[13] Ardanza-Trevijano S，Zuriguel I，Arevalo R，et al．Topological analysis of tapped granular media using 
persistent homology[J]．Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys，2014，89(5)：052212． 
[14] Shen Caihua ， Liu Songyu ， Tong Liyuan ， et al ．topological optimization of highway tunnel 
excavation[J]．Highway Engineering，2008，3（4）：70-74． （in chinese） 
[15] Lai Hongpeng, Xie Yongli ， Yang Xiaohua, ，et al ．Topological optimization of highway tunnel lining 
structure in weak surrounding rock[J]．Highway，2011，（4）：203-20. （in chinese） 
[16] Zixuan Cang, and Guo-Wei Wei,(2017). Topological fingerprints reveal protein -ligand binding mechanism. 
arXiv:1703.10982v1 [q-bio.QM] 
[17] WANG Yuyan ． Discrete element analysis of the large －span tunnel in the jointed rock mass
［D］． Chongqing：Chongqing University，2014．（in chinese） 
[18] Zhang Yucheng，Yang Guanghua，Liu Peng，etc．An Equivalent Approach for Acting Blasting Load in 
Dynamic Numerical Simulation of  Blasting Vibration[ J] ．Chinese Journal of Underground Space and 
Engineering，2012，8（1）：56-64．（in chinese） 
[19] Manouchehrian A ， Cai M ．  Analysis of rockburst in tunnels subjected to static and dynamic

===== PAGE 13 =====
13 
 
loads[J]．Journal of Rock Mechanics & Geotechnical Engineering，2017，9( 6) ：12 -23． 
[20] Zhang Yi ，Zhou Bukui ，Yu Xiao ，Xu Xiangyun ，Hu Feng ．Effect of accidental explosion of ground 
explosive depot on metro tunnel[J]．Frotective Engineering，2019，6（3）：41-3．(in chinese） 
[21] ZHENG Yingren ，QIU Chenyu ，ZHANG Hong ，et al ．Exploration of stability analysis methods for 
surrounding rocks of soil tunnel[J].Chinese Journal of  Rock Mechanics and Engineering ，2008，27( 10) ：1968 
-1980．(in chinese） 
[22] Li Qinglong.Study on collapse mechanism and treatment measures of tunnel with gently inclined rock layer
［D］．Chengdu University of Technology，2015 (in chinese）
