===== PAGE 1 =====
KATRIN Sensitivity to keV Sterile Neutrinos with the TRISTAN Detector Upgrade
H. Acharya,1, 2 M. Aker,3 D. Batzler,3 A. Beglarian,4 J. Beisenk¨ otter,5 M. Biassoni,6 B. Bieringer,5 Y. Biondi,3
B. Bornschein,3 L. Bornschein,3 M. B¨ ottcher,5 M. Carminati,7, 8 A. Chatrabhuti,9 S. Chilingaryan,4 B. A. Daniel, 10
M. Descher,3 D. D´ ıaz Barrero,3 P. J. Doe,11 O. Dragoun,12 G. Drexlin,13 E. Ellinger,14 R. Engel,3 K. Erhardt,3
L. Fallb¨ ohmer,15 A. Felden,3 C. Fengler,3, a C. Fiorini,7, 8 J. A. Formaggio,16 C. Forstner,17, 15, b F. M. Fr¨ ankle,3
G. Gagliardi,18, 6 K. Gauda,5 A. S. Gavin,15 T. Geigle,3 T. Geier,3 S. Gentner,3 W. Gil,3 F. Gl¨ uck,3 C. Goupy,15
R. Gr¨ ossle,3 K. Habib,3 V. Hannen,5 L. Hasselmann,3 K. Helbing,14 S. Heyns,3 R. Hiller,3 D. Hillesheimer,3
D. Hinz,3 T. H¨ ohn,3 A. Jansen,3 M. Kandler,17 K. Khosonthongkee,19 C. K¨ ohler,15 J. Kohpeiß,3 A. Kopmann,4
N. Kovac,3 L. La Cascio, 13 L. Laschinger,17, 15 T. Lasserre,15 J. Lauer,3 T. L. Le, 3 O. Lebeda,12 S. M. Lee, 10
A. Lokhov,13 M. Mark,3 T. Marrod´ an Undagoitia,15 A. Marsteller,3 E. L. Martin, 1, c K. McMichael,10, d
S. Mertens,17, 15 S. Mohanty,3 J. Mostafa,4 I. M¨ uller,3 A. Nava,18, 6 S. Niemes,3 I. Nutini,6 A. Onillon,15, e
D. S. Parno, 10 M. Pavan,18, 6 U. Pinsook,9 J. Pl¨ oßner,15 J. M. L. Poyato, 23 J. R´ aliˇ s,12 S. Ramachandran,14
C. Rodenbeck,3 M. R¨ ollig,3 R. Sack,3 A. Saenz,24 R. Salomon,5 P. Sch¨ afer,3 M. Schl¨ osser,3 L. Schl¨ uter,22
S. Schneidewind,5, 6 U. Schnurr,3 J. Sch¨ urmann,5, 24 A.K. Sch¨ utz,22 A. Schwemmer,15 A. Schwenck,3 J. Seeyangnok,9
C. Silva,13 F. Simon,4 J. Songwadhana,19 D. Spreng,17, 15, b W. Sreethawong,19 M. Steidl,3 J. ˇStorek,3 X. Stribl,17, 15
M. Sturm,3 T. St¨ urwald,14 N. Suwonjandee,9 N. Tan Jerome,4 H. H. Telle,23 L. A. Thorne, 26 T. Th¨ ummler,3
K. Trost,3 K. Urban,7, 8 K. Valerius,3 D. V´ enos,12 P. Voigt,17 V. Wallner,17 C. Weinheimer,5 S. Welte,3
J. Wendel,3 C. Wiesinger,15 J. F. Wilkerson, 1, 2 J. Wolf,13 S. W¨ ustling,4 J. Wydra,3 W. Xu,16 and G. Zeller 3
(KATRIN Collaboration)
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
2Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory, Durham, NC 27708, USA
3Institute for Astroparticle Physics (IAP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
4Institute for Data Processing and Electronics (IPE), Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (KIT), Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
5Institute for Nuclear Physics, University of M¨ unster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 9, 48149 M¨ unster, Germany
6Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) – Sezione di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 3, 20126 Milano, Italy
7Politecnico di Milano, Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Piazza L. da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy
8Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) – Sezione di Milano, Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy
9Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
10Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
11Center for Experimental Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics, and
Dept. of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
12Nuclear Physics Institute, Czech Academy of Sciences, 25068 ˇReˇ z, Czech Republic
13Institute of Experimental Particle Physics (ETP), Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT), Wolfgang-Gaede-Str. 1, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
14Department of Physics, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences,
University of Wuppertal, Gaußstr. 20, 42119 Wuppertal, Germany
15Max-Planck-Institut f¨ ur Kernphysik, Saupfercheckweg 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
16Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
17Technical University of Munich, TUM School of Natural Sciences,
Physics Department, James-Franck-Straße 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
18Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit` a di Milano - Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 3, 20126 Milano, Italy
19School of Physics and Center of Excellence in High Energy Physics and
Astrophysics, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand
20Current address: Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708, USA
21Institute for Technical Physics (ITEP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
22Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
23Departamento de Qu´ ımica F´ ısica Aplicada, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain
24Institut f¨ ur Physik, Humboldt-Universit¨ at zu Berlin, Newtonstr. 15, 12489 Berlin, Germany
25Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, University of Heidelberg, Albert-Ueberle-Str. 2, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
26Institut f¨ ur Physik, Johannes-Gutenberg-Universit¨ at Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany
(Dated: April 16, 2026)
arXiv:2603.23256v2  [hep-ex]  15 Apr 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
Sterile neutrinos in the keV mass range are a well-motivated extension of the Standard Model
and viable dark matter candidates. Their existence can be probed in laboratory experiments, as
the admixture of a sterile state would induce a characteristic kink-like distortion in theβ-decay
electron energy spectrum. The KATRIN experiment is designed to measure the effective electron
neutrino mass with sub-eV sensitivity by analyzing the endpoint region of the tritiumβ-decay
spectrum. Following the completion of its neutrino mass program, KATRIN will extend its physics
reach to the search for keV-scale sterile neutrinos. This effort will be enabled by the TRISTAN
detector, a newly developed silicon drift detector array optimized for differential measurements at
high rates and energies well below the endpoint. In this article, we present the projected sensitivity of
KATRIN to keV-scale sterile neutrinos using a dedicated simulation framework. With four months
of detector livetime, KATRIN has the statistical power to probe mixing amplitudes at the level of
|Ue4|2∼10 −6 for sterile neutrino masses in the (4–13) keV range, significantly extending the reach
of previous laboratory searches. The major experimental systematic uncertainties investigated in
this work reduces the sensitivity by a factor of 10–50 over the same mass range.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Karlsruhe Tritium Neutrino (KATRIN) experi-
ment [1–5], operated at the Karlsruhe Institute of Tech-
nology (KIT), aims to measure the effective mass of the
electron antineutrino with sub-eV precision by study-
ing the endpoint region of the tritiumβ-decay spec-
trum. Since the start of data taking in 2019, KATRIN
has successively set the most stringent laboratory lim-
its on the neutrino mass [6–8], with the latest result of
mν <0.45 eV (90% CL), improving upon the previous
direct laboratory bounds [9, 10] by about a factor of five.
Beyond its primary goal, KATRIN has also demonstrated
its capability to explore other physics topics by provid-
ing constraints on a broad range of new physics scenarios,
such as Lorentz invariance violation [11], general neutrino
interactions [12], and sterile neutrinos in both the eV [13–
15] and keV [16] mass ranges, while also demonstrating
sensitivity to light bosons [17]. After the completion of
the neutrino mass measurement campaign, KATRIN will
extend its reach to keV sterile neutrino searches through
integration of the TRISTAN detector [18–20]. This up-
grade consists of a novel large-area, highly pixelated sil-
icon drift detector (SDD) array and a dedicated data-
acquisition (DAQ) system optimized for high count rates
and good energy resolution that will enable KATRIN to
perform a differential measurement of the fullβ-decay
spectrum. Together with the intense tritium source, the
TRISTAN detector will offer sensitivity to a broad range
of precision tests in nuclear and particle physics and to
searches for physics beyond the Standard Model, such as
signals of the emission of new light bosons [21], general
neutrino interactions [22, 23], extra dimensional sterile
a Current address: Department of Physics, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
b Also affiliated with Semiconductor Laboratory of the Max Planck
Society, Isarauenweg 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
c Current address: Department of Physics, Duke University,
Durham, NC, 27708, USA
d Also affiliated with Department of Physics, Washington and Jef-
ferson College, Washington, PA 15301, USA
e Corresponding author: anthony.onillon@mpi-hd.mpg.de
neutrinos [24], and right-handed currents [25]. The pri-
mary objective of the program is, however, the detec-
tion of keV-scale sterile neutrinos, which constitute vi-
able dark-matter candidates [26].
The nature of dark matter remains one of the most cen-
tral open questions in modern physics. Although its exis-
tence has been unambiguously established by numerous
astrophysical and cosmological observations, the Stan-
dard Model does not include any particle that can ac-
count for the observed dark matter abundance [27]. New
physics is therefore required to explain its fundamental
nature [28].
A sterile neutrino with a mass in the keV range repre-
sents a well-motivated dark matter candidate, requiring
only a minimal extension of the Standard Model [26, 29–
31]. Sterile neutrinos are hypothetical neutrino states
that do not take part in the weak interaction. In the
presence of active-sterile mixing, the neutrino mass eigen-
states are admixtures of active interaction states and
sterile right-handed states. The heavy state considered
here is predominantly sterile, with a small active admix-
ture that allows it to couple weakly to beta decay. It is
characterized by its massm 4 and its active-sterile mixing
parameter sin2θ. Depending on their production mecha-
nism, keV-scale sterile neutrinos can constitute so-called
warm dark matter, which is often discussed in connection
with small-scale structure anomalies such as themissing-
satellite problem[32] and thecusp-core problem[33, 34].
In these cases, standard cold-dark-matter simulations
predict an excess of small structures compared to obser-
vations. Warm dark matter can alleviate these tensions
while remaining consistent with the observed large-scale
structure of the Universe [35]. The allowed parameter
range for keV sterile neutrinos as dark-matter candidates
is mainly motivated by cosmological and astrophysical
constraints. These constraints are summarized later in
Fig. 14:
•As fermions, sterile neutrinos must satisfy the
Tremaine–Gunn bound, which sets a lower mass
limit of∼0.5 keV to avoid violating the Pauli ex-
clusion principle [36].
•Small-scale structure data can set more stringent
bounds on the mass. These bounds depend on the

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
specific production mechanism of sterile neutrinos,
which determines their temperature profile. While
warm dark matter can alleviate tensions of small-
scale structures, too warm (or even hot) dark mat-
ter candidates are ruled out, as they would wash
out the small-scale structure to an extent which be-
comes incompatible with observations. As a result,
the lower bound inferred from the Tremaine–Gunn
constraint can be significantly higher, reaching sev-
eral keV when cosmological production scenarios
are taken into account [37].
•A stringent upper bound on the mixing angle arises
from sterile neutrino production via mixing with
active neutrinos (the freeze-in mechanism). If the
mixing angle is too large, the resulting abundance
of keV-scale sterile neutrinos would exceed the dark
matter density observed in the Universe.
•In contrast, mixing angles that are too small would
not allow the production of a sufficient abundance
of keV-scale sterile neutrino dark matter. Spe-
cific production mechanisms, such as the Shi–Fuller
mechanism [38], can predict the correct relic abun-
dance, with sterile neutrino masses and mixing
angles lying within the allowed parameter space.
This minimal mixing typically lies in the range
sin2(2θ)∼(10 −10−10−7) for keV-scale masses from
1 to 50 keV [26, 39].
•Another stringent bound arises from the decay of
sterile neutrino dark matter. Although sterile neu-
trino dark matter can decay via mixing with ac-
tive neutrinos, the mixing is so small that its life-
time is long enough to account for the dark mat-
ter observed today. The decay mode into an ac-
tive neutrino and a mono-energetic X-ray photon
would lead to a characteristic signature for X-ray
telescopes. The absence of a significant signal
places strong constraints, typically imposing an up-
per bound of sin 2(2θ) well below 10−7 [40], partic-
ularly at higher sterile-neutrino masses where the
decay rate increases with mass.
While such astrophysical observations provide valuable
information on keV sterile neutrino dark matter, they
rely on assumptions about the underlying cosmological
model, the production mechanism, and the abundance
and distribution of the particle in the cosmos. Various
studies show that the above-mentioned constraints can be
alleviated when extending the model assumptions. For
instance, in [41] the late phase transition of an auxil-
iary scalar field would turn on the active-sterile mixing
only at a very late stage in the evolution of the universe.
This scenario would avoid any over-production of ster-
ile neutrino dark matter and alleviate X-ray constraints.
In another study [42], these constraints are circumvented
by reducing the sterile neutrino contribution to the total
amount of dark matter, by postponing dark matter pro-
duction to lower temperatures, and by reducing the decay
rate in photons and active neutrinos through cancelation
with a new physics diagram.
Ultimately, direct laboratory measurements are de-
sired to unambiguously establish the existence of sterile
neutrinos, without relying on astrophysical assumptions.
A powerful method to probe sterile neutrinos in the lab-
oratory is via kinematic signatures. Such searches can
be performed in high-precision studies of nuclear decays,
for instance in electron capture [43, 44] or, as of interest
here,β-decay. Pastβ-decay experiments have already
set constraints down to|U e4|2∼(10−2−10−3) for sterile
neutrino masses up to∼50 keV [16, 45–48]. The next im-
provement in sensitivity is expected to come from exper-
iments able to collect significantly higher-statistics [49].
In this paper, we present an overview study of the KA-
TRIN sensitivity to keV-scale sterile neutrinos in the up-
coming phase with the TRISTAN detector. The paper
is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we summarize the
physics motivation for keV-scale sterile neutrino searches
in tritiumβ-decay. Sec. III provides an overview of the
experimental setup, including both the baseline config-
uration for the neutrino-mass measurement and the up-
graded configuration for the keV-sterile neutrino search
phase. The analysis framework, including the modeling
and the treatment of dominant systematic effects, is pre-
sented in Sec. IV. The resulting sensitivities and the im-
pact of systematic uncertainties are presented and dis-
cussed in Section V. Finally, conclusions are provided in
Secs. VI.
II. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Theβ-decay of molecular tritium,
T2 → 3HeT+ +e− + ¯νe,(1)
is a superallowed transition with an endpoint energy of
E0 ≃18.6 keV and a short half-life of 12.3 years. The
differentialβ-decay spectrum can be written as
dΓ
dEe
(mν)∝F(Z,E e)peEe(E0−Ee)
×
p
(E0−Ee)2−m 2νC(Ee),(2)
whereE e andp e are the electron energy and momentum,
Zis the nuclear charge of the daughter nucleus,F(Z,E e)
is the Fermi function describing the Coulomb interaction
with the daughter nucleus,m ν is the effective electron-
neutrino mass, andC(E e) accounts for theoretical cor-
rections beyond the Fermi function, including radiative,
recoil, atomic, and molecular effects [50–52].
If a sterile neutrino mixes with the electron neutrino, it
would produce a distinct signature in the tritiumβ-decay
spectrum, as the decay acquires an additional branch in
which the heavier mass eigenstatem 4 is emitted [24, 53,
54]. The resulting differential spectrum is:
dΓ
dEe
= (1−|U e4|2) dΓ
dEe
(mν) +|Ue4|2 dΓ
dEe
(m4),(3)

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
0 5 10 15 E0 = 18.6 keV
Energy (keV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Diﬀerential decay rate (a.u.)
m4sin2 θ
Without sterile
With sterile:
cos2 θ d□
dEe
(mν) + sin2 θ d□
dEe
(m4)
Active branch: cos 2 θ d□
dEe
(mν)
Sterile branch: sin 2 θ d□
dEe
(m4)
FIG. 1. Illustration of a sterile neutrino signature in the the-
oretical tritiumβ-decay spectrum. The black curve shows
the standard spectrum, while the blue curve includes a ster-
ile state withm 4 = 10 keV and an unphysically large mixing
amplitude of sin 2θ= 0.2 for visibility. The kink appears at
E=E 0−m4. For clarity, no experimental effects are included
in this plot.
consisting of the superposition of an active branch gov-
erned by the effective neutrino massm ν, and a sterile
branch determined bym 4. The sterile admixture intro-
duces a kink-like distortion in the spectrum at an en-
ergyE e =E 0−m 4. Its amplitude is proportional to
|Ue4|2 = sin2θ, the active–sterile mixing parameter corre-
sponding to the mixing angleθin the two-neutrino frame-
work [55]. The impact of a sterile neutrino on the tritium
β-decay spectrum is illustrated in Fig. 1. For tritium,
the search is thus kinematically limited to sterile neu-
trino masses below the endpoint energy,m 4 ≲18.6 keV.
Numerous isotopes with endpoint energies in the few-
to-few-tens of keV range, such as3H [16, 45–48], 7Be [44],
20F [56], 35S [57], 63Ni [58], 64Cu [59], 144Pr [60],
187Re [61] and 241Pu [62] have been investigated in
searches for keV-scale sterile neutrinos. Among these
isotopes, tritium stands out as an isotope of choice: its
endpoint energy provides sensitivity across the relevant
mass range; the super-allowed transition enables accu-
rate spectral modeling; and the short half-life permits
high-intensity sources for precision measurements. His-
torically, the most stringent laboratory limits on ster-
ile neutrinos in the (0.01–2) keV mass range have been
obtained from tritiumβ-decay experiments, including
Mainz [45], Troitsk [46, 47], and the work of Hidde-
mann et al. [48]. Most recently, KATRIN has estab-
lished the leading laboratory-based constraints in the
(0.01–1.0) keV mass range using data from its commis-
sioning campaign [16]. This result represents an impor-
tant milestone, demonstrating the feasibility of search-
ing for keV-scale sterile neutrinos with KATRIN. The
goal of the present work is to demonstrate that KATRIN,
equipped with the TRISTAN detector, has the potential
to extend this sensitivity by several orders of magnitude
and to higher sterile neutrino masses.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. KATRIN beamline
KATRIN consists of a 70-meter-long beamline de-
signed for the direct measurement of the absolute neu-
trino mass via high-precisionβ-spectroscopy of tritium
β-decay. The beamline is composed of two main sections:
the Source and Transport Section (STS) and the tritium-
free Spectrometers and Detector Section (SDS) [2, 3].
Electrons are produced in the 10-meter-long Window-
less Gaseous Tritium Source (WGTS), where highly pu-
rified molecular tritium gas is continuously injected and
diffuses toward both ends of the tube. The gas is then
pumped out and recirculated into the tritium loop sys-
tem. The WGTS is designed to provide a high and sta-
ble activity of up to 10 11 Bq. In the current KATRIN
configuration, it is operated at 79 K. Electrons are mag-
netically guided from the source through the transport
section to the pre-spectrometer and the main spectrom-
eter (MS), i.e., in the downstream direction toward the
detector. The transport section reduces the tritium par-
tial pressure by more than 14 orders of magnitude us-
ing multiple pumping sections to prevent tritium from
entering the spectrometer section. Both spectrometers
function as high-pass filters based on the MAC-E filter
principle [63, 64], which combines magnetic adiabatic col-
limation with an electrostatic retarding potential. They
transmit only electrons whose longitudinal energy, i.e.,
the kinetic energy associated with the momentum com-
ponent parallel to the magnetic-field direction, exceeds
the applied potential.
Electrons are guided through the 23-m-long, 10-m-
wide main spectrometer in a gradually decreasing mag-
netic field under adiabatic conditions. Because the mag-
netic field varies slowly compared to the electron cy-
clotron motion, the magnetic moment is approximately
conserved along the trajectory. During this transport,
their pitch angle, defined as the angle between the elec-
tron momentum and the local magnetic field direction,
governs the distribution of kinetic energy between lon-
gitudinal and transverse components. Due to conserva-
tion of the magnetic moment, most of the transverse en-
ergy is converted into longitudinal energy by the time
the electrons reach the analyzing plane, leaving only a
small residual transverse component. This adiabatic col-
limation ensures a large angular acceptance with a max-
imum accepted pitch angle of 51 ◦ for electrons emitted
in the WGTS (B src = 2.52 T) [8]. If this condition were
to be violated, non-adiabatic transport would induce un-
controlled pitch-angle changes, leading to unwanted re-
flections and, in some cases, trapping of electrons. The
magnetic field profile along the main spectrometer is
shaped by superconducting solenoids and by an exter-

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
nal air-coil system, which allows fine adjustment of the
field configuration. The large field ratio between the field
at the exit of the spectrometer and the analyzing plane
(Bmax = 4.2 T,B ana = 0.63 mT) results in a maximum
residual transverse energy of only ∆E≈2.8 eV at the
endpoint energy [8].
Electrons transmitted through the main spectrometer
are then accelerated by 10 kV using a post-acceleration
electrode (PAE) and counted at the focal plane detec-
tor (FPD), a 148-segment silicon PIN diode array [65],
characterized by an intrinsic energy resolution of order
1.5 keV (FWHM) for 20 keV incident electrons. However,
in the neutrino-mass measurement, the energy resolution
is determined by the MAC-E filter, so that the detec-
tor resolution is not a limiting factor. The integral spec-
trum of the endpoint region is then obtained by recording
the detector count rate at successive retarding potentials
(Ums) in a narrow energy window starting a few tens
of eV below the endpointE 0, where each measurement
gives the number of electrons transmitted above the ap-
plied threshold potential.
At the opposite end of the beamline lies the rear sec-
tion. It contains a gold-plated rear wall absorbing the
non-transmitted electrons and defining the electric po-
tential relative to the high voltage of the main spectrom-
eter. This section is also equipped with an angle-selective
source of monoenergetic photoelectrons (electron gun) for
calibration measurements [66].
B. Beamline upgrades for keV-neutrino sterile
searches
The sterile-neutrino signature, although often referred
to as a kink, manifests as a broad distortion over the
whole tritiumβ-decay spectrum. An integral high-
resolution MAC-E filter scan is therefore not optimal
for this search, since it both integrates over much of the
relevant spectral information and reconstructs the spec-
trum from successive retarding-potential settings. This
also makes the measurement more sensitive to time-
dependent source variations between scan steps in the
high-statistics regime relevant for TRISTAN. Sensitivity
to keV-scale sterile neutrinos therefore motivates a dif-
ferential measurement of the fullβ-decay spectrum, in
which a broad energy interval is recorded simultaneously
and the electron energy is determined by the detector re-
sponse rather than by the retarding potential. In this
mode, the spectrometer retarding potential is lowered
such that a large range of electron energies is transmit-
ted, resulting in orders-of-magnitude higher count rates.
The main spectrometer is nevertheless retained for tech-
nical reasons and to preserve the option of future integral
measurements for cross-checks and systematic-effect in-
vestigations.
For this new phase, critical modifications of the beam-
line are required, as illustrated in Fig. 2, showing the KA-
TRIN beamline with the TRISTAN detector installed.
The main modifications include:
Detector system –The most important upgrade is the
TRISTAN detection system, a multi-pixel silicon drift de-
tector (SDD) array designed to handle high rates, while
replacing the current KATRIN detector section with min-
imal modifications [18, 19, 67]. SDDs are selected for
their excellent energy resolution at high count rates, en-
abled by their small anode capacitance and integrated
charge amplification, while the use of drift rings allows for
large pixel sizes without compromising performance. The
full TRISTAN detector system will consist of nine mod-
ules, each containing a monolithic SDD chip segmented
into 166 hexagonal pixels, each with an equivalent radius
of about 3 mm. The segmentation in modules avoids the
technological challenges of producing a single large sen-
sor while ensuring nearly gapless coverage when the mod-
ules are placed side by side. The readout electronics are
mounted behind the SDD chip, perpendicular to the de-
tector plane, further minimizing insensitive areas [68]. In
principle, the detector provides an active area of about
12×12 cm2 with roughly 1500 pixels. In practice, only
the innermost circular detection area with a diameter of
about 9 cm, as defined by the magnetic flux mapping of
the source onto the detector, is used. The TRISTAN
modules are designed to be compatible with the strong
magnetic fields in the detector chamber and are opti-
mized for a low outgassing rate. Stable operation has
been demonstrated in magnetic fields of up to 2 T, which
covers the planned TRISTAN operating conditions. The
prototype and final modules that have already been char-
acterized demonstrate an energy resolution better than
300 eV FWHM in response to 20 keV electrons, stable op-
eration under KATRIN-like conditions, and count-rate
capabilities up to∼100 kcps per pixel [20, 68–70]. To
address the challenges posed by the TRISTAN detec-
tor’s high per-pixel count rates and large channel mul-
tiplicity, a dedicated DAQ system was designed [71].
This remote analog to digital conversion DAQ relies on
early digitization close to the detector and flexible field-
programmable gate array (FPGA)-based back-end pro-
cessing, enabling efficient, high-throughput energy recon-
struction with minimal distortion.
Windowless Gaseous Tritium Source –The WGTS
was designed to be operated with a high nominal column
density ofρd= 5×10 17 molecules/cm2, whereρddenotes
the integrated number of tritium molecules per unit area
along the source axis. For the keV-scale sterile neutrino
search, this column density must be adjusted to ensure
a detector rate not exceeding∼100 kcps per pixel. The
optimal column density for TRISTAN is projected to be
within 0.5–10% of the nominal value. The exact value
will depend on the retarding potential and the magnetic
field configuration, both of which also influence the re-
sulting detector rate.
Post-acceleration electrode –For the neutrino-mass
measurement, the PAE is operated at +10 kV (techni-
cally limited to +12 kV), primarily to reduce detector-
related background by shifting the endpoint region to

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
FIG. 2. Schematic view of the KATRIN beamline equipped with the TRISTAN detector. The magnetic-field setting corresponds
to the reference configuration used in this analysis. The dominant systematic effects relevant for the keV-sterile neutrino search
are illustrated: final-state distribution (a), T 2 scattering (b), magnetic traps (c), rear-wall backscattering (d) and decay (e),
magnetic reflection (f), magnetic collimation (g), spectrometer transmission (h), spectrometer adiabaticity (i), post-acceleration
(j), synchrotron energy loss (k), detector backscattering and back-reflection (l), charge collection and backscattering escape
(m), and charge sharing (n).
higher energies. For this new phase, a PAE capable of
sustaining up to +20 kV is under development to re-
duce detector-related systematic effects, as discussed in
Sec. IV C.
Rear Wall –Half of the electrons emitted in the
WGTS travel upstream and hit the rear wall. An addi-
tional fraction also reaches this surface after being mag-
netically reflected in the beamline by the main spectrom-
eter or pinch magnet located at its exit, or after backscat-
tering in the detector. While many of these electrons are
absorbed in the RW, a significant fraction can scatter
back into the beamline through various processes. These
include single or multiple scattering, as well as the pro-
duction of secondary electrons via ionization or Auger
de-excitation. The backscattered electrons re-enter the
beamline with modified energies and pitch angles and
can propagate toward the detector or undergo further re-
flections. This effect can lead to a significant number of
electrons traversing the beamline multiple times before
final absorption at the detector. While such events do
not have a major impact on the neutrino-mass measure-
ment due to the narrow energy window analyzed near the
endpoint, they are a significant source of uncertainty for
the keV-sterile neutrino search, as most of the scattered
electrons will remain within the analysis energy window.
The current RW is gold plated to ensure stable electrical
coupling to the source plasma. However, gold (Z=79) ex-
hibits a large probability of electron backscattering due
to its high nuclear charge. To mitigate RW backgrounds
produced by backscattering, a new RW made of beryl-
lium (Z=4) will be installed. Beryllium’s low nuclear
charge results in a significantly smaller backscattering co-
efficient compared to gold (e.g., 3.4% vs 48% for 18.6 keV
0
2
4
Field B (T)
Brw
Bsrc Bmd
Bpch
Bana
Bdet
KATRIN nominal KATRIN with TRISTAN
50
 40
 30
 20
 10
 0 10
z position (m)
20
0
20
Potential E (kV)
Ums
UPAE
FIG. 3. Comparison of the on-axis magnetic field and elec-
tric potential for the nominal KATRIN neutrino measurement
campaign and for the keV sterile neutrino search using the
TRISTAN detector.
electrons at normal incidence), with values varying for
different incident energies and angles.
Electromagnetic field design –The magnetic field
along the beamline is created by a set of 24 superconduct-
ing solenoids delivering maximum fields ranging from
3.6 T to 6 T [72]. During operation with TRISTAN, the
basic principle of electron transport along the beamline
remains unchanged, but the main operational parame-
ters are optimized for the keV-sterile neutrino search.
The magnetic-field and electric-potential configurations
assumed for this study are summarized in Table I and il-
lustrated in Fig. 3, where they are compared to the nom-
inal configuration for the neutrino-mass measurement.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
TABLE I. Summary of the electromagnetic field configuration assumed for this study. The adopted parameters represent
a compromise between several competing requirements aimed at mitigating specific systematic effects. Final values will be
confirmed with dedicated measurements during commissioning.
Parameter Description Nominal TRISTAN
Brw RW surface field 1.24 T 0.82 T
Bsrc WGTS field 2.52 T 3.60 T
Bmd Max. field downstream WGTS 4.20 T 3.62 T
Bana MS analyzing-plane field 0.6 mT 2 mT
Bpch Pinch-magnet field 4.20 TB md−0.2 T
Bdet Detector surface field 2.50 T 1.41 T
Ums MS retarding voltage -18.6 kV -3.5 kV
Upae PAE detector voltage +10 kV +20 kV
These modifications are designed to reduce the contribu-
tion of electrons originating from the RW at the detector
while ensuring adiabatic transport of the electrons. Ad-
ditionally, the configuration must guarantee that the flux
tube mapped onto the detector does not intersect with
any beamline elements.
At the RW, a reduced magnetic fieldB rw will be used.
This setting ensures that backscattered electrons from
the RW with large pitch angles are magnetically reflected
back toward the RW, providing an additional chance for
absorption. The relative contribution of RW electrons
to the detector spectrum can be further minimized by
increasing the fraction of events that propagate directly
from the source to the detector by increasing the mag-
netic field at the sourceB src. This adjustment increases
the maximum angle of transmission, thereby increasing
the acceptance. These modifications are constrained by
the maximum technically feasible field at the source of
Bsrc = 3.6 T and a minimal field at the RW ofB rw =
0.82 T to avoid flux tube collisions due to the beam tube
geometry.
The detector fieldB det must be reduced in tandem
with theB rw to ensure the full magnetic mapping of the
detector onto the RW. While a lower RW field is ben-
eficial for suppressing backscattering contributions, an
excessively low detector field would introduce large sys-
tematic uncertainties due to an increase of the electron
gyroradii and pixel migration from back-reflection at the
detector. Dedicated studies have shown that the detec-
tor magnetic field should remain above approximately
1 T [73].
Further optimizations are required to ensure adiabatic
transport of high-energy electrons through the MS. In
standard KATRIN operation, the maximal downstream
magnetic fieldB md is located at the pinch magnet at the
downstream end of the MS. For TRISTAN, this mag-
netic field maximum is shifted to the source side of the
MS. This suppresses non-adiabatic pitch-angle changes
of electrons with large surplus energy inside the MS. The
effectiveness of this mitigation is governed by the mag-
netic field difference ∆B=B md−B pch. In this work,
the maximal field downstream of the sourceB md, is de-
fined with a small offset of 20 mT relative toB src, result-
ing inB md = 3.62 T. This ensures a well-defined global
magnetic-field maximum and slightly reduces the maxi-
mum accepted pitch angle in the source, to about 86 ◦,
thereby blocking electrons produced very close to 90 ◦.
A conservative field difference of ∆B= 0.2 T is then
adopted, yieldingB pch = 3.42 T. To further improve the
adiabatic transport through the main spectrometer, the
maximum current of the MS air-coil system will be in-
creased, raising the achievable magnetic field inside the
spectrometer up to 2 mT.
Ultimately, the main spectrometer will be operated at
a much lower retarding potential, as this setting directly
determines the accessible sterile neutrino mass range.
The measurement is foreseen at fixed retarding-potential
settings rather than in integral mode, but several fixed
settings may be used for systematic investigations. While
the optimal settings must ultimately be determined ex-
perimentally, in particular to validate adiabatic transport
and to characterize systematic effects, retarding poten-
tials in the rangeU ms =−8.5 to−3.5 kV are targeted
to provide sensitivity to sterile neutrino masses up to
m4≈10–15 keV.
IV. ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK
In the keV sterile neutrino search, KATRIN must ana-
lyze the full differential tritiumβ-decay spectrum rather
than only the endpoint region. To this end, a dedicated
simulation framework has been developed. This section
describes the modeling code, the treatment of dominant
systematic effects, and the reference settings used for the
sensitivity evaluation.
A. Spectrum modeling framework
The model uses a binned forward convolution method,
which consists of folding a theoretical prediction of the
differential tritiumβ-decay spectrum with a series of ex-
perimental response functions to predict the measured
spectrum at the detector [74]. A schematic showing the
iterative structure of the code is presented in Fig. 4. It is
based on a response-matrix approach, in which the input
β-decay spectrum is represented as a two-dimensional

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
Rear Wall
response
EM transport
response
Source
response
EM transport
response
Detector
response
DAQ
response
2D energy-angle
tritium spectrum
Convolution Model
prediction
FIG. 4. Schematic of the iterative structure of the convo-
lution model used to predict the observableβ-decay tritium
spectrum. Light-cyan blocks marked with a database sym-
bol denote groups of systematic effects whose responses are
implemented using precomputed response matrices stored in
dedicated databases.
matrix in the energy–pitch angle phase space, while each
experimental effect is described by a four-dimensional
matrix that describes how the electron energy and the
angle distribution are modified. After applying a given
systematic effect, the output spectrumS out is related to
the input spectrumS in via the integral transform:
Sout(E′
e,ϑ′) =
ZZ
R(E′
e,ϑ′;Ee,ϑ)S in(Ee,ϑ) dEe dϑ.
(4)
HereS(E e,ϑ) denotes the differential electron rate in en-
ergyE e and pitch angleϑ, andR(E ′
e,ϑ′;Ee,ϑ) is the
response function describing the redistribution of events
in (Ee,ϑ) space. The transport of electrons through the
beamline is assumed to be adiabatic. It is modeled with
an iterative convolution that accounts for changes in en-
ergy and direction due to scattering in the source, at the
detector or at the RW, as well as electric and magnetic re-
flections along the beamline. This model propagates the
joint energy–pitch-angle probability density function of
the electrons between discrete locations along the beam-
line, rather than performing full three-dimensional par-
ticle tracking in detailed electromagnetic field maps. As
a result, it requires only the longitudinal magnetic-field
profile and electric potential as shown in Fig. 3, thereby
significantly reducing the computational complexity. As
for other systematic effects, the impact of magnetic and
electric fields on the electron energy and pitch angle is
encoded in dedicated response matrices. In addition, pos-
sible direction reversals due to electric and magnetic mir-
roring are explicitly taken into account.
The response matrices are generated via dedicated
Monte Carlo simulations (custom-developed code or
Geant4[75]) or analytical calculations and are precom-
piled into an input library. The matrices are built by
scanning the response for all possible electron energies
and input angles. The input parameters describing the
systematic effects can also be varied in the simulation
and embedded as an additional dimension of the response
matrix. The key advantage of this framework is its re-
liance on pre-generated response matrices, which can be
reused once computed without rerunning Monte Carlo
simulations. This enables rapid spectrum evaluations,
which are essential for studying the impact of system-
atic uncertainties and for refining or extending individ-
ual systematic models without affecting the others. In
addition, as the response matrices are generated once
and reused, the finite Monte Carlo statistics of the un-
derlying simulations are fully correlated across all spec-
trum predictions. This ensures that differences between
spectra arise solely from variations in systematic param-
eters, rather than from Monte Carlo noise. The analysis
framework is implemented in Python 3 and optimized for
performance using vectorized numerical operations, just-
in-time compilation, caching, and parallelization. These
features allow efficient repeated evaluations required for
nuisance-parameter variations and sensitivity studies.
B. Systematic effects modeling
The dominant systematic effects accounted for in the
model are treated as follows:
(i) Tritiumβ-decay and source-related effects –The
input differentialβ-decay spectrum is modeled using
the standard weak-interaction formalism described in
Sec. II, including standard higher-order corrections such
as radiative, recoil, screening, and related atomic ef-
fects [50, 51]. Altogether, these corrections modify the
spectrum by less than∼1% above 1 keV [49]. In T2 decay,
molecular binding energies shift the effectiveQ-value,
while the sudden change in nuclear charge and molecular
configuration leads to excitations described by the final-
state distribution (FSD). The impact of uncertainties in
the theoretical description of the tritiumβ-spectrum, in-
cluding the FSD, was previously investigated in a dedi-
cated sensitivity study [49]. Since then, improved FSD
calculations have become available [52]. Its inclusion in
the model with an updated assessment of its impact for
the TRISTAN configuration is deferred to future work,
as the present study focuses on experimental systematic
uncertainties.
Inside the source,β-decay electrons can scatter off
tritium molecules, leading to energy loss and angular
changes. This process is modeled using a dedicated KA-
TRIN simulation framework that accounts for electrons
produced in the source as well as those re-entering from
upstream and downstream. The model incorporates elas-
tic scattering, electronic excitation, and ionization [76–
79], with ionization providing the dominant contribu-
tion due to its large cross section and substantial energy
loss. The scattering probabilities are computed assum-
ing Poisson statistics and are proportional to the prod-
uct of the energy-dependent cross section and the column
density traversed by the electron, where the pitch angle
determines the effective path length through the source
due to the electron’s cyclotron motion. Local minima
of the magnetic field between the superconducting coils
in the source create magnetic traps, in which electrons
produced with large pitch angles can oscillate until they
escape through scattering. The increased residence time
enhances scattering probabilities and modifies both the

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
energy and angle of escaping electrons. Magnetic trap-
ping is modeled using a simplified bucket model [80], with
traps approximated as regions of constant magnetic field.
The model parameters include the fraction of trapped
electrons, estimated from an analytical description of the
WGTS longitudinal density profile [81] and parameter-
ized by an effective trap column densityρd trap; and the
average magnetic field inside the traps,B trap, derived
from simulations with the KASSIOPEIA software pack-
age, a dedicated charged-particle tracking framework for
simulations in electromagnetic fields developed for the
KATRIN experiment [82]. Finally, energy losses due to
synchrotron radiation are neglected, as they have been
previously estimated to be negligible compared to the
overall energy resolution [80].
(ii) Beamline transport and spectrometer effects –
The model incorporates transport effects for both
downstream- and upstream-propagating electrons, as-
suming adiabatic transport along the beamline such that
the orbital magnetic moment of the electron is con-
served. Under this assumption, transport effects such
as magnetic reflection, collimation, spectrometer trans-
mission, and post-acceleration can be treated analyti-
cally [83]. Magnetic reflection occurs when electrons
propagate from a region of lower to higher magnetic field,
leading to a pitch-angle cutoffϑ max = arcsin
p
B1/B2

above which electrons are reflected. Conversely, magnetic
collimation and de-collimation modify the pitch angle ac-
cording to the adiabatic relation sin 2ϑ/B= const.Elec-
trons are transmitted through the spectrometer only if
their longitudinal kinetic energy exceeds the applied re-
tarding potential. This results in an energy-dependent
transmission function whose width is determined by the
magnetic-field ratio, ∆E≃E·B ana/Bmax. For a fixed re-
tarding potentialU ms, the transmission width only affects
electrons within an energy interval of order ∆Earound
the threshold energyE≃qU ms. For the electromagnetic
configuration used here, this corresponds to ∆E≃2 eV
atE≃3.5 keV. Electrons with energyE=qU ms +ε,
whereε≫∆Eare fully transmitted. Downstream of the
spectrometer, the PAE increases the electron kinetic en-
ergy and decreases the pitch angles at the detector by in-
creasing the momentum component parallel to the mag-
netic field. For backward-propagating electrons originat-
ing from detector backscattering, reflection at the PAE
occurs if their longitudinal kinetic energy is insufficient
to overcome the electrostatic potential step.
(iii) Rear-wall effects –Two distinct effects originate
from the RW: (a) partial backscattering and secondary-
electron production from incident electrons, and (b)β-
decays from tritium accumulated on the rear-wall sur-
face. Backscattering of electrons on different rear-wall
materials is modeled using dedicatedGeant4simula-
tions with the PENELOPE low-energy electromagnetic
physics package [84]. These simulations provide energy-
and angle-dependent response functions that map the in-
cident electron distribution at the RW to the spectrum
of backscattered and secondary electrons re-entering the
beamline. In addition, tritium accumulation on the
RW, originating from the non-negligible residual tritium
pressure in the rear-wall region, is modeled as a dis-
tinct source term compared to electrons produced in the
WGTS. As such accumulation is specific to the data-
taking conditions and was shown to be subdominant com-
pared to backscattering from electrons produced in the
WGTS, this contribution is not considered in the present
analysis. Dedicated measurements under representative
tritium-exposure conditions are ongoing and will help re-
fine its treatment in future analyses [85].
(iv) Detector response –The detector response model
accounts for three dominant effects: partial energy depo-
sition, intrinsic energy-resolution broadening, and charge
sharing between pixels. Partial energy deposition arises
primarily from three processes: (a) dead-layer effects,
where incomplete charge collection occurs in a thin en-
trance layer of the detector; (b) X-ray escape, in which
characteristic silicon X-rays (∼1.74 keV) produced by in-
elastic interactions exit the sensitive volume; and (c)
backscattering, where scattered electrons leave the de-
tector volume and re-enter the beamline in the upstream
direction. These effects are modeled using aGeant4-
based detector simulation combined with an analytic de-
scription of the depth-dependent charge-collection effi-
ciency in the detector dead layer. The simulation em-
ploys the PENELOPE package, chosen for its demon-
strated agreement with dedicated TRISTAN detector-
characterization measurements [20, 70]. The efficiency
profile is described by an exponential function character-
ized by a single length scale parameterλ. This param-
eter defines the depth-dependent charge-collection effi-
ciency used to weight individual energy depositions [20].
The effect of electrons backscattered and backreflected at
the detector surface is not explicitly modeled and is in-
stead treated as a systematic uncertainty, as described in
Sec. V C. This reflects a limitation of the current frame-
work, as the process depends simultaneously on the de-
tector response and the electromagnetic field configura-
tion. A detailed treatment would necessitate response
matrices of substantially higher dimensionality, resulting
in prohibitive computational complexity for the present
sensitivity study. Statistical fluctuations in the number
of electron–hole pairs generated during energy deposition
give rise to Fano noise, resulting in an energy-dependent
Gaussian broadening of the spectrum. This contribu-
tion is modeled analytically asσ fano(E) =√Eε ehFfano,
whereε eh = 3.65 eV is the mean energy required to cre-
ate an electron–hole pair in silicon [86] andF fano = 0.115
is the Fano factor accounting for the non-Poissonian dis-
persion of the number of observed charge carriers [87].
Charge sharing occurs when an electron interacts near
a pixel boundary and the resulting charge cloud is col-
lected by adjacent pixels, leading to a reduced energy
recorded in the primary pixel and the remaining charge
being collected in neighboring channels. Charge shar-
ing is modeled analytically assuming a Gaussian charge-
cloud distribution. The current implementation includes

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
only two-pixel sharing and neglects triple charge shar-
ing, in which the signal is distributed across three pix-
els. AboutO(1%) of all events are expected to involve
charge sharing, and roughly 5% of those are expected to
be triple charge-sharing events. The model depends on
the pixel geometry and on the charge-cloud widthw cc.
Triple charge sharing and possible modifications of charge
drift and sharing induced by the magnetic field are the
subject of ongoing studies. Although charge sharing can
be experimentally mitigated using pixel-multiplicity cuts
based on temporal coincidences, such cuts are not used
in this analysis.
(v) DAQ and readout effects –The DAQ digitizes de-
tector signals and reconstructs event energies and time
stamps through the application of finite-impulse-response
filters. These include electronic noise, finite detection
threshold, unresolved pileup, deadtime, and energy-scale
calibration. Accurate modeling of these effects is criti-
cal for high-rate measurements such as TRISTAN where
overlapping signals, finite time resolution, and other
readout effects can distort the measured spectrum. In
the analysis framework, DAQ-related effects relevant for
high-rate operation are modeled at the spectral level.
Complementary waveform-level modeling is under devel-
opment and will be used to further validate and refine
this treatment [88]. Electronic noise, originating from
intrinsic fluctuations in the readout electronics, is mod-
eled as an energy-independent Gaussian broadening with
widthσ en, added in quadrature to the intrinsic detec-
tor resolution. A finite detection threshold arises from
baseline noise and trigger-filter limitations in the front-
end electronics, imposing a minimum signal amplitude
required for reliable event detection. This effect is mod-
eled by appling a smooth turn-on at low energies using
the cumulative distribution function of a Gaussian with
a parametrized threshold position and effective width.
At the high count rates expected for TRISTAN, mul-
tiple events may occur within the minimum pulse-pair
resolution timet holdoff, defined by the trigger algorithm.
Events occurring within this interval cannot be resolved
individually and give rise to an unresolved pileup com-
ponent, in which the deposited energies are summed.
This produces a characteristic spectral contribution ex-
tending beyond the tritium endpoint. The pileup frac-
tion increases with both the detector rate andt holdoff.
Unresolved pileup is modeled by self-convolution of the
spectrum, corresponding to the random superposition
of independent energy depositions within the resolution
window. The pileup spectrum is constructed before ap-
plying the trigger threshold, so the threshold acts only
on the total spectrum, without modifying the modeled
pileup spectral shape. The resulting pileup contribution
is scaled according to the probability of having two or
more events withint holdoff, with higher-order contribu-
tions included iteratively up to third order in this analy-
sis. To prevent overlapping pulses from being processed
as a single event, a fixed deadtime windowt pu is applied
after each trigger. Events occurring within this deadtime
window are rejected and therefore do not contribute to
the reconstructed spectrum. Deadtime effects therefore
reduce the overall event rate without modifying the spec-
tral shape. Finally, the conversion from reconstructed
pulse heights to physical energy is modeled using a linear
calibration characterized by gain and offset parameters,
GandE offset respectively.
(vi) Background –A small background contribution,
originating from a combination of spectrometer-related
and detector-related sources such as intrinsic radioactiv-
ity and cosmic-muon-induced events, is expected. De-
tailed measurements of the differential background spec-
trum at KATRIN have been reported in Ref. [89], yield-
ing a rate of approximately 6×10−4 cps/keV, correspond-
ing to a total background rate of about 10 −2 cps over
the measured energy range. For the keV sterile neu-
trino search, the background level may differ slightly from
these measurements due to modified electromagnetic field
settings and vacuum conditions associated with the de-
tector upgrade but due to the very high tritium event
rate expected, the background contribution will remain
negligible compared to the signal. Its impact was there-
fore investigated by introducing a flat component with a
conservative rate ofR bkg = 1×10 −3 cps/keV.
C. Inputs and reference configuration
Following the prescription described in Sec. III B the
set of reference input parameters and uncertainties re-
ported in Table II were used for this analysis.
In summary, the new beryllium RW was used, and the
magnetic field values were optimized to further reduce
the contribution of electrons backscattered at the RW.
The detector parameter governing the dead-layer width
was set toλ= (58±2) nm. This choice is consistent
with several measurements performed with TRISTAN
detector modules and electron-gun data over the years,
which generally indicate an effective dead-layer thickness
of about (50−60) nm [19, 20, 90]. The charge-sharing
cloud width was set tow cc = (20±1)µm, guided by
dedicated detector characterization studies using elec-
trons, X-rays, and a collimated monochromatic laser
beam [91, 92]. These measurements show that a Gaussian
charge-cloud model provides a good description of the
data and support a characteristic width in the range of
about 16–20µm. Pileup was modeled using a minimum
pulse-pair resolution time oft holdoff = 112 ns, and a trig-
ger deadtime oft pu = 1.15µs. In addition to the intrin-
sic Fano contribution, an energy-independent Gaussian
broadening due to electronic noise withσ en = 44 eV was
included. More details on the DAQ concept for TRIS-
TAN can be found in [71]. The PAE was set to 20 kV
and the retarding potential was set toU ms =−3.5 kV.
The energy of the electrons included in the fit there-
fore span from 23.5 keV up to the tritium endpoint at
approximately 38.6 keV, corresponding to an accessible
sterile neutrino mass range of up to∼15 keV. The col-

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
0 20 40 60
Energy (keV)
1010
1012
1014
Expected count per keV
EPAE + qUms = 23.5 keV
EPAE = 20 keV
    15 keV
mass range 
Unresolved 
   pile-up
Backscattering
tail and 
charge sharing
T otal spectrum
Pile-up
FIG. 5. Predicted tritiumβ-decay spectrum measured by
the TRISTAN detector at KATRIN for four months of data
taking, in the absence of any keV sterile-neutrino spectral
distortion. The tritiumβ-decay spectrum is shifted by 20 keV
due to the acceleration of electrons by the PAE before the
detector. Partial energy depositions from charge sharing and
backscattering are responsible for the low energy contribution
below 20 keV. The non-zero contribution above the tritium
energy endpoint is due to unresolved pileup events. In this
configuration, because of the−3.5 kV retarding potential, the
accessible sterile neutrino mass range is reduced to 15 keV.
umn density was set to 0.6% of the nominal activity to
ensure an input electron rate of 100 kcps per pixel at the
detector. At this rate, approximately 2% of detected
triggers correspond to unresolved pileup, while detector
deadtime reduces the effective livetime to approximately
80%. Above this rate, pileup becomes a primary con-
cern by significantly reducing the measured rate. In ad-
dition, a rate-independent livetime reduction due to pe-
riodic preamplifier reset inhibit windows was included,
resulting in an additional∼5% loss of livetime for the
parameters considered.
Based on magnetic flux–tube mapping at the detector,
524 “golden” pixels, defined as those fully illuminated
together with their neighboring pixels, were selected for
the analysis. This number reflects the achievable config-
uration with the current detector chamber design, while
further design developments and investigations are ongo-
ing to increase the number of mappable pixels. With
this configuration, a measured rate of∼5×10 7 e−/s
is expected. This rate is several orders of magnitude
higher than the average count rate of∼2.4 e −/s mea-
sured by KATRIN with the FPD during the first five
neutrino-mass measurement campaigns for scan steps
above (E0−40) eV [8].
In the following, unless stated otherwise, a reference
data-taking period of four months of detector operation
is assumed, corresponding to a total collected statistics
of approximately 4×10 14 recorded events. The result-
ing expected tritiumβ-decay spectrum measured with
the TRISTAN detector is illustrated in Fig. 5. Several
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0Rate (a.u)
Upae = 0 kV
All events
Back. 
events
Upae = 10 kV Upae = 20 kV
0 20
Energy (keV)
10 4
10 2
100
Ratio
0 20
Energy (keV)
0 20 40
Energy (keV)
(a) Backscattering at the detector (pileup off)
0 20
Energy (keV)
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0Rate (a.u)
Upae = 0 kV
w/o charge
sharing
w/ charge
sharing
0 20
Energy (keV)
Upae = 10 kV
0 20 40
Energy (keV)
Upae = 20 kV
(b) Charge sharing (pileup off)
10 3
10 1
101
Rate (a.u)
Upae = 0 kV
All events
Pileup
Upae = 10 kV Upae = 20 kV
0 20 40
Energy (keV)
10 4
10 2
100
Ratio
0 20 40
Energy (keV)
0 20 40 60
Energy (keV)
(c) Unresolved pileup
FIG. 6. Impact of key detector related systematic effects on
the expected spectrum for different post-acceleration poten-
tials. For pileup and backscattering, the relative contribu-
tions to the total spectrum are shown. Charge sharing does
not constitute an additional spectral component but redis-
tributes events among bins in a bin-width-dependent way;
therefore, its effect is illustrated by comparing spectra be-
fore and after applying the charge-sharing response. Post-
acceleration increases the electron kinetic energy and further
reduces its incidence angle at the detector surface, thus low-
ering the backscattering probability. It also shifts unresolved
pileup to energies above the endpoint and moves the signal
spectrum away from regions dominated by charge-sharing ef-
fects.
effects are visible in the spectrum. The tritiumβ-decay
spectrum is shifted due to the post-acceleration poten-
tial, while its low-energy part is truncated by the re-
tarding potential. A low-energy tail induced by detector
backscattering and charge-sharing effects, which lead to
partial energy deposition, is also visible, together with
a non-zero contribution above the tritium endpoint due
to pileup events. The mitigation of these effects through
the increase of the electron energy before reaching the
detector by raising the post-acceleration potential is il-
lustrated in Fig. 6.
Figure 7 illustrates the strong suppression of RW
backscattering achieved through the optimized magnetic-
field configuration and the implementation of the new
beryllium rear wall, resulting in only a small residual con-
tribution from rear-wall events. Relative to the nominal
configuration using a gold-plated RW, the RW-induced

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Normalized rate (a.u.)
Nominal B-field
all e  (Au rear wall)
all e  (Be rear wall)
e  from source only
Optimised B-field
all e  (Be rear wall)
e  from source only
0 10 20 30 40
Energy (keV)
10 4
10 2
100
RW fraction
FIG. 7. Mitigation of rear-wall electrons through material
exchange and optimization of the electromagnetic field de-
sign. In the optimized configuration, a larger fraction of elec-
trons emitted in the WGTS are transported to the detec-
tor without reflections, leading to a higher source-only spec-
trum. Replacing the gold-plated RW with beryllium signif-
icantly reduces backscattering and, together with the opti-
mized magnetic-field configuration that reflects large-pitch-
angle electrons back onto the RW, strongly suppresses rear-
wall events.
contribution to the event rate within the fit range is re-
duced from∼4×10 −1 to∼4×10 −2 by magnetic-field
optimization, and further to∼5×10 −3 when the beryl-
lium RW is implemented.
V. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we present the projected sensitivity of
KATRIN to keV-scale sterile neutrinos. After describ-
ing the statistical methodology, we discuss the expected
statistical reach, the impact of systematic uncertainties,
and the effect of potential mismodeling.
A. Sensitivity Methodology
The sensitivity results presented here were obtained
using aχ 2-based analysis of Asimov (or “reference”)
datasets. The Asimov spectra are generated from the ex-
pected event rates under the null hypothesis (|Ue4|2 = 0)
and do not include statistical fluctuations. At each point
of a predefined two-dimensional grid covering a range of
sterile neutrino masses and mixing amplitudes, the pre-
dicted spectrum for the alternative hypothesis (with pa-
rametersm 4 and|U e4|2) is compared to the reference
spectrum. The scalarχ 2 test statistic is then calculated
as:
χ2(|Ue4|2,m 4|⃗ p) =
⃗Γ(|Ue4|2,m 4|⃗ p)−⃗Γref
T
V−1⃗Γ(|Ue4|2,m 4|⃗ p)−⃗Γref

,(5)
where ⃗Γref is the Asimov spectrum without sterile mix-
ing and ⃗Γ(|Ue4|2,m 4 |⃗ p) is the spectrum including a
sterile component.⃗ prepresents any relevant nuisance
parameters, andVis the covariance matrix.Vcan be
set to include purely statistical uncertainties (V stat) or
the combination of statistical and systematic uncertain-
ties
 
V stat +V syst
, depending on whether systematic
uncertainties are considered. The statistical covariance
is calculated assuming Poisson counting in each bin and
given by:
V stat
ii = Γref,i, V stat
ij = 0 (i̸=j).
The impact of systematic uncertainties is assessed by gen-
erating spectra in which the input parameters are ran-
domly varied according to Gaussian distributions with
standard deviations given by their respective uncertain-
ties. For each random draw of the systematic parame-
ters, a new spectrumS k is generated. By accumulating
Nsuch simulated spectra, a bin-to-bin covariance matrix
is computed as
V syst
ij = 1
N
NX
k=1
 
Sk
i−Si
 
Sk
j−Sj

,(6)
whereS k
i is the content of thei-th energy bin for thek-th
sample, and Si is the mean bin content over all samples.
Sensitivities are calculated using fits in which two key pa-
rameters, the global normalization (source activity) and
the pileup amplitude, are allowed to vary freely. This en-
sures that any global rate effect is absorbed. Most other
systematic effects are incorporated via precomputed co-
variance matrices, while a small subset of nuisance pa-
rameters are profiled explicitly when indicated. By con-
trast, explicit profiling over a large set of nuisance param-
eters would be more computationally demanding. Using
a covariance-based approach greatly reduces calculation
time and was observed to yield slightly more conservative
limits than full profiling.
The sterile-neutrino parameter space is explored by
scanning the rangesm 4∈[0,15] keV linearly and|U e4|2∈
[10−7,0.5] logarithmically. Since the tritiumβ-decay
spectrum is shifted by 20 keV due to the post-acceleration
potential, and a retarding potential ofU ms =−3.5 kV is
applied, the energy of the measured electrons of interest
span from 23.5 keV up to the tritium endpoint at ap-
proximately 38.6 keV. Theχ 2 fit is performed over this
range, using a bin width of 100 eV. At each grid point,
theχ 2 value is evaluated, and sensitivity contours are de-
rived under the assumption of Wilks’s theorem and are
reported at the 95% CL (χ 2
crit = 5.99).

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
TABLE II. Systematic parameters and their associated uncertainties as considered for the sensitivity study. The last column
indicates how the uncertainty assignment was obtained: data refers to constraints derived from measurements or calibration
data, motivated refers to values guided by dedicated simulations and/or data–simulation comparisons, and arbitrary refers to
conservative assumed values adopted where no direct constraint was available. Parameters marked unconstrained are profiled
freely in the fit.
Category Parameter Symbol Base value Uncertainty Source
Source
Column density total ρd 3.1×10 15 cm−2 2% data
Column density trap ρdtrap 3.1×10 14 cm−2 1% motivated
Trap magnetic field Btrap Bsrc - 20 mT 3 mT motivated
Rear wall Backscattering amplitude scaling factor αbs 1 10% motivated
Transport
& Spectrometer
Magnetic field rear wall Brw 0.82 T 0.25% arbitrary
Magnetic field source Bsrc 3.6 T 0.25% data
Magnetic field max. downstream Bmd 3.62 T 0.25% arbitrary
Magnetic field detector Bdet 1.41 T 0.25% arbitrary
Retarding potential Ums -3.5 kV – –
Post acceleration electrode Upae 20 kV 1 V arbitrary
Detector
Backscattering amplitude scaling factor βbs 1 10% motivated
Dead layer parameter λ 58 nm 2 nm data
Charge cloud width wcc 20µm 1µm data
Fano noise scaling factor Sfano 1 10% arbitrary
Readout
Pulse pair resolution tholdoff 112 ns - -
Trigger deadtime tpu 1.15µs - -
Electronic noise σen 44 eV 10% arbitrary
Energy scale – gain G 1 unconstrained motivated
Energy scale – offset Eoffset 0 eV unconstrained motivated
Background Background rate Rbkg 10−3 cps/keV 10%/keV arbitrary
B. Statistical sensitivity
The expected statistical sensitivity of KATRIN to keV
sterile neutrinos for various measurement times is pre-
sented in Fig. 8. The sensitivity curves exhibit a charac-
teristic shape over the accessible mass range. It is driven
by the tritiumβ-spectrum and the mass-dependent po-
sition of the sterile-neutrino signature, with the optimal
sensitivity reached at the midpoint of the mass range.
Thanks to a high input count rate of∼100 kcps per pixel,
KATRIN can collectN evt∼1.5×10 11 events and reach a
statistical sensitivity of|Ue4|2∼2×10 −5 at the midpoint
of its mass range after just one hour of data collection.
Because statistical uncertainties scale as√Nevt according
to Poisson statistics, the statistical sensitivity improves
as∝1/ √Tmeas, whereT meas is the total measurement
time. Consequently, KATRIN has the potential to reach
a statistical limit of up to∼5×10 −7 with four months of
data taking, corresponding to a total accumulated statis-
tic of about 4×10 14 events.
The tritiumβ-decay spectrum theoretically enables
the search for sterile neutrinos with masses extending up
to the tritium endpoint energy of 18.6 keV. In practice,
however, systematic effects with strong contributions at
low energy, such as backscattering at the RW and de-
tector or potential non-adiabatic transport through the
main spectrometer, may necessitate operating at a higher
retarding potential. This would truncate the low-energy
part of the spectrum and thereby reduce the accessible
sterile-neutrino mass range. The impact of the retarding
potential on the accessible mass range is illustrated in
Fig. 9 for severalqU ms values: 1.5, 3.5, 8.5 and 13.5 keV
respectively corresponding to accessible mass ranges of
17, 15, 10 and 5 keV. Although increasing the retarding
potential may be necessary to mitigate challenging low-
energy systematic effects, high statistical sensitivity can
be maintained by adjusting the column density to keep
an input detector rate of 100 kcps per pixel.
C. Systematic uncertainties
1. Assigned systematic uncertainties
A comprehensive set of systematic effects has been
evaluated to assess their impact on the experimental sen-
sitivity. The corresponding nuisance parameters, their
reference values, and assigned uncertainties are summa-
rized in Table II. The adopted uncertainties are based
on a combination of beamline measurements carried out
for the neutrino-mass measurement, dedicated measure-
ments with the TRISTAN detector and DAQ system, or
based on conservative assumptions when data were not
available.
Source-related uncertainties include the tritium col-
umn density in the WGTS and magnetic trapping ef-
fects. A relative uncertainty of 2% is assigned to the
column density, larger than the 1% used in the neutrino-
mass analysis [8] due to the reduced statistical precision
expected from electron-gun calibration measurements at

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
0 4 8 12 16
m4 (keV)
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
sin2
1 min
1 hour
1 day
1 month
4 months
FIG. 8. Impact of the measurement time on statistical sensi-
tivity. For all cases, a common retarding potential ofU ms =
−3.5 kV as well as a common column density ofρd= 0.6%
are used.
0 4 8 12 16 20
m4 (keV)
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
sin2
Ums = 13.5 kV Ums = 8.5 kV Ums = 3.5 kV
d = 12.1%
 d = 1.8%
 d = 0.6%
FIG. 9. Impact of the retarding potential on statistical sen-
sitivity. For all cases, a measurement time of 4 months was
considered. The column density was tuned to yield a rate of
100 kcps/pixel.
low column densities. Magnetic trapping is parameter-
ized by an effective trap column density and an average
trap magnetic field, with uncertainties of 1% and 0.15%,
respectively, motivated by dedicated simulation studies.
An energy- and angle-independent relative uncertainty
of 10% is assigned to the electron backscattering proba-
bility at the rear wall to account for residual modeling un-
certainties. This choice is motivated by comparisons be-
tween measured and simulated backscattering coefficients
with the TRISTAN detectors [70, 93], as well as on pub-
lished comparisons of experimental data withGeant4
simulations for relevant materials and energies [94, 95].
A relative uncertainty of 0.25% was previously mea-
sured for the source magnetic-field [96]. As a base-
line, the same 0.25% relative uncertainty is considered
for the source, rear-wall, maximal downstream and de-
tector magnetic fields. Uncertainties associated with
the main spectrometer retarding potential and the post-
acceleration energy have been demonstrated to be sta-
ble and reproducible at the sub-ppm level [97]. For this
study, the post-acceleration energy uncertainty was set
to an arbitrary value of 1 eV.
Regarding detector related effects, a 3.5% uncertainty
is assigned to the dead-layer width parameter and a
5% uncertainty to the charge-cloud width, based on
data taken with the TRISTAN detectors as discussed in
Sec. IV C. Relative uncertainties of 10% are assigned to
both the Fano noise and the electronic noise. This choice
conservatively covers the resolution spread observed in
detector characterization measurements at different en-
ergies. Unmodeled backreflection of electrons backscat-
tered at the detector surface is covered by assigning a
10% uncertainty to the detector backscattering proba-
bility, motivated by dedicated simulations. DAQ cali-
bration parameters, including the gain and offset, are
not constrained through covariance matrices but are in-
stead profiled as free parameters in the fit to account
for residual energy-scale uncertainties. This conserva-
tive treatment allows the fit to self-calibrate the global
energy scale using the high event statistics, thereby ab-
sorbing potential small residual mis-calibrations without
biasing the sensitivity. Dedicated calibration measure-
ments with the TRISTAN detector and the DAQ system
are ongoing to independently constrain these parame-
ters and reduce their impact in future analyses. DAQ
non-linearities, primarily originating from the analog-to-
digital conversion of detector signals, are accounted for in
the sensitivity analysis. Detailed measurements and sim-
ulations have shown that these effects induce smooth and
energy-dependent distortions of the reconstructed spec-
trum. When mitigation techniques are applied, their im-
pact on the sterile-neutrino sensitivity is negligible [71].
Finally, to account for possible deviations from the
simplified flat background model, a conservative uncor-
related bin-to-bin uncertainty of 10% of the background
rate per 1 keV is assigned.
2. Systematic impact on the sensitivity
The relative impact of individual systematic uncertain-
ties on the measured spectrum within the analyzed en-
ergy range is illustrated in Fig. 10. Most systematic
effects introduce smooth, energy-correlated distortions
with amplitudes typically well below the percent level.
Their spectral behavior is qualitatively distinct from the
characteristic distortion induced by a keV-scale sterile
neutrino, which features a kink-like spectral feature at
E=E 0−m 4 accompanied by an extended distortion
at lower energies. The impact of systematic uncertain-
ties on the sterile-neutrino sensitivity is summarized in
Fig. 11 for each group of systematic effects, while the

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
0
1
Sref (a.u)
5
0
5
Ssterile/Sref 1 (10 4)
m4 = 4 keV, sin2 = 10 3
m4 = 8 keV, sin2 = 10 3
m4 = 12 keV, sin2 = 10 3
10 2
10 4
10 6
0
10 6
10 4
10 2
Spert/Sref 1
Source
d = 3.1 × 1015 cm 2 + 2%
dtrap = 3.1 × 1014 cm 2 + 1%
Btrap = (Bsrc 20 mT) + 0.15%
Transport
Brw = 0.82 T + 0.25%
Bsrc = 3.6 T + 0.25%
Bmd = 3.62 T + 0.25%
Bdet = 1.41 T + 0.25%
Epae = 20 keV + 1 V
24 28 32 36
Energy (keV)
10 2
10 4
10 6
0
10 6
10 4
10 2
Spert/Sref 1
Rear wall
bs = 1 + 10%
Detector
= 58 nm + 2 nm
wcc = 20 m + 1 m
Sfano = 1 + 10%
bs = 1 + 10%
Readout
en = 44 eV + 10%
FIG. 10. Impact of a sterile-neutrino signal and indi-
vidual systematic uncertainties on the measured spectrum
within the region of interest. (top) Reference expected spec-
trumS ref. (upper middle) Relative spectral distortion in-
duced by a sterile-neutrino admixture for three representative
sterile-neutrino massesm 4 = 4,8,12 keV at fixed mixing
sin2θ= 10 −3. (lower middle and bottom) Relative spec-
tral distortions induced by individual systematic variations
applied one at a time around the reference model. The con-
sidered effects are grouped by category and correspond to
the parameter variations listed in Table II. The lower-middle
panel shows source and transport effects, while the bottom
panel shows rear-wall, detector, and readout effects. In all ra-
tio panels, only shape distortions are shown, with the overall
normalization fixed to that of the reference spectrum.
individual contributions are shown in Fig. 12. Starting
from the statistics-only sensitivity, systematic effects are
added sequentially at the group level and finally com-
bined all together. When all systematic uncertainties are
combined, the projected sensitivity is degraded by a fac-
tor ranging from 10 to 50 with respect to the statistical
limit. For a reference data-taking period of four months,
this corresponds to an expected sensitivity in the order
of|U e4|2∼2×10 −5 over the sterile-neutrino mass range
m4≃(4–13) keV. Repeating the analysis for different
measurement times shows that the relative loss compared
to the statistics-only sensitivity remains consistent. Im-
portantly, the achievable sensitivity is not dominated by
any single group of systematic effects, but rather by the
cumulative impact of the several sub-dominant contribu-
tions. Source-, transport-, and detector-related uncer-
tainties lead to comparable sensitivity loss, with trans-
port effects exhibiting a slightly larger impact on aver-
age. When considered individually, each of these groups
still allows sensitivities typically better than 5×10 −6.
Rear-wall and DAQ-related systematics are found to have
a noticeably smaller impact on the sensitivity. At the
level of individual nuisance parameters, a direct corre-
spondence between the spectral distortion induced by
a given systematic effect and its impact on the sterile-
neutrino sensitivity is typically not straightforward to
identify. However, a clear trend emerges: systematic
effects that predominantly modify the low-energy part
of the reconstructed spectrum (e.g. RW backscatter-
ing, charge-sharing cloud width) tend to induce a larger
degradation of the sensitivity at higher sterile-neutrino
masses.
Within the source-related systematics, the sensitivity
is dominated by uncertainties associated with the sim-
plified modeling of magnetic trapping in the WGTS, in
particular the effective magnetic-field strength inside the
trap regions. This highlights the importance of further
experimental and simulation studies of this effect. Sub-
dominant but still non-negligible contributions are ob-
tained from uncertainties of the total column density and
the fraction of magnetically trapped tritium.
For beamline and transport effects, the sensitivity loss
is primarily driven by the uncertainty in the source mag-
netic field, which controls electron transport both up-
stream and downstream of the source. Uncertainties in
the maximal downstream field and the rear-wall magnetic
fields produce effects of comparable but smaller magni-
tude. By contrast, the detector magnetic field and the
PAE energy have a non-negligible but much smaller im-
pact on the sensitivity.
Detector-related systematic uncertainties show no sin-
gle dominant contribution. Dead-layer width, charge-
sharing cloud width, and detector backscattering all pro-
duce sensitivity degradations of similar magnitude, while
the impact of the intrinsic energy-resolution uncertainty
is found to be negligible.
The sensitivity loss due to DAQ-related effects is domi-
nated by the energy-scale calibration parameters. Uncer-

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
0 4 8 12 16
m4 (keV)
10 7
10 6
10 5
10 4
10 3
sin2
stat. only
stat. + source syst.
stat. + rear wall syst.
stat. + transport syst.
stat. + detector syst.
stat. + DAQ syst.
stat. + all syst.
FIG. 11. Impact of systematic uncertainties on the projected
KATRIN sensitivity to keV-scale sterile neutrinos for four
month of detector live-time. The black solid curve shows the
statistics-only sensitivity. Colored solid curves represent the
sensitivity obtained when adding, on top of statistical un-
certainties, one category of systematic effects at a time as
reported in Table II. The gray dashed curve shows the sensi-
tivity combined for all systematic uncertainties.
tainties associated with electronic noise, pulse-pair reso-
lution, and DAQ non-linearity have at most a marginal
impact on the sensitivity.
Finally, uncertainties associated with the background
spectral shape are found to have no measurable impact on
the sensitivity and are therefore not shown in the figures.
D. Modeling inaccuracy
In the previous section, we propagated uncertainties of
known systematic effects by varying model parameters
within their assumed range. These systematics gener-
ally introduce smooth and energy-correlated distortions
to the spectrum that do not mimic the distinctive sig-
nature of a keV sterile-neutrino signal. Because of this,
marginalizing over them retains most of the sensitivity
to the signal. However, this approach implicitly assumes
that the model parametrization of each systematic ef-
fect is accurate. While we tested parameter uncertainties
within a correct model, we did not evaluate the impact
of a potential mismodeling. If the true spectrum devi-
ates from the assumed parametrization, such deviation
could degrade the sensitivity in ways not addressed by
the current study.
In this section, we investigate the impact of poten-
tial mismodeling by introducing a shape uncertainty
on a known systematic contribution. Similar investiga-
tions of spectral mismodeling have been performed pre-
viously [49], where generic shape distortions were intro-
duced to assess their impact on sterile-neutrino searches.
10 7
10 5
10 3
 Source
stat. only
stat. + d ( = 2.0%)
stat. + dtrap ( = 1.0%)
stat. + Btrap ( = 0.15%)
stat. + all source syst.
Transport
stat. only
stat. + Bsrc ( = 0.25%)
stat. + Bmd ( = 0.25%)
stat. + Brw ( = 0.25%)
stat. + Bdet ( = 0.25%)
stat. + Upae ( = 1 V)
stat. + all
transp. syst.
0 8 16
10 7
10 5
10 3
 Detector
stat. only
stat. + bs ( = 10%)
stat. +  ( = 3.5%)
stat. + ccw  ( = 5%)
stat. + Sfano ( = 10%)
stat. + all det. syst.
0 8 16
DAQ
stat. only
stat. + non-linearity
stat. + en ( = 10%)
stat. + E-scale (G free)
stat. + E-scale (Eoff free)
stat. + all DAQ syst.
m4 (keV)
sin2
FIG. 12. Breakdown of the impact of individual systematic
uncertainties on the sterile-neutrino sensitivity. Each panel
shows the statistics-only sensitivity (black solid line) and the
sensitivity obtained when adding a single systematic uncer-
tainty at a time, grouped by category. The gray dashed
curves show the combined impact of all systematic uncertain-
ties within each category.
Here, we instead focus on the specific and physically mo-
tivated systematic effect associated with RW backscatter-
ing. Concretely, an uncorrelated bin-to-bin uncertainty
is applied to the RW spectral component, and the mag-
nitude of this uncertainty is varied to assess its impact
on the projected sensitivity. The results of this study
are shown in Fig. 13. The impact of a normalization
uncertainty on the RW backscattering contribution is
compared to that of a shape uncertainty, whose ampli-
tude is varied between benchmark values of 0.01% and
10% per keV. Several conclusions can be drawn from this
study. First, mismodeling of the RW backscattering spec-
tral shape can substantially degrade the sterile-neutrino
sensitivity, with an impact that far exceeds that of a nor-
malization uncertainty alone. When only a normalization
uncertainty is considered, the sensitivity remains largely
preserved, with losses below a factor of four over the full
sterile-neutrino mass range relative to the statistics-only
case. In contrast, a shape uncertainty at the level of
≲0.01% per keV is required to induce a comparable loss
in sensitivity. Increasing the shape uncertainty by one or-
der of magnitude leads to a further order-of-magnitude
reduction in sensitivity. For a benchmark shape uncer-
tainty of 1% per keV, the sensitivity is degraded by fac-
tors ranging fromO(10) at low sterile-neutrino masses
up toO(10 3) at higher masses. This mass dependence
results from the increasing relative contribution of RW
backscattering events at lower electron energies (see Fig.
7). Because this study assumes identical uncorrelated

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
0 4 8 12 16
m4 (keV)
10 7
10 5
10 3
10 1
sin2
stat. only
stat. + RW back. norm. ( bs = 10%)
stat. + RW back. shape 
( shape = 0.01 10%/keV)
FIG. 13. Impact of normalization and shape uncertainties
of the Be rear-wall backscattering contribution on the sterile-
neutrino sensitivity. The blue solid line corresponds to a nor-
malization uncertainty, while the dashed lines show the effect
of shape uncertainties modeled as uncorrelated bin-to-bin un-
certainties in the range of 0.1%–10%/keV, used as benchmark
values.
relative uncertainties per bin across the entire energy
range, mismodeling effects become more pronounced in
the low-energy region, leading to a stronger degradation
of the sensitivity at higher sterile-neutrino masses. At
an intermediate mass ofm 4≃7.5 keV, the sensitivity
deteriorates from sin 2θ∼5×10 −7 to∼5×10 −5.
It is important to emphasize that this study does not
aim to model a specific physical mismodeling mechanism,
but rather provides a conservative stress test of the sensi-
tivity to generic shape uncertainty affecting a dominant
systematic component. In practice, fully uncorrelated
bin-to-bin shape uncertainties of this magnitude are not
expected from the underlying physics of electron trans-
port or scattering. Similar considerations apply to other
systematic effects, which are generally driven by smooth
and correlated energy-dependent distortions. Overall,
these results highlight the critical importance of accurate
modeling of systematic effects. They also underscore the
need for in situ measurements with the TRISTAN de-
tector to experimentally validate and characterize these
contributions in order to achieve optimal sensitivity.
E. Comparison with existing constraints
The projected KATRIN sensitivity can be placed in a
broader experimental context by comparing it with exist-
ing laboratory limits and astrophysical constraints in the
(m4,|Ue4|2) parameter space, as shown in Fig. 14. The
projected KATRIN sensitivity with the TRISTAN de-
tector extends well beyond previous searches performed
by KATRIN and other existing laboratory bounds.
1 10 50
m4 (keV)
10 11
10 9
10 7
10 5
10 3
10 1
sin2
KATRIN with TRISTAN (4 months)
stat. + syst.
stat. only
Tremaine Gunn bound
FIG. 14. Projected KATRIN sensitivity to keV sterile neu-
trinos with the TRISTAN detector upgrade. The expected
exclusion sensitivity obtained after 4 months of data taking
is shown for a statistics-only analysis (solid blue line) and in-
cluding systematic uncertainties (dashed blue line), as sum-
marized in Table II. Existing laboratory constraints in the
mass range (0.5–50) keV are shown as a dashed light-blue line
for the KATRIN low-activity measurement [16] and as solid
black lines for other experiments [47, 57, 58]. Selected as-
trophysical constraints, including X-ray decay limits (light-
orange shaded region) and bounds from thermal overproduc-
tion (solid medium brown) taken from Ref. [42], are shown
for comparison. A model-dependent relaxation of the X-ray
decay limits is indicated by the darker light-orange shading.
The grey band at low masses denotes the phase-space region
excluded by the Tremaine–Gunn bound [36].
While current laboratory constraints typically reach the
O(10−3) level in mixing, KATRIN has the potential
to probe mixing amplitudes down toO(10 −5) over the
sterile-neutrino mass rangem 4≃(4–13) keV. KATRIN
will thus provide a direct laboratory test that is indepen-
dent of cosmological and astrophysical assumptions, and
complementary to indirect astrophysical searches.
Other laboratory experiments probing the same
parameter space utilize magnetic microcalorimeters
(MMCs) to study theβ-decay spectra of 3H and
241Pu [62, 98]. MMC-based measurements benefit from
the energy resolution of cryogenic detectors and from the
radioactive source being embedded in the detector it-
self, thereby avoiding systematic effects associated with
beamline-based measurements. Nonetheless, individual
MMCs are typically limited to activities ofO(100 Bq).
As a result, year-scale measurements with such tech-
nologies are projected to reach statistical sensitivities
to mixing in the range 10 −2–10−4 for sterile-neutrino
masses from 1 to 18 keV. The projected KATRIN sen-
sitivity, including systematic effects, also remains com-
petitive in the context of proposed searches based on 3H
nanospheres, which still require further technological de-
velopment and longer measurement times [99].

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
F. Discussion
In this work, we have evaluated the sensitivity of the
KATRIN experiment with the TRISTAN detector to
keV-scale sterile neutrinos using a forward-convolution
framework that incorporates the dominant experimental
systematic effects. The results demonstrate strong sen-
sitivity well beyond current laboratory limits. To put
these results into perspective, we now discuss two key
limitations of this study.
Model limitations –The convolution-based framework
relies on precomputed response matrices defined on dis-
cretized energy and pitch-angle grids. Its accuracy is
therefore governed by an intrinsic compromise between
binning granularity, memory usage, and computational
time, such that high numerical accuracy is rapidly lim-
ited by technical constraints. In addition, the code does
not account for the potential backreflection of electrons
backscattered at the detector. It also does not include
an explicit radial dependence of the effects, and there-
fore cannot fully capture spatially resolved effects. More
generally, the modular treatment of individual system-
atic effects makes it challenging to accurately model com-
plex coupled processes, particularly when multiple inter-
actions occur sequentially or when correlations depend
on timing or spatial information. Furthermore, several
effects are treated using simplified parameterizations, as
discussed previously. This includes, for example, the
modeling of magnetic trapping in the source approxi-
mated as regions of constant magnetic field, charge shar-
ing without explicit treatment of triple-pixel events, and
unresolved pileup assumed to be an energy independent
process. For such effects, the set of parameters varied in
this study may not fully encompass all possible spectral
distortions and the resulting sensitivity loss.
To complement the approach presented here, a full
event-by-event Monte Carlo simulation of the KATRIN
beamline equipped with the TRISTAN detector is un-
der active development. It combines KASSIOPEIA’s
accurate electromagnetic-field modeling with the robust
Geant4framework for simulating electron interactions
with matter. This code tracks individual electrons from
their points of production in the tritium source to their
final energy depositions in the detector. At each stage
of propagation, the electron energy, pitch angle, time-
of-flight, and spatial coordinates are recorded, enabling
a detailed reconstruction of successive interactions and
transport histories. By explicitly tracking timing and
spatial information, this framework naturally accounts
for coupled effects such as detector backscattering fol-
lowed by backreflection and fully captures spatial effects,
including pixel changes between successive energy depo-
sitions caused by backreflection and electron drift. At
present, the computational demands of this full Monte
Carlo approach, together with its ongoing development
status, prevent its use for large-scale sensitivity scans of
the type presented here. Nevertheless, it is expected to
become an essential component of the TRISTAN analysis
framework, providing refined modeling of the systematic
effects and support for the calibration analyses.
Challenge of robust modeling –We have shown that
the sensitivity to keV-scale sterile neutrinos relies criti-
cally on precise modeling of systematic effects. While the
present simulation framework provides a robust tool for
sensitivity evaluation and systematic exploration, achiev-
ing the projected sensitivity in experimental data will be
challenging. As demonstrated in this work, mismodel-
ing of dominant systematic contributions has the poten-
tial to significantly degrade the sensitivity. It is there-
fore critical for this next phase of KATRIN to (i) opti-
mize the beamline configuration to minimize the impact
of systematic effects, (ii) develop accurate models that
account for potentially correlated and time-dependent
effects approximated or neglected in the present work,
and (iii) perform extensive experimental validation and
calibration of the dominant response components. Ow-
ing to its unique experimental configuration, KATRIN
will have the opportunity to measure ultra-high-statistics
spectra and to operate the beamline under varied elec-
tromagnetic settings. This flexibility enables systematic
effects to be studied both through mitigation and de-
liberate enhancement, providing unique cross-checks of
the modeling. In addition, TRISTAN will leverage ongo-
ing calibration measurements performed with a dedicated
experimental setup at KIT, where detector modules are
characterized in a replica of the beamline detector section
operated under conditions similar to those of the experi-
ment, thereby providing essential input for validating and
refining the model prior to detector installation.
VI. CONCLUSION
Following the completion of its neutrino-mass measure-
ment campaigns, the KATRIN experiment will enter a
new physics phase dedicated to the search for keV-scale
sterile neutrinos with the TRISTAN detector. This tran-
sition introduces a fundamentally different measurement
strategy based on high-rate and differential spectroscopy
of the tritiumβ-decay spectrum over a broad energy
range.
In this work, we have presented a sensitivity study
of KATRIN in this forthcoming phase based on a ded-
icated forward-convolution framework that incorporates
the dominant beamline, detector, and readout effects rel-
evant for the measurement. For the baseline scenario
of four months of detector runtime considered in this
analysis, KATRIN is found to reach a statistical sensi-
tivity at the level of|U e4|2 ∼10 −6 for sterile-neutrino
masses in the range of approximately (4–13) keV. When
the major experimental systematic uncertainties are in-
cluded, the sensitivity is reduced by up to a factor of 50,
yielding a potential projected sensitivity at the level of
|Ue4|2∼2×10−5 over the same mass range. Importantly,
no single systematic effect dominates the sensitivity loss.
Instead, the expected sensitivity emerges from the cumu-

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
lative impact of several sub-dominant effects.
Overall, this study demonstrates that KATRIN
equipped with the TRISTAN detector has the poten-
tial to provide a powerful laboratory probe of keV-scale
sterile neutrinos that is independent of cosmological and
astrophysical model assumptions, extending well beyond
existing laboratory constraints. As demonstrated in this
work, mismodeling of dominant systematic contributions
can significantly degrade the sensitivity. Achieving the
projected sensitivity will therefore require stringent con-
trol and validation of the systematic effect models. Nev-
ertheless, this study provides a quantitative baseline for
the TRISTAN phase and a clear prioritization of the sys-
tematic contributions that should be addressed. At the
same time, the combination of ultra-high-statistics mea-
surements with flexible beamline operation places the ex-
periment in a uniquely strong position to constrain, and
mitigate such effects. The analysis framework established
here provides a solid foundation for future modeling re-
finements as commissioning data become available.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the support of Helmholtz Associa-
tion (HGF), Ministry for Education and Research BMBF
(05A23PMA, 05A23PX2, 05A23VK2, and 05A23WO6),
the doctoral school KSETA at KIT, Helmholtz Initiative
and Networking Fund (grant agreement W2/W3-118),
Max Planck Gesellschaft, and Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft DFG (GRK 2149 and SFB-1258 and
under Germany’s Excellence Strategy EXC 2094 –
390783311) in Germany; Ministry of Education, Youth
and Sport (CANAM-LM2015056) in the Czech Re-
public; Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN)
in Italy; Suranaree University of Technology (SUT),
Thailand Science Research and Innovation (TSRI),
the National Science, Research and Innovation Fund
(NSRF) (Project No. 204211), and the National Sci-
ence, Research and Innovation Fund via the Program
Management Unit for Human Resources & Institu-
tional Development, Research and Innovation (grant
B39G680010) in Thailand; and the Department of En-
ergy through grants DE-FG02-97ER41020, DE-FG02-
94ER40818, DE-SC0004036, DE-FG02-97ER41033, DE-
FG02-97ER41041, DE-SC0011091 and DE-SC0019304
and the Federal Prime Agreement DE-AC02-05CH11231
in the United States. This project has received funding
from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No. 852845). We thank
the computing support at the Institute for Astroparti-
cle Physics at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Max
Planck Computing and Data Facility (MPCDF), and the
National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center
(NERSC) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
[1] KATRIN Collaboration, KATRIN: a next generation
tritium beta decay experiment with sub-eV sensitiv-
ity for the electron neutrino mass (2001), arXiv:hep-
ex/0109033.
[2] KATRIN Collaboration, KATRIN design report 2004,
Wissenschaftliche Berichte. FZKA7090, 1 (2005).
[3] M. Akeret al., The design, construction, and commis-
sioning of the KATRIN experiment, JINST16(08),
T08015, (2021).
[4] M. Arenzet al., First transmission of electrons and ions
through the KATRIN beamline, JINST13(04), P04020,
(2018).
[5] M. Akeret al., First operation of the KATRIN experi-
ment with tritium, Eur. Phys. J. C80, 264 (2020).
[6] M. Akeret al., Improved upper limit on the neutrino
mass from a direct kinematic method by KATRIN, Phys.
Rev. Lett.123, 221802 (2019).
[7] M. Akeret al., Direct neutrino-mass measurement with
sub-electronvolt sensitivity, Nat. Phys.18, 160 (2022).
[8] M. Akeret al., Direct neutrino-mass measurement based
on 259 days of KATRIN data, Science388, 180 (2025).
[9] C. Krauset al., Final results from phase II of the Mainz
neutrino mass search in tritiumβdecay, Eur. Phys. J. C
40, 447 (2005).
[10] V. N. Aseevet al., Upper limit on the electron antineu-
trino mass from the Troitsk experiment, Phys. Rev. D
84, 112003 (2011).
[11] M. Akeret al., Search for Lorentz-invariance violation
with the first KATRIN data, Phys. Rev. D107, 082005
(2023).
[12] M. Akeret al., First constraints on general neutrino in-
teractions based on KATRIN data, Phys. Rev. Lett.134,
251801 (2025).
[13] M. Akeret al., Bound on 3 + 1 active-sterile neutrino
mixing from the first four-week science run of KATRIN,
Phys. Rev. Lett.126, 091803 (2021).
[14] M. Akeret al., Improved eV-scale sterile-neutrino con-
straints from the second KATRIN measurement cam-
paign, Phys. Rev. D105, 072004 (2022).
[15] H. Acharyaet al., Sterile-neutrino search based on 259
days of KATRIN data, Nature648, 70 (2025).
[16] M. Akeret al., Search for keV-scale sterile neutrinos with
the first KATRIN data, Eur. Phys. J. C83, 763 (2023).
[17] J. Lauer for the KATRIN Collaboration, Search for
new light bosons with the KATRIN experiment, PoS
ICHEP2024, 326 (2024).
[18] S. Mertenset al., A novel detector system for KATRIN
to search for keV-scale sterile neutrinos, J. Phys. G46,
065203 (2019).
[19] S. Mertenset al., Characterization of silicon drift detec-
tors with electrons for the TRISTAN project, J. Phys. G
48, 015008 (2020).
[20] M. Biassoniet al., Electron spectrometry with silicon
drift detectors: a Geant4 based method for detector
response reconstruction, Eur. Phys. J. Plus136, 125
(2021).
[21] G. Arcadiet al., Tritium beta decay with additional emis-
sion of new light bosons, JHEP2019(1), 206.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
[22] C. Fengler,The Effective Description of General Neu-
trino Interactions in TritiumβDecay and first Con-
straints based on the second KATRIN Science Run,
Ph.D. thesis, Karlsruher Institut f¨ ur Technologie (2025),
https://doi.org/10.5445/IR/1000183053.
[23] P. O. Ludl and W. Rodejohann, Direct neutrino mass ex-
periments and exotic charged current interactions, JHEP
2016(6), 040.
[24] W. Rodejohann and H. Zhang, Signatures of extra dimen-
sional sterile neutrinos, Phys. Lett. B737, 81–89 (2014).
[25] J. Barry, J. Heeck, and W. Rodejohann, Sterile neutrinos
and right-handed currents in KATRIN, JHEP2014(7),
081.
[26] S. Dodelson and L. M. Widrow, Sterile neutrinos as dark
matter, Phys. Rev. Lett.72, 17 (1994).
[27] M. Cirelli, A. Strumia, and J. Zupan, Dark Matter
(2024), arXiv:2406.01705.
[28] J. L. Feng, Dark Matter Candidates from Particle Physics
and Methods of Detection, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.
48, 495 (2010).
[29] T. Asaka and M. Shaposhnikov, TheνMSM, dark matter
and baryon asymmetry of the universe, Phys. Lett. B
620, 17 (2005).
[30] T. Asaka, S. Blanchet, and M. Shaposhnikov, The
νMSM, dark matter and neutrino masses, Phys. Lett.
B631, 151 (2005).
[31] M. Dreweset al., A white paper on keV sterile neutrino
dark matter, JCAP (01), 025, arXiv:1602.04816.
[32] A. Klypin, A. V. Kravtsov, O. Valenzuela, and F. Prada,
Where are the missing galactic satellites?, Astrophys. J.
522, 82 (1999).
[33] B. Moore, Evidence against dissipation-less dark mat-
ter from observations of galaxy haloes, Nature370, 629
(1994).
[34] R. A. Flores and J. R. Primack, Observational and theo-
retical constraints on singular dark matter halos, Astro-
phys. J. Lett.427, L1 (1994).
[35] P. Bode, J. P. Ostriker, and N. Turok, Halo formation in
warm dark matter models, Astrophys. J.556, 93 (2001).
[36] S. Tremaine and J. E. Gunn, Dynamical role of light
neutral leptons in cosmology, Phys. Rev. Lett.42, 407
(1979).
[37] A. Boyarsky, O. Ruchayskiy, and D. Iakubovskyi, A lower
bound on the mass of dark matter particles, JCAP2009
(03), 005.
[38] X. Shi and G. M. Fuller, New dark matter candidate:
Nonthermal sterile neutrinos, Phys. Rev. Lett.82, 2832
(1999).
[39] K. Abazajian, G. M. Fuller, and M. Patel, Sterile neu-
trino hot, warm, and cold dark matter, Phys. Rev. D64,
023501 (2001).
[40] A. Boyarsky, M. Drewes, T. Lasserre, S. Mertens, and
O. Ruchayskiy, Sterile Neutrino Dark Matter, Prog. Part.
Nucl. Phys.104, 1 (2019).
[41] F. Goertz, M. Hager, G. Laverda, and J. Rubio, Phas-
ing out of darkness: From sterile neutrino dark matter
to neutrino masses via time-dependent mixing (2025),
arXiv:2407.04778.
[42] C. Benso, V. Brdar, M. Lindner, and W. Rodejohann,
Prospects for finding sterile neutrino dark matter at KA-
TRIN, Phys. Rev. D100, 115035 (2019).
[43] C. J. Martoffet al., HUNTER: precision massive-
neutrino search based on a laser cooled atomic source,
Quantum Sci. Technol.6, 024008 (2021).
[44] S. Friedrichet al., Limits on the existence of sub-MeV
sterile neutrinos from the decay of 7Be in supercon-
ducting quantum sensors, Phys. Rev. Lett.126, 021803
(2021).
[45] C. Kraus, A. Singer, K. Valerius, and C. Weinheimer,
Limit on sterile neutrino contribution from the Mainz
neutrino mass experiment, Eur. Phys. J. C73, 2323
(2013).
[46] A. I. Belesevet al., The search for an additional neutrino
mass eigenstate in the 2–100 eV region from ”Troitsk nu-
mass’ data: a detailed analysis, J. Phys. G41, 015001
(2013).
[47] J. N. Abdurashitovet al., First measurements in search
for keV sterile neutrino in tritium beta-decay in the
Troitsk nu-mass experiment, JETP Lett.105, 753
(2017).
[48] K. H. Hiddemann, H. Daniel, and O. Schwentker, Limits
on neutrino masses from the tritium beta spectrum, J.
Phys. G21, 639 (1995).
[49] S. Mertenset al., Sensitivity of next-generation tritium
beta-decay experiments for keV-scale sterile neutrinos,
JCAP2015(02), 020.
[50] D. Wilkinson, Small terms in the beta-decay spectrum of
tritium, Nucl. Phys. A526, 131 (1991).
[51] M. Kleesieket al.,β-decay spectrum, response function
and statistical model for neutrino mass measurements
with the KATRIN experiment, Eur. Phys. J. C79, 204
(2019).
[52] S. Schneidewindet al., Improved treatment of the T 2
molecular final-states uncertainties for the KATRIN
neutrino-mass measurement, Eur. Phys. J. C84, 494
(2024).
[53] R. Shrock, New tests for and bounds on neutrino masses
and lepton mixing, Phys. Lett. B96, 159 (1980).
[54] H. J. de Vegaet al., Role of sterile neutrino warm dark
matter in rhenium and tritium beta decays, Nucl. Phys.
B866, 177 (2013).
[55] In the two-neutrino mixing scheme, sin 2(2θ) =
4|U e4|2 (1−|U e4|2)≃4|U e4|2 for small mixing angles.
[56] J. Deutsch, M. Lebrun, and R. Prieels, Searches for ad-
mixture of massive neutrinos into the electron flavour,
Nucl. Phys. A518, 149 (1990).
[57] E. Holzschuh, L. Palermo, H. St¨ ussi, and P. Wenk, The
β-spectrum of 35S and search for the admixture of heavy
neutrinos, Phys. Lett. B482, 1 (2000).
[58] E. Holzschuh, W. K¨ undig, L. Palermo, H. St¨ ussi, and
P. Wenk, Search for heavy neutrinos in theβ-spectrum
of 63Ni, Phys. Lett. B451, 247 (1999).
[59] K. Schreckenbach, G. Colvin, and F. von Feilitzsch,
Search for mixing of heavy neutrinos in theβ+ andβ-
spectra of the 64Cu decay, Phys. Lett. B129, 265 (1983).
[60] A. V. Derbinet al., Search for a neutrino with a mass
of 0.01–1.0 MeV in beta decays of 144Ce–144Pr nuclei,
JETP Letters108, 499 (2018).
[61] M. Galeazzi, F. Fontanelli, F. Gatti, and S. Vitale, Limits
on the existence of heavy neutrinos in the range 50–1000
eV from the study of the 187Re beta decay, Phys. Rev.
Lett.86, 1978 (2001).
[62] C. Leeet al., Search for a heavy neutral lepton with the
magneto-νexperiment using 241Puβ − decays, Phys. Rev.
C113, 024620 (2026).
[63] V. Lobashev and P. Spivak, A method for measuring the
electron antineutrino rest mass, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A
240, 305 (1985).

===== PAGE 21 =====
21
[64] A. Picardet al., A solenoid retarding spectrometer with
high resolution and transmission for keV electrons, Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. B63, 345 (1992).
[65] J. Amsbaughet al., Focal-plane detector system for the
KATRIN experiment, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A778, 40
(2015).
[66] S. Schneidewindet al., A precision 32 keV angular-
selective photoelectron source for calibration mea-
surements at the KATRIN experiment (2026),
arXiv:2603.15918.
[67] TRISTAN Group, Conceptual design report:
KATRIN with TRISTAN modules (2022),
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248068381.
[68] D. Siegmannet al., Development of a silicon drift detec-
tor array to search for keV-scale sterile neutrinos with
the KATRIN experiment, J. Phys. G51, 085202 (2024).
[69] M. Carminatiet al., The TRISTAN 166-pixel detector:
Preliminary results with a planar setup, Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. A1049, 168046 (2023).
[70] D. Sprenget al., Investigation of electron backscattering
on silicon drift detectors for the sterile neutrino search
with tristan, JINST19(12), P12009, (2024).
[71] A. S. Gavinet al., Design and linearity assessment of the
TRISTAN detectors’ remote analog to digital conversion
DAQ system (2026), arXiv:2602.04976.
[72] M. Arenzet al., The KATRIN superconducting magnets:
overview and first performance results, JINST13(08),
T08005, (2018).
[73] A. Nava,Detector and beamline response model-
ing for differential electron measurements with
the KATRIN experiment, Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versit` a degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca (2025),
https://tesidottorato.depositolegale.it/handle/20.500.1
4242/193446.
[74] M. Descher,Differential spectrum modeling and sen-
sitivity for keV sterile neutrino search at KATRIN,
Ph.D. thesis, Karlsruher Institut f¨ ur Technologie (2024),
https://10.5445/IR/1000166956.
[75] J. Allisonet al., Recent developments in Geant4, Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. A835, 186 (2016).
[76] J. W. Liu, Total cross sections for high-energy electron
scattering by H2 (1Σ+
g ), N2 (1Σ+
g ), and O2 (3Σ−
g ), Phys.
Rev. A35, 591 (1987).
[77] M. E. Rudd, Differential and total cross sections for ion-
ization of helium and hydrogen by electrons, Phys. Rev.
A44, 1644 (1991).
[78] W. Ko los, H. J. Monkhorst, and K. Szalewicz, Energy un-
resolved differential cross section for electron scattering
by H2, J. Chem. Phys.77, 1323 (1982).
[79] G. Arrighini, F. Biondi, and C. Guidotti, A study of the
inelastic scattering of fast electrons from molecular hy-
drogen, Mol. Phys.41, 1501 (1980).
[80] A. Huber,Analysis of First KATRIN Data and
Searches for keV-Scale Sterile Neutrinos, Ph.D.
thesis, Karlsruher Institut f¨ ur Technologie (2021),
https://doi.org/10.5445/IR/1000128344.
[81] L. Kuckertet al., Modelling of gas dynamical properties
of the KATRIN tritium source and implications for the
neutrino mass measurement, Vacuum158, 195 (2018).
[82] D. Furseet al., Kassiopeia: a modern, extensible C++
particle tracking package, New J. Phys.19, 053012
(2017).
[83] X. Taoet al., Hamiltonian theory of adiabatic motion of
relativistic charged particles, Phys. Plasmas14(2007).
[84] J. Sempauet al., An algorithm for monte carlo simula-
tion of coupled electron-photon transport, Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. B132, 377 (1997).
[85] D. Batzleret al., Tritium accumulation and ozone
decontamination of tungsten and beryllium (2025),
arXiv:2512.24256.
[86] H. Kolanoskiet al.,Particle Detectors: Fundamentals
and Applications(Oxford University Press, 2020).
[87] R. C. Aliget al., Scattering by ionization and phonon
emission in semiconductors, Phys. Rev. B22, 5565
(1980).
[88] K. Urban,Silicon Drift Detector R&D for a
keV Sterile Neutrino Search at KATRIN, Ph.D.
thesis, Technische Universit¨ at M¨ unchen (2024),
https://mediatum.ub.tum.de/?id=1754928.
[89] F. T. Harms,Characterization and Minimization of
Background Processes in the KATRIN Main Spectrom-
eter, Ph.D. thesis, Karlsruher Institut f¨ ur Technologie
(2015), https://doi.org/10.5445/IR/1000050027.
[90] D. B. Siegmann,Development of the TRISTAN
Silicon Drift Detector Modules for the keV ster-
ile Neutrino Search with the KATRIN Experiment,
Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universit¨ at M¨ unchen (2024),
https://mediatum.ub.tum.de/?id=1750436.
[91] K. Urban,Application of a TRISTAN Silicon Drift
Detector as Forward Beam Monitor in KATRIN,
Master’s thesis, Technische Universit¨ at M¨ unchen
(2019), https://www.katrin.kit.edu/publikationen/Urb-
an Korbinian 19.pdf.
[92] C. Forstneret al., Investigations of charge collection and
signal timing in a multi-pixel silicon drift detector, J.
Instrum.20(06), P06013, (2025).
[93] A. Navaet al., A Geant4-based model for the TRISTAN
detector, J. Phys. Conf. Ser.2156, 012177 (2021).
[94] S. H. Kimet al., Validation test of Geant4 simulation of
electron backscattering, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science62, 451 (2015).
[95] P. Donderoet al., Electron backscattering simulation in
Geant4, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B425, 18 (2018).
[96] N. R.-M. Trost,Modeling and measurement of Rydberg-
State mediated Background at the KATRIN Main Spec-
trometer, Ph.D. thesis, Karlsruher Institut f¨ ur Technolo-
gie (2019), https://doi.org/10.5445/IR/1000090450.
[97] C. Rodenbecket al., Wideband precision stabilization of
the -18.6 kV retarding voltage for the KATRIN spec-
trometer, JINST17(06), P06003, (2022).
[98] Y. C. Leeet al., LiFE-SNS: LiF experiment for keV-scale
sterile neutrino search (2026), arXiv:2602.05161.
[99] D. Carney, K. G. Leach, and D. C. Moore, Searches
for massive neutrinos with mechanical quantum sensors,
PRX Quantum4, 010315 (2023).
