===== PAGE 1 =====
Hyperhelices: A classical analog for strings and hidden dimensions
N. H. Fletchera)
Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering, Australian National University,
Canberra 0200, Australia
~Received 24 June 2003; accepted 9 January 2004 !
A hyperhelix is a structure consisting of a rod coiled into a helix, coiled into a helix,..., through a
ﬁnite or even inﬁnite number of orders. An examination of the transverse vibrations of such a
structure shows that the macroscopic behavior is accounted for by waves on the rod that are
conﬁned to an extremely small range of wave numbers centered about a value equal to the reciprocal
of the smallest helical radius involved. All other dynamical aspects of the behavior and their
associated physical dimensions are completely hidden at the level of the ﬁnal helix. It is suggested
that the study of the dynamics of such a structure might provide a fruitful analogy for understanding
the string theory. © 2004 American Association of Physics Teachers.
@DOI: 10.1119/1.1652038#
I. INTRODUCTION
As is well known to those working on the string theory of
elementary particles or cosmic structures, many of the pos-
sible physical dimensions of the string are hidden because
they are coiled up into some sort of small structure concealed
within the string. In this paper, we examine the classical
behavior of string-like structures with many hidden classical
dimensions to provide an analog of quantum string theory.
Classical structures do not have hidden dimensions, but an
instructive analog can be found in the behavior of conceptual
structures called ‘‘hyperhelices’’. A hyperhelix is a helical
structure where the coils of the helix are found to also consist
of a helix with a much smaller helical diameter though a
similar helical pitch angle ~see Fig. 1 !. In turn, the coils of
this smaller helix consist of an even smaller helix, and so on.
In the discussion to follow, we proceed in the opposite direc-
tion where we take a rod, coil it into a helix, coil this helix
into a very much larger helix, etc. For convenience, we shall
refer to a simple helix as a hyperhelix of order 1, a simple
helix coiled into a larger helix as a hyperhelix of order 2, and
so on. A simple rod is then a hyperhelix of order zero. If this
super-structuring ~or sub-structuring! is allowed to continue
indeﬁnitely, then the resulting object is fractal, but it is also
possible for the structuring to end after a ﬁnite number of
generations, as is the case with the hidden dimensions of
string theory, and the resulting object might be termed quasi-
fractal.
The vibrational behavior of hyperhelices has been investi-
gated by the author and colleagues, 1 and the purpose of this
note is to discuss the way in which the hidden dimensions
inﬂuence the behavior of the object as a whole. The hope is
that the hyperhelix might be a fruitful analogy by which
physicists can convey to non-experts a picture of part of the
nature of string theory.
II. WA VE PROPAGATION ON A HELIX
Wave propagation on a simple straight elastic rod is a
classical problem in mechanics to which approximate solu-
tions have been known for a long time. There are many
treatments in literature of the much more complex problem
of wave propagation on a simple helix, because of its prac-
tical importance in engineering. A helpful survey has been
given by Wittrick.2
There are several forms of elastic waves that can propa-
gate on a straight rod. The simplest are longitudinal waves,
torsional waves, and ﬂexural or bending waves for which
there are two orthogonal polarizations. Each of these waves
has a characteristic speed, with the speed of the ﬂexural
waves being much smaller than the speed of the other wave
types.
If v is taken to be the angular frequency and c is the phase
velocity of a wave of the type considered along the elemen-
tary rod from which the helix is formed, then k5v/c
52p/l, where l is the wavelength measured along the rod.
Consider the propagation of bending waves when the rod is
bent into a helix of radius R.I f k!R21 so that the wave-
length is much longer than the helical radius, there are two
forms of propagating waves, corresponding to the two polar-
izations of the wave displacement relative to the helical axis.
Referring to Fig. 1, if the displacement is perpendicular to
the helical axis as represented by T0 , then the result is a
‘‘varicose’’ wave, which we deﬁne as type A for conve-
nience, in which the radius of the helix expands and con-
tracts. This motion is necessarily closely coupled to a longi-
tudinal motion of much larger displacement amplitude on the
helical rod when it is viewed with respect to the helical co-
ordinate system, but the propagation velocity is essentially
that of the bending wave. In the second type of wave, deﬁned
as type B, the displacement is parallel to the helical axis, as
shown by T08 , and the helical loops do not expand. The elas-
tic strain in the elementary rod is then actually torsional,
though this is not immediately obvious. The complicated
couplings between transverse, longitudinal, and torsional
modes have been examined by several authors, 1,3,4 and are
clearly important in the engineering dynamics of helical
springs.
An interesting aspect of the behavior of type A and B
waves emerges when these waves are regarded on the scale
of the helix, considered as a straight tube-like element with
its helical structure ignored. Type A waves are then seen to
be simple torsional waves on this super-structure, while type
B waves are longitudinal. No transverse waves of types T1
and T18 on the helix as a whole appear to emerge, and this
appears to represent a problem since a helical spring can
701 701Am. J. Phys. 72 ~5!, May 2004 http://aapt.org/ajp © 2004 American Association of Physics Teachers

===== PAGE 2 =====
clearly be displaced sideways and can support macroscopic
transverse waves. The origin of these macroscopic displace-
ments must be sought in a more careful examination of the
elementary waves.
For k!R21, the propagation of type A and B waves along
the helix is nearly non-dispersive. 2 Dispersion sets in at
larger wave numbers, and the phase velocity c5v/k falls to
zero when k5R21, as shown in Fig. 2 ~a!, which gives dis-
persion curves plotted in the style of phonon dispersion
curves in crystals, though with a normal rather than a re-
duced wave number. The surprising occurrence of frequency
zeros in these curves, conﬁrmed by a study of the progres-
sive bending of a rod, 5 has a simple macroscopic interpreta-
tion when the helix is viewed as a simple thick tube or rod
and its internal helical structure is ignored. When k is equal
to R21, type A waves, in which there is a displacement nor-
mal to the helical axis, have a wavelength equal to the cir-
cumference of a single helical turn. This means that opposite
halves of the turn are displaced in opposite directions relative
to the helical axis, as shown in Fig. 3. This displacement is
coupled, in the helical coordinate system, to a longitudinal
displacement of the same wavelength which differs in phase
by p/2 along the turn, so that there is no major elastic strain.
The result is that the whole turn is simply displaced side-
ways. Because all turns of the helix are displaced in exactly
the same way, the whole helix simply moves sideways.
There is no elastic strain and the propagation velocity on the
elementary rod is zero.
When k is not exactly equal to R21, the direction of the
displacement precesses with distance along the helix, so that
the resultant macroscopic displacement is helical. In this
case, there is some elastic strain and the propagation veloc-
ity, although small, is no longer zero. The angular sense of
the helical wave depends on the sign of k2R21;i f k
.R21, then the helical turns are all slightly expanded by the
wave, while if k,R21 they are all slightly compressed.
Consider now the simultaneous propagation of two such
Fig. 1. ~a! A simple helix, or hyperhelix of order 1. The torsional, C0 ,
longitudinal, L0 , and transverse, T0 and T08 , motions at the level of the
elementary curved rod are identiﬁed, as are their descriptions as torsional,
C1 , longitudinal, L1 , and transverse, T1 and T18 , modes of the ﬁrst-order
helix. ~b! A hyperhelix of order 2. There is a similar group of macroscopic
modes C2 , L2 , T2 , and T28 on this structure, as well as hidden microscopic
modes of orders 1 and 0 on the elementary helix and elementary rod ~from
Ref. 1!.
Fig. 2. ~a! Dispersion curve for transverse wave propagation on a simple
helix. The frequency is plotted as a function of the wave number on the
elementary rod from which the helix is made. ~b! The related curve for a
hyperhelix of order 2, showing the splitting near k5R1
21, again plotted in
terms of the wave number on the elementary rod. ~c! A similar curve show-
ing further splitting for a hyperhelix of order 3. In each case, the arrows
show the minima that are coupled to produce simple transverse waves on the
macroscopic hyperhelix, and bullets show the wave numbers for which vari-
cose ~torsional! behavior occurs ~from Ref. 1 !.I n ~b! and ~c! the spread
along the k axis near the point R1
21 is greatly exaggerated.
Fig. 3. A single helical turn, showing the displacements due to type A waves
when the wavelength is exactly equal to the circumference of the turn ( k
52p/R where R is the radius of the turn !. Solid arrows show the
transverse-wave displacements, T, and dotted arrows show the closely
coupled longitudinal-wave displacements, L, which are equal in amplitude
but displaced in phase by p/2. ~Black dots show the zeros of the respective
waves.! The result is a simple transverse ~upward! displacement of the
whole turn with no elastic strain being involved. All other turns behave in
the same manner, and there is no elastic strain in the whole wave, which
therefore has zero frequency.
702 702Am. J. Phys., V ol. 72, No. 5, May 2004 N. H. Fletcher

===== PAGE 3 =====
waves on a helix with helical pitch angle a. When a helical
type A wave of wave number k5R211d is associated with
a wave of the same amplitude with wave number k5R21
2d, the resultant wave is a macroscopic plane transverse
wave with wave number d/a on the helix as a whole. Once
more, there are two polarizations of this wave, depending on
the signs with which the component helical waves are
coupled. There is, however, a small complication. If d
!R21 so that the macroscopic helical waves have a wave-
length extending over many helical turns, the propagation
speeds of the two helical components of a planar transverse
wave of low frequency v will be very nearly, but not exactly,
equal. This means that the polarization plane of the trans-
verse waves on the helix will gradually precess as they
propagate. The distance over which this precession becomes
appreciable is, however, very large for a ﬁnely coiled helix,
and so can generally be ignored.
The important conclusion from this discussion is that it is
possible to disregard the internal structure of the helix and to
regard it as a macroscopic straight rod with appropriately
low density and elastic modulus. All of the normal macro-
scopic transverse wave distortions on this helical rod are then
represented by waves of wave number very close to R21 on
the invisible elementary rod that makes up the helix. All of
the geometrical dimensions that refer to this elementary rod
have been hidden, and remain hidden until the frequency of
the waves on the macroscopic helix is increased to the extent
that the slow precession of the polarization plane of trans-
verse waves as they propagate becomes detectable. A simple
physical example is the behavior of the helical cord often
used to connect the handset of a telephone to its base. This
cord behaves in almost all ways like a simple rope or a rod
with minimal stiffness, and its helical sub-structure can be
ignored provided waves excited on it have a wavelength
much greater than the spacing between the helical turns.
III. WA VE PROPAGATION ON A HYPERHELIX
If a straight rod is regarded as a hyperhelix of order zero
and a simple helix as a hyperhelix of order 1, then a hyper-
helix of order 2 can be formed by coiling an ordinary helix
of radius R1 into a much larger helix of radius R2 . Because,
as noted, the ordinary helix actually behaves like a simple
rod carrying waves with wave number k15k2R1
21 for k
’ R1
21, the hyperhelix will behave like an ordinary rod when
k1 is close to R2
21. Because R2@R1 , the macroscopic be-
havior of the second-order hyperhelix is therefore contained
within the two coupled regions very close to R1
211R2
21 and
R1
212R2
21, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2 ~b!. Within these
two neighborhoods, all of the complexities of the wave mo-
tions on hyperhelices of orders 0 and 1 are hidden.
This progression, with the size of the helix increasing by
several orders of magnitude at each order, can be carried
through an arbitrary number of orders, each order effectively
hiding one dimension of the behavior and reducing further
the region of elementary wave number space involved on the
initial rod. The situation is, however, more complex than it
initially appears, because the relevant region of wave number
space splits into two at each hyperhelix stage, so that the
ﬁnal dispersion curve is a quasi-fractal object, terminating
after a ﬁnite number of stages if the order of the ﬁnal hyper-
helix is also ﬁnite. This is illustrated in the dispersion curves
for hyperhelices of order 1, 2, and 3 shown in Fig. 2. For a
hyperhelix of order N, the macroscopic wave behavior can
be shown1 to be conﬁned to the wave number range
R1
216 (
n52
N
Rn
21
)
m51
N21
am , ~1!
on the elementary rod, where the subscripts refer to the hy-
perhelical orders. On the hyperhelix of order N, the physical
dimensions are so large that the macroscopic wave numbers
kN are conﬁned to a very small region near kn50.
For the simple case in which the pitch angles an and size
ratios Rn /Rn11 are taken to be constant and the sequence is
continued so that N→‘ , the Hausdorff ~or capacity! dimen-
sion of the resulting fractal structure is 6
D5
log~aRn /Rn11!
log~Rn /Rn11! . ~2!
Because geometrical considerations require that Rn /pRn11
,a,1, the dimension D lies in the range 1 ,D,2.
This discussion has modeled the hyperhelix as being suc-
cessively coiled into larger and larger helical structures, so
that one has to take a successively more ‘‘global’’ view of its
behavior. This is the reason that the wave number range on
the elementary rod that describes this behavior is progres-
sively more and more limited. It would, of course, be pos-
sible to proceed in the opposite direction: To regard the ﬁnal
hyperhelix of order N as an ordinary macroscopic object and
then to take a progressively more highly magniﬁed view of
its structure. If this were done, then the macroscopic waves
of wave number kN would be seen to be made up from waves
on the underlying hyperhelix of order N21 and having wave
numbers kN21 lying very close to ( RN /RN21)kN . This pro-
gression would then continue as further underlying hyperhe-
lical orders were examined. Although this interpretation is,
perhaps, the more logical way in which to approach hidden
dimensions, it has not been adopted here because of the
greater difﬁculty in describing the progression of wave types.
The dispersion curves would still have the form shown in
Fig. 2 except that the scale would change immensely in go-
ing from Figs. 2 ~a! to 2~b! to 2~c!.
IV . CONCLUSIONS
Although the relevance to string theory is not readily ap-
parent, quasi-fractal hyperhelices clearly have the essential
ability to hide dimensions and mode details within an appar-
ently simple structure. Perhaps the richness of these possi-
bilities may provide some analogies from which string
theory, or other areas of theoretical physics, might beneﬁt.
a!Electronic mail: neville.ﬂetcher@anu.edu.au
1N. H. Fletcher, T. Tarnopolskaya, and F. R. de Hoog, ‘‘Wave propagation
on helices and hyperhelices: A fractal regression,’’ Proc. R. Soc. London,
Ser. A 457,3 3 – 4 3~2001!.
2W. H. Wittrick, ‘‘On elastic wave propagation in helical springs,’’ Int. J.
Mech. Sci. 8,2 5 – 4 7~1966!.
3L. della Pietra and S. della Valle, ‘‘On the dynamic behavior of axially
excited helical springs,’’ Meccanica17,3 1 – 4 3~1982!.
4W. Jiang, W. K. Jones, T. L. Wang, and K. H. Wu, ‘‘Free vibration of
helical springs,’’ Trans. ASME58, 222–228 ~1991!.
5T. Tarnopolskaya, F. R. de Hoog, A. Tarnopolsky, and N. H. Fletcher,
‘‘Vibration of beams and helices with arbitrary large uniform curvature,’’
J. Sound Vib. 228, 305–332 ~1999!.
6G. L. Baker and J. P. Gollub, Chaotic Dynamics , 2nd ed. ~Cambridge
U. P., Cambridge, 1996!, pp. 110–114.
703 703Am. J. Phys., V ol. 72, No. 5, May 2004 N. H. Fletcher
