===== PAGE 1 =====
arXiv:2007.01828v1  [gr-qc]  2 Jul 2020
Gravitational Wave Test of the Strong Equivalence Principl e
C. S. Unnikrishnan
Gravitation Group, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai - 400 005, India
George T. Gillies
School of Engineering and Applied Science,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4746, US A
The Strong Equivalence Principle (SEP) holds the full essen ce and meaning of the
General Theory of Relativity as the nonlinear relativistic theory of gravitation. It
asserts the universal coupling of gravity to all matter and i ts interactions including
the gravitational interaction and the gravitational self e nergy. We point out that
conﬁrming the gravitational coupling to gravitons, and hen ce to the gravitational
waves, is the direct test of the SEP. We show that the near simu ltaneous detection
of gravitational waves and gamma rays from the merger of bina ry neutron stars
provides a unique and the most precise test of the SEP, better than a part in 10 9,
which is also the only test of the SEP in the radiation sector.
Contents
I. Introduction 1
II. Sensitivity of the tests of the SEP 3
III. GW tests of the SEP 4
IV. Concluding remarks 7
References 7
I. INTRODUCTION
The Einstein Equivalence Principle (EEP) that asserts the local equiv alence of all physi-
cal phenomena in a uniform gravitational ﬁeld g and an accelerated frame with a = −g was
postulated by Einstein on the basis of the weak equivalence principle ( WEP), or the univer-
sality of the ratio of the gravitational to inertial mass. The WEP in tu rn rests empirically
on the observed Universality of Free Fall (UFF), which is the fact th at the gravitational
acceleration does not depend in the mass or other material proper ties of the body in free
fall. Due to the equivalence of the mass and energy, UFF implies that t he gravitational ac-

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
celeration does not depend on the binding energies of the standard model interactions in the
falling body. The formulation of the General Theory of Relativity as a geometrical theory
presupposes that the EEP includes the gravitational phenomena a s well. Then, one has to
insist on the UFF of the gravitational binding energy of the falling bod ies, leading to the
Strong Equivalence Principle (SEP). Generalizing from the equivalenc e of the gravitational
mass and the inertial mass, The SEP asserts the universal coupling of gravity to all matter
and their interaction energy, including that of the gravitational int eraction, highlighting the
nonlinear nature of gravity. Hence, at the fundamental microscopic level, the SEP aﬃrms
the universal gravitational coupling to gravitons themsel ves. This completes the Einstein
Equivalence Principle as the grand generalization that asserts the lo cal equivalence of all
physical phenomena, including gravitational phenomena, in a unifor m gravitational ﬁeld
and in a uniformly accelerated frame. The SEP is the ﬁnal frontier of explicit tests of the
principle of equivalence [1, 2].
A signiﬁcant test of the SEP requires that the precision in the measu rement of the
diﬀerential acceleration δa/g in the gravitational ﬁeld g is better than the fractional amount
of of the gravitational self energy relative to the total energy εg/E. Since E is essentially
the rest mass energy of a massive test body, εg/M c2 ≃ GM 2/R(M c2) = GM/Rc2. Hence,
a signiﬁcant test requires the observational access to the relativ e trajectories of a pair of
planetary to stellar scale test objects, in the gravitational ﬁeld of a third body.
The SEP has been tested and veriﬁed directly in the ‘free fall’ of the E arth and the
Moon towards the Sun employing the Nordtvedt eﬀect [1, 3], by monit oring the orbital
distance of the Moon from the Earth in Lunar Laser Ranging (LLR) [4 , 5]. This feat was
possible because of the impressive long term precision achieved, of s everal millimeters, in
the determination of the orbital distance of 3 .7 × 108 m. This translated to a test of the
UFF and the WEP with a precision of 2 parts in 10 13. With the gravitational self energy
of Eg/mc2 ≃ 5 × 10−10 for the Earth, and relatively negligible self energy for the Moon,
one obtains the signiﬁcant observational constraint on any violatio n of the SEP of < 0.04%,
which is remarkable considering the smallness of the contribution of t he gravitational self
energy of these bodies to their total mass-energy.
The only better observational constraint on the SEP is obtained by comparison of the
orbits of a triple stellar system PSR J0337+1715, consisting of a bina ry system of a mil-
lisecond radio pulsar (366 Hz) and a white dwarf, with a 1.6-day orbita l period, that itself
is in a much longer period orbit (327 days) with another white dwarf [6 –8]. The orbits can
be monitored with the radio pulses from the neutron star (pulsar). The gravitational self
energy of a neutron start is about 10%, and it is comparatively neglig ible for the while dwarf.
With the limit of 2 parts in 10 6 on the universality of free fall in this triple stellar system,
the SEP is established with a precision of 10 −5, which is more than an order of magnitude
tighter than the LLR result. However, the analysis involved in obtain ing this constraint is
necessarily more elaborate and complicated, owing the fact that th e entire information on
the orbits is extracted from the observation of the pulses from th e pulsar in the system.
There is evidently a paucity of accessible tests of SEP, owing to the e xtreme weakness of
the gravitational interaction. There is only one Earth-Moon-Sun s ystem in this universe for
which we have easy access to, for the study of such a deep and cha racteristic foundational
issue of gravity. Pulsar-white dwarf systems provide test system s to study situations in
which there is a large contribution of the gravitational self energy t o the total mass energy,
but the precision is limited because the galactic gravitational ﬁeld in wh ich they free fall is
very small. An observationally convenient and accessible triple stellar system is a rare chance

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
that is very hard to come by. In this context, we have found an ent irely new way for the
precision tests of the SEP and GTR, leveraging the realization that t he gravitational waves
are the purest and manifest form of gravitational energy. Gravit ational waves conceptually
correspond to real gravitons, whereas the notional gravitation al self energy in bulk matter
corresponds to the virtual carriers of the interaction. In fact, the binding energy or the
self energy, both in case of electromagnetism and gravitation, is th e absence of real energy,
rather than its presence; that much positive energy is released in m aking the bound system.
The manifest form of the gravitational energy is the gravitational wave, just as the manifest
form of the electromagnetic energy is the electromagnetic wave. T herefore, testing for the
gravitational coupling of the gravitons themselves is the u ltimate test of the SEP . The photons
can provide the ideal reference for the comparison. Clearly, a test of the universal coupling
of gravitational waves to the gravity of bulk matter is the mo st direct test of SEP .
A new window for this direct and reliable precision test of SEP opened w ith the detection
of near simultaneous gravitational waves (GW) and gamma rays fro m the merger of binary
neutron stars [9, 10]. This unique test has the clear possibility of sco res of future detections,
allowing crucial statistical reliability. The central idea of the test stems from the realizations
that gravitational waves are propagating form of pure gravi tational energy, released directly
from the gravitational binding energy of the binary system . Then, the gravitational eﬀects of
massive structures, like galaxy clusters, on the propagation of pr istine gravitational energy,
relative to the same eﬀects on photons, is a transparent direct te st of SEP. The gamma rays
serve as the reference matter-energy, without any signiﬁcant g ravitational energy, providing
a complete test. The Shapiro delay is a ﬁrst order test, proportion al to the integrated
gravitational potential in the intervening space [11], and the gravit ational bending is a
second order test, proportional to the gradient of the potentia l. Hence, the Shapiro delay
provides a much better test of the SEP than the gravitational ben ding. But the latter is the
one that resembles the ‘free fall’ tests. We examine both eﬀects fo r the completeness of the
discussion.
II. SENSITIVITY OF THE TESTS OF THE SEP
The classic test of the SEP along the lines of the tests of the univers ality of free fall
involves comparing the relative trajectory of two bodies in the grav itational fall towards a
third massive body. What is measured is the diﬀerence in acceleration δa in the gravitational
ﬁeld g. The ratio δa/g is identical to the E¨ otv¨ os WEP parameter η. When the relative
contribution of the gravitational self energy is larger than the sen sitivity η if the test, one
gets a useful test of the SEP. There are three key quantities to c onsider while estimating
the precision of the test of the SEP, denoted by the symbol ∆. One is the gravitational
acceleration at the location of the falling bodies, g. The second parameter is the diﬀerence
in the ratio of the gravitational energy in the falling bodies to their to tal energy. Since the
total energy is essentially the rest mass energy,
δεg =
⏐⏐⏐⏐
εg1
m1c2 − εg2
m2c2
⏐⏐⏐⏐ (1)
The third parameter is of course the precision achieved in the test o f the universality of free
fall from factual observation (including both the statistical and s ystematic errors). This is
the precision to which the diﬀerential acceleration of free fall is con strained relative to the

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
local gravitational ﬁeld, δa/g. Clearly, for a given precision in the measurement of the
diﬀerential acceleration, a better test is obtained when the actua l gravitational acceleration
g is larger. The precision of the test of WEP is determined by
η ≡
( mi
mg
)
1
−
( mi
mg
)
2
= δa/g
Then the sensitivity for the test of SEP is given by ∆ = η/δε g.
For the solar system tests, g ≃ 10−2 − 10−3 m/s2 and the precision (2 σ) achieved in
observing δa/g (for LLR) is about 10 −13 m/s2. But the quantity δεg for the Earth-Moon
system is only 4 .6 × 10−10. Therefore, the constraint on the violation of the SEP is limited
to
∆ = η
δεg
≤ 10−13
4.6 × 10−10 ≃ 2 × 10−4 (2)
The test employing the free fall of a neutron star-white dwarf sys tem towards the galaxy can
take advantage of the much higher gravitational energy of the ne utron star ( δεg > 10−1),
but much of that advantage is oﬀset by the tiny galactic gravitation al acceleration of only
g ≃ 2 × 10−10 m/s2. Yet, impressive constraints on η have been obtained of the order of
η ≤ 10−3, which translates to the constraint on SEP of ∆ = η/δε g ≤ 10−2 [12].
In contrast, a triple stellar system like the PSR J0337+1715 in which a neutron star-white
dwarf system orbits another neutron star, allows the better con straint through painstaking
analysis of the orbital data and careful modeling [7, 8]. The gravitat ional acceleration (with
the 327 day orbit) is comparable to the LLR case, g ≃ 5 × 10−3 and the diﬀerence in the
gravitational self energy is δεg ≃ 10−1. The precision achieved in estimating the diﬀerential
acceleration is η ≤ 2 × 10−6. This provides the strongest constraint on SEP to date of
∆ ≤ 2 × 10−5.
The GW test of the SEP is a class apart from the tests involving massiv e bodies in two
respects. A gravitational wave is pristine gravitational energy, p ropagating over cosmological
distances. Therefore, the ratio of the gravitational energy to t he total energy is unity for
GW, εg/E = 1. Then we need another entity that can co-propagate with GW wit h negligible
gravitational energy, for comparison, and that is light, for which εg/E ≃ 0. Thus δεg = 1.
The diﬀerential comparison is possible if both the GW signal and the ele ctromagnetic signal
from the same source is observed. Fortunately, we have one conﬁ rmed astrophysical event
with these criteria satisﬁed, in the gravitational wave detection in t he LIGO-Virgo detectors
and the Gamma ray detection by the Fermi satellite, GW170817+GRB [9, 10].
III. GW TESTS OF THE SEP
The triad of interferometric gravitational wave (GW) detectors, LIGO Hanford,
LIGO Livingston, and Virgo, sensed the arrival of gravitational waves f rom the inspiral
and the merger of a binary neutron star (BNS) system, on the 17t h August 2017 [9]. Named
GW170817+GRB, it became the one-of-a-kind event (so far) beca use of the near simulta-
neous detection of gamma rays, within about 1.7 s, by the Fermi gam ma ray satellite [10].
This detection with the three GW detectors allowed the delineation of a relatively precise
localization area in the sky, which led to the identiﬁcation of the sourc e galaxy as NGC
4993 at a distance of 40 megaparsecs (10 24 m). What is relevant for our test of the SEP is
that the gravitational waves and the gamma rays have to travers e this vast distance in the

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
FIG. 1: The relative positioning and parameters of the sourc e galaxy, the solar system and the
Virgo galaxy cluster for the calculation of the propagation delay and gravitational bending.
gravitational presence of the mighty Virgo cluster of galaxies, bef ore they pass through the
gravitational ﬁeld of our Milky Way galaxy, and arrive on the Earth.
The geometrical conﬁguration of the GW-GRB event relative to the Earth and the Virgo
cluster is indicated in the ﬁgure 1. The universal gravitational coup ling of the Virgo cluster
mass to the gravitational energy of the GW and the electromagnet ic energy of the gamma
rays would manifest in two physical eﬀects. One is the Shapiro time de lay which of ﬁrst
order in α = φ/c2 ≃ GM/Rc2, and the second is the time delay due to the gravitational
bending, which is of second order in α (the gravitational bending itself, which is ﬁrst order
in the potential, cannot be observed for the gravitational waves) .
The Shapiro delay is the excess propagation delay of the waves due t o the gravitational
potential,
∫
ds(2φ/c3). Any violation of the SEP due to a nonuniversal coupling to the
gravitational energy of GW will alter this delay, relative to the Shapir o delay of the photons.
One already know that the electromagnetic energy in bulk matter ob eys the UFF to the
very high precision of ηem ≤ 10−9, because the ratio of the total electromagnetic energy
in the atom to its rest mass energy is Eem/mc2 > 10−5, and the best tests of the WEP
have reached η ≤ 1.5 × 10−14 [14, 15]. Therefore, we the gravitational coupling of the
gamma rays would obey the WEP to better than a few parts in 10 9. With the galactic
potential φmw/c2 ≃ 10−6, the Shapiro delay during the propagation over 30 Kpc ( ∼ 1021
m) in the Milky Way galaxy itself amounts to about 100 days, as has bee n analyzed in
a comparison of the velocity of light and GW in the BNS merger event GW 170817+GRB
[10]. However, we should consider the Virgo cluster, because the ma in contribution of the
gravitational potential in our cosmological neighbourhood is from t his galaxy cluster. The
Shapiro delay is scalar cumulative eﬀect, steadily increasing with the s ame sign. There are
no other theoretical complication like ﬁxing a metric because we know with certainty that
the propagation is in the unique k ≃ 0 FLR W metric of our factual universe. Therefore, the
calculation with the mass of the Virgo cluster gives a reliable lower limit to the gravitational
eﬀect between NGC 4993 and the Earth. Because the propagation duration t (over the
distance >10 Mpc) in the average potential φV /c2 ≃ 1.5 × 10−6 of the Virgo cluster is more
than 10 15 s, a very conservative value for the gravitational Shapiro delay is r eadily estimated
from δt =
∫
ds(2φ/c3) as
δt > 2φV
c2 t ≃ 3 × 109 s (3)

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
which is to be compared with the observed 1.7 s between the arrival t imes of the gravita-
tional waves and the gamma rays. This implies the gravitational coup ling of propagating
gravitational energy to the source masses is the same as the grav itational coupling of elec-
tromagnetic energy within ∆ ≃ 6 × 10−10. Note that any kind of electromagnetic factor
along the path can only introduce further delays in the propagation of the photons; hence
the factual constraint is always better than our conservative co nstraint. The similar prop-
agation of the GW and the gamma rays from GW170817+GRB has yielde d a very high
precision test of the SEP at better than part in a billion!
We can also get a constraint on the SEP from the similar bending of the GW and light in
the ﬁeld of the Virgo cluster, albeit with lower precision. This is similar to the free fall test of
two bodies in the gravitational ﬁeld of a third body, with the additiona l aspect of relativistic
propagation of the tested entities. If there are many massive str uctures, distributed around
the path of propagation, the precise calculation of the resultant g ravitational bending is
complicated, and requires the detailed catalogue of matter distribu tion. Unlike the scalar
Shapiro delay, the gravitational bending by a large structure like th e Virgo cluster can be
partially nulled, if there are several smaller structures that are clo ser to the path of propa-
gation. If the gravitational waves and the gravitational energy in them did not experience
the same ‘free fall’ as the photons in the gravitational ﬁeld of the Vir go cluster, there would
have been signiﬁcant discrepancy in the time of arrival of the gravit ational waves and the
gamma rays.
The angle of bending due to the gravity of a compact source is well kn own as α =
4GM/c2R. Since the bending is small, the diﬀerence in the distance of propagat ion between
the deﬂected path and the unperturbed path is (ﬁgure 1),
δL = L
cos α − L ≃ L
1 − α2/2 − L ≃ Lα2/2 (4)
The excess delay due the gravitational bending is then δt = δL/c = Lα2/2c. Hence, this
eﬀect is of second order in α. A more accurate expression from the lensing equation is
δt ≃ (1 +z)α2DLDS/2cDLS, which corrects for the redshift distance of the source. The time
delay due to the bending of waves propagating at the velocity c in the gravitational ﬁeld of
a mass distribution of size smaller than the distance between the sou rce and the observer
can now be estimated referring to the ﬁgure 1.
Conservatively taking 3 ×1014M⊙ as the total mass of the Virgo cluster of galaxies and its
dark matter halo within a radius of about 3 Mpc (and the ‘impact param eter’ of 10 Mpc), the
bending angle α is approximately 6 × 10−6 rad [16]. This is consistent with the gravitational
ﬁeld of the Virgo cluster at the local group, estimated from the infa ll velocity of about 200
km/s of the local group towards Virgo cluster. The deﬂection of th e path translates to the
gravitational bending delay Lα2/2c > 3 × 104 s, where we have taken L as half the distance
to NGC 4993 (this is consistent with the combination of distances app earing in the lensing
equation). This has to be compared to the 1.7 s delay between the GW from the BNS merger
and the GRB. Since the gravitational waves are pure gravitational energy in propagation,
this observed universality of ‘free fall’ under the gravitational act ion of the mighty cluster
of matter on both electromagnetic waves and gravitational waves readily proves the Strong
Equivalence Principle, with the tightness of the constraint on any vio lation smaller than
∆ < 6 × 10−5. As expected, the Shapiro delay constraint on the SEP that we obt ained in
this work is by far the most stringent, ∆ ≤ 6 × 10−10.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS
A unique test of the strong equivalence principle, which asserts the universal gravitational
coupling to the gravitational energy itself, is devised by recognizing that the propagating
gravitational waves are entirely gravitational energy. A comparis on of the propagation of
gravitational energy with gamma photons, from the merger event of the binary neutron stars
detected by the LIGO-Virgo detectors, yielded the most stringen t test of the SEP, with the
constraint on any violation ∆ ≤ 6 × 10−10. Besides, this is the only test of the SEP in the
radiation sector. The design sensitivity of the upgraded advanced GW detectors is 170- 300
Mpc for binary neutron star mergers, which is 3 times the sensitivity they had when the
event GW170817 happened. This means that one can expect an ord er of magnitude higher
event rate at the full sensitivity, expected by 2025, and about 3 t o 10 BNS events/year, with
source identiﬁcation. With many such events, the statistical prec ision and conﬁdence in our
unique test of the SEP will steadily improve. In such a scenario, ther e is no doubt that this
gravitational wave test will remain the most precise conﬁrmation of the strong equivalence
principle.
[1] C. M. Will, Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physi cs, (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge; New York, 1993), 2nd edition
[2] C. S. Unnikrishnan and G. T. Gillies, Equivalence princi ple exotica, Frontiers of Physics 3,
444 (2008).
[3] K. L. Nordtvedt Jr, Equivalence principle for massive bo dies. I. Phenomenology, Phys. Rev.,
169, 1014–1016 (1968)..
[4] S. M. Merkowitz, Tests of gravity using lunar laser rangi ng, Living Rev. Relativity, 13, lrr-
2010-7 (2010).
[5] F. Hofmann and J. M¨ uller, Relativistic tests with lunar laser ranging, Class. Quantum Grav.
35 035015 (2018).
[6] S. M. Ransom et al., A millisecond pulsar in a stellar trip le system, Nature 505, 520–524
(2014).
[7] A. M. Archibald et al., Universality of free fall from the orbital motion of a pulsar in a stellar
triple system, Nature 559, 73–76 (2018).
[8] G. Voisin et al., An improved test of the strong equivalen ce principle with the pulsar in a
triple star system, A&A 638, A24 (2020).
[9] B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO and Virgo Scientiﬁc Collaborati ons), GW170817: Observation of
gravitational waves from a binary neutron star inspiral, Ph ys. Rev. Lett. 119, 161101 (2017).
[10] B.P. Abbott et al. (LIGO, Virgo and Fermi Scientiﬁc Coll aborations), Gravitational waves
and gamma-rays from a binary neutron star merger: GW170817 a nd GRB 170817, ApJ 848,
L13 (2017).
[11] I. I. Shapiro, Fourth test of general relativity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 789–791 (1964).
[12] P. C. C. Freire, M.l Kramer and N. Wex, Tests of the univer sality of free fall for strongly
self-gravitating bodies with radio pulsars, Class. Quantu m Grav. 29 184007 (2012).
[13] C. M. Will, The Confrontation between general relativi ty and experiment, Living Reviews in
Relativity. 17 (1): 4–107 (2014).
[14] T. A. Wagner, S. Schlamminger, J. H. Gundlach and E. G. Ad elberger, Torsion-balance tests

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
of the weak equivalence principle, Class. Quantum Grav. 29 184002 (2012).
[15] P. Touboul et al., MICROSCOPE Mission: First results of a space test of the equivalence
principle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 231101 (2017).
[16] C. S. Unnikrishnan, The gravitational bending of gravi tational waves: Evidence from temporal
coincidence of GW170817 and GRB170817A, LIGO Document T170 0474-v3 (2017).
