===== PAGE 1 =====
Review article
“Assembly Theory” in life-origin models: A critical review
David Lynn Abel
ProtoBioCybernetics & Protocellular Metabolomics, The Gene Emergence Project, The Origin of Life Science Foundation, Inc, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Protolife
Protocells
Abiogenesis
Life origin
Origin of life
Protometabolism
Protocellular metabolomics
ProtoBioCybernetics
Molecular evolution
Chemical evolution
Pre-Darwinian evolution
ABSTRACT
Any homeostatic protometabolism would have required orchestration of disparate biochemical pathways into 
integrated circuits. Extraordinarily specific molecular assemblies were also required at the right time and place. 
Assembly Theory conflated with its cousins—Complexity Theory, Chaos theory, Quantum Mechanics, Irrevers-
ible Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics and Molecular Evolution theory— collectively have great naturalistic 
appeal in hopes of their providing the needed exquisite steering and controls. They collectively offer the best 
hope of circumventing the need for active selection required to formally orchestrate bona fide formal organi-
zation (as opposed to the mere self-ordering of chaos theory) (Abel and Trevors, 2006b). This paper focuses 
specifically on AT’s contribution to naturalistic life-origin models.
1. What is Assembly Theory (AT)?
“AT” explores the degree of causation difficulty and minimal re-
quirements needed to produce a given molecular ensemble (Cronin, 
2023; Gordon, 2013; Łukaszyk, 2024; Marshall, 2021; Mathis et al., 
2024; Miles, 2023; Schwieterman, 2018; Walker, 2024). Lee Cronin and 
Sara Walker have probably taken the lead in promoting AT (Cardoso 
et al., 2020; Cronin and Walker, 2016; Liu et al., 2021; Marshall et al., 
2021). Sharma et al. (2023) published in Nature is the most formally 
developed version of AT. Updates, clarifications, additions and defenses 
have been added mostly within YouTube URLs (Cronin, 2023; Cronin 
and Fridman, 2024; Mathis et al., 2024; Walker, 2024). Leading critics 
are Hector Zenil (Zenil, 2023, 2024; Zenil and Tour, 2024), James Tour 
(2024), Hazen et al. (Hazen et al., 2024), Chemist Steven Benner (2023), 
and Johannes Jaeger (2024). AT could probably be viewed as a subset or 
outgrowth of complexity theory (Gordon, 2013; Lambert, 2020), Shan-
non Uncertainty (entropy) (Shannon, 1948a, 1948b), Kolmogorov 
Algorithmic Compression Theory (Kolmogorov, 1965, 1983) and LZ 
compression, Zenil’s decade-old block Decomposition Method (Abrah˜ao 
FS et al., 2024; Ozelim et al., 2024; Uthamacumaran et al., 2024; Zenil, 
2023, 2024). The Chaos Theory of self-ordering dissipative structures 
researched initially by Prigogine and Nicholis also plays a major role 
(Glansdorf and Prigogine, 1971; Nicolis and Prigogine, 1977, 1989; 
Prigogine, 1961, 1962, 1967, 1980, 1997; Prigogine et al., 1969, 1972a, 
b, 1977; Prigogine and Nicolis, 1971; Prigogine and Stengers, 1984).
Behind AT often lies the pre-assumption of impressive creativity 
producible by irreversible nonequilibrium thermodynamics (Prigogine, 
1962; Prigogine et al., 1972a; Torrenegra-Rico et al., 2022). Onsager’s 
Nobel Prize winning work on “reciprocal relations” revealed these 
spontaneous paired reverse flux disequilibria (Onsager, 1931, 1968). 
Proponents of irreversible nonequilibrium thermodynamics contend 
that quanta dispersal over many degrees of microscopic freedom alone is 
sufficient to explain life origin) (Branscomb, 2019; Hernandez and 
Michaelian, 2022; Michaelian, 2017a, 2017b, 2018, 2019, 2021, 2022; 
Morales and Michaelian, 2020). Thermal energy/mass conservation is 
believed to be maintained by these reciprocal paired fluxes. One flux is 
thermodynamically downhill, but drives another flux in close proximity 
uphill. Thermodynamic probabilism is viewed as an “imperative,” as 
though it were a physicodynamic cause of creative physical effects. 
Irreversible far-from-equilibrium fluxes and states are imagined to 
spontaneously occur. This is viewed as the avenue to spontaneous 
abiogenic potential. It is hoped that this avenue would obviate the need 
for any active selection (Abel, 2009c, 2011f, 2024a, c) required for 
molecular evolution.
Proponents of AT begin with what seems to be indistinguishable 
from Shannon’s uncertainty measures of future possibility space. What 
is the phase space of physicodynamic possibilities (Sharma et al., 2023)? 
Also prominent in AT models is a presumed history of such possibilities 
having actually occurred.
Many AT proponents hope that AT will help elucidate plaguing 
E-mail address: lifeorigin@verizon.net. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
BioSystems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biosystems
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2024.105378
Received 17 August 2024; Received in revised form 30 November 2024; Accepted 4 December 2024  
BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
Available online 20 December 2024 
0303-2647/© 2024 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

===== PAGE 2 =====
abiogenesis dilemmas in an inanimate environmental context. Abio-
genesis science has the wonderful benefit of providing very helpful 
reductionism to a lot of very sticky problems. The result is a great deal of 
simplicity and clarity in studying how steering, control, conceptual 
complexity, and homeostatic metabolism might have first been accom-
plished in an inanimate environment.
Of particular interest would be what the molecular assemblies might 
be able to DO if spontaneously formed. The field of protocellular 
metabolomics requires an extraordinary degree of molecular function-
ality not only of individual moieties, but of their collective efficacious 
pathways to biofunction, their holistic cooperation and integrated cir-
cuits. AT focuses on measuring the difficulty of molecular assemblies. 
Understanding the contributions of molecular/chemical/pre-Darwinian 
selection and evolution also plays a crucial role.
If there were any key to understanding “self-organization” and 
“emergence,” it would come through a synthesis of AT, Complexity 
Theory, Chaos Theory, Quantum Mechanics and Irreversible Non- 
equilibrium Thermodynamics. Molecular Evolution is added to the 
mix in hopes of providing the needed missing explanation of selection 
for “usefulness.” But the focus of this paper is primarily on AT specif-
ically as it relates to abiogenesis theory.
2. Limitations and shortcomings of relevance to abiogenesis
2.1. Physiochemical and other physicodynamic limitations of AT
Of great interest to abiogenists is AT’s assertion that it can distin-
guish between, and even measure, the difficulty level of spontaneous 
formation of biotic vs. abiotic molecules. There does appear to be some 
measurable minimal differences between the two, although the bulk of 
this difference appears to be related mostly to mere molecular length 
and size more than to potential biotic function (Abrah˜ao FS et al., 2024; 
Ozelim et al., 2024; Zenil, 2023; Zenil and Tour, 2024).
No measurements of the difficulty of spontaneous assembly of 
biochemical pathways, integrated circuits, and homeostatic metabolism 
are offered by AT.
The question of measurement will be addressed more fully below in 
section 2.5. For now, the question is, “How did inanimate physicody-
namics specifically pursue and produce biotic players, formally organize 
disparate biochemical pathways, and orchestrate all of these indepen-
dent biochemical pathways into holistic homeostatic metabolism?” In 
all fairness to AT proponents, their focus is primarily on the formation of 
individual biotic molecular assemblies. But how would AT researchers 
know which molecular assemblies were “biotic” except in the larger 
context of at least an envisioned theoretical protometabolism? Not all 
organic molecules are biotic. To do this, they “reconceptualize” in their 
minds ordinary physical chemistry in order to imagine abiogenic sce-
narios. The limitations of this human mentation relevant to what actu-
ally happened historically and ontologically in a prebiotic environment 
will be addressed below in Section 2.6.
The question still remains, “What steered inorganic and organic 
chemistry toward abiogenesis in an inanimate environment?” Is the 
contention that no active selection, steering or controls were needed to 
produce conceptually complex biotic molecules and their orchestration 
into biosystems? Or is the contention that mere constraints and laws 
were adequate to do this active selection, steering and formal control? 
Steering toward function and controlling that function to maintain or 
optimize it are formal enterprises, not physicodynamic natural-science 
phenomena. Neither constraints nor laws are capable of steering phys-
icodynamic interactions toward “usefulness.”
A few simple inorganic catalysts could have contributed spontane-
ously early on. But most required catalysis would have necessarily been 
protein enzymes having ingenious secondary and tertiary structures. 
Crude catalytic agents would have to be legion and all-too-specific for 
many essential protometabolic molecular assemblies to form. Even if 
they all formed, they would have to be carefully sequenced in their 
synthetic reactions at the right times and under the required conditions. 
Reaction sequences would have to be selectively interrupted just at the 
right time to preclude biochemical catastrophe. Any protometabolism 
would have to be formally orchestrated, not merely self-ordered (Abel, 
2024b; Abel and Trevors, 2006b), to achieve the slightest hope of 
homeostasis.
What determined the sequential polymerizations (primary structure) 
that only later caused the effect of the needed secondary and tertiary 
structures? Where did all the needed specific chaperones come from to 
assist folding? How did these chaperones just happen to be waiting at 
the ribosomal exit port for each emerging polypeptide? How did the 
incredible ribosome super-machine come into existence in the first 
place? How did this machine know how to translate specific poly-
nucleotide sequencing into polyamino acid sequencing? How did all of 
the t-RNAs and aminoacyl tRNA synthetases/transferases, etc. get 
structured and then integrated into an orchestrated symphony? All of 
this had to be waiting at the same time and place in order to even define 
what would be “biogenic” individual molecular assemblies.
Many more problems exist. 
a. What about the fact that many potential players in abiogenesis 
models have very short half-lives?
b. What about the homochirality problem? Yes, Sharma (2023) has 
recently published a very interesting paper on homochirality origin. 
But this model is quite limited in scope.
c. What about the spin-polarized electron problem (Ozturk and Dimi-
tar, 2022)?
d. Does mere molecular stability equal molecular function?
e. Wouldn’t a self-replicating RNA-peptide assembly tend to consume 
all the resources needed for the formation of many other assemblies 
required for protolife to “self-organize”?
Biochemical reality demands acknowledgement of the inadequacy of 
physicodynamics alone to orchestrate life. The only thing preventing the 
production of chemical “tar” is precise prescription of many synthetic 
steps and factors specified in great detail by Prof. James Tour at Rice 
University (Thaxton et al., 2020; Tour, 2020, 2024). Tour’s Harvard 
debate with Lee Cronin expounds on these severe biochemical limita-
tions (Zenil and Tour, 2024). Lee Cronin is probably the number-one 
proponent of AT (Cronin, 2023; Cronin and Fridman, 2024; Marshall 
et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2023).
AT supporters place great emphasis on “possibilities” and “eons of 
time.” But time is not a cause of any effect. Absolutely no “history” of 
successful “possibilities” is provided by AT authors wherein spontaneous 
generation of even protolife is produced. Nothing is more formally 
organized than homeostatic metabolism far from equilibrium. The only 
thing “emerging” in the history of human observation seems to be the 
vivid imagination of the AT theorists’ wish fulfilment.
Chemist Steven Benner (2023) contends that AT has not solved “the 
wickedly complex problem central to organic chemistry: The problem of 
reactivity.”
Kondratyeva et al. (Kondratyeva et al., 2022) point out the mutual 
need of both proteins and nucleic acids. Co-evolution models suggest a 
possible physico-chemical and structural link between nucleic acids, 
proteins and amino acids. They have therefore received great attention 
(Copley et al., 2007; Guimaraes, 2004, 2010, 2011, 2014, 2015, a, b, 
2017, 2019; Guimaraes et al., 2008; Lahav, 1991, 1993; Stevenson, 
2002; Tagami and Li, 2023; Wong, 1975). But these models are highly 
conjectural with limited empirical support. Imagination tends to be very 
stretched and the envisioned products quite extensive. No steering or 
controls are offered to justify presupposing the processing pathways 
needed. Without active selection, this author finds co-evolution models 
to be theoretically simplistic and naïve.
In the RNA world hypothesis, the emergence of translation was 
preceded by a hypothesized era of self-replicating RNAs. The problem is, 
no RNA chemist has ever been able to synthesize ribozymes with 
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
processive polymerase activity (Kondratyeva et al., 2022). If highly 
skilled RNA chemists cannot manufacture such RNA’s, questions are 
raised about their spontaneous formation according to AT. One of AT’s 
main theorists is an abiogenist whose primary interest is the level of 
“difficulty” involved in synthesizing biogenic molecular “assemblies” 
(Sharma et al., 2023).
Useful co-enzymes, peptides, proteins, small RNA’s and poly-
nucleotide genes could all be considered highly functional molecular 
“assemblies.” How was the formation and measurement of difficulty of 
these high-achieving assemblies accomplished? The naturalistic expla-
nation is necessarily limited to mere chance and necessity.
2.1.1. Are chance and necessity sufficient?
A simple piece of wire can be used for many functions. But how many 
pieces of any kind of wire have ever spontaneously “self-organized,” or 
“emerged” in the history of human observation? Even a simple piece of 
physical wire is an instantiated formalism. The characteristics of this 
“molecular ensemble” and physical “object,” as AT authors would call it, 
have never been observed to spontaneously generate from the four know 
forces of physics, from law, constraints, from chance, or from irrevers-
ible nonequilibrium thermodynamics. Iron ore in the ground lacks the 
characteristics of a long piece of metal alloy with constant diameter and 
optimized tensile strength and malleability needed to make a simple 
paper clip.
A piece of wire is an object that shows evidence of active selection in 
its formation. We do not attribute that selection to iron ore itself, or to 
the laws of physics and chemistry. An orchestrating, conceptualizing 
agent did the active selecting that brought this alloy “object” into exis-
tence. This “molecular ensemble” was “assembled” as an engineering 
project, not as a mere physico-chemical sequence of spontaneous 
“possible” interactions. No empirical history exists of a simple piece of 
wire “emerging” by “self-organization.” Why not? If AT cannot explain 
the origin of a simple piece of wire, it is not going to explain the origin of 
life.
Spontaneous formation of innumerable needed life-origin players is 
statistically prohibitive (Axe, 2000, 2004). Axe found that only one 
polypeptide in 1077 stochastic ensembles would spontaneously fold into 
a needed tertiary structure. Not only that, but the spontaneous forma-
tion of many needed molecular assemblies has Universal Plausibility 
Metrics of ξ < 1.0. The Universal Plausibility Principle (Abel, 2009d, e, 
2011i) requires peer-review rejection of any model with that low a 
quantification of the Universal Plausibility Metric of ξ. The proposed 
spontaneous formation and collection of so many needed 
statistically-prohibitive “assemblies” in the same place at the same time 
is simply scientifically untenable as a “natural” phenomenon.
2.1.2. Constraints vs. controls
Constraints are not Controls (Abel, 2010, 2024b, c). Mere constraints 
cannot steer and control events toward conceptual, orchestrational, 
integrative, formal function.
“The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sci-
ences” (Hamming, 1980; Wigner, 1960) is only unreasonable for those 
who fanatically refuse to acknowledge the third fundamental category of 
reality: Choice Causation (Abel, 2007, 2008a, b, 2009a, 2010, 2011d, e, 
f, h, j, k, l, 2012, 2015, 2024c; Abel and Trevors, 2005, 2006b; D’Onofrio 
et al., 2012a; Trevors and Abel, 2004). No rational basis or empirical 
experience exists to justify attributing homeostatic metabolism to 
Chance and Necessity alone.
The self-ordering phenomena of chaos theory are usually grossly 
overextended into wild imaginations of “self-organization” and “emer-
gence” of formalisms. The self-orderings of chaos theory are not only 
blind to “usefulness,” they usually destroy usefulness. Consider weather 
fronts, hurricanes and tornadoes. How much organization is produced 
by these self-ordered “dissipative structures”?
Controls require active selection prior to the realization of the 
function produced by those active selections. The selections cannot be 
passive and secondary to eventual functionality. Any needed function 
that might be favored is only later produced. Even then, inanimate na-
ture does not favor function over non-function. The environment only 
favors the fittest already-living organisms.
Sophisticated functionality must be pursued with purposeful choices. 
Such conceptually complex utility has never been observed to be pro-
duced by mere constraints or law. The notions of “self-organization” and 
“emergence” violate this empirical reality. These two terms have no 
place in natural science. “Self-organization” is a nonsense term. Nothing 
can possibly organize itself into existence. It would have to already exist 
to organize anything. If it already existed, it could not possibly organize 
itself into existence. No excuse remains for continuing to appeal to “self- 
organization” or “emergence” as a physical cause within quality natu-
ralistic science.
All known life is programmed and cybernetically processed (Esposito 
et al., 2024). Life is formal computation. Constraints cannot cause 
formal computation. Only the controls requiring active selections can 
generate formal sophisticated function. No function is as sophisticated 
as biofunction. Objects and their spontaneous physicochemical combi-
nations do not program or compute. Mere spontaneous molecular as-
semblies (“combinations”) do not produce programs or Turing 
machines, let alone ribosomes.
Evolution would not have existed yet in an inanimate environment. 
Nothing was alive yet to differentially survive and reproduce. Any se-
lection in molecular evolution would have been active, not passive and 
secondary (Abel, 2009c, 2024a). Thus, abiogenesis had to have been 
steered by controls, not by fixed laws or constraints. If the latter did the 
programming, the program would consist of all “1’s,” or of all “0’s,” by 
law! “Does not compute!”
In criticizing AT, Jaeger (2024) reveals his own confusion in his 
clause, “‘higher level emergent causal constraints’ in computational worlds 
made of basic objects and their combinations.” What exactly are these 
magical “higher level constraints” that are just pre-supposed meta-
physically to have so much formal control capability? In what sense can 
any physicodynamic constraint cause “higher level” non-trivial sophis-
ticated formal function? Is this science, or science fiction? Where is the 
empirical evidence of mere constraints being capable of formal controls? 
The only time constraints can serve as controls is when those constraints 
(usually starting conditions) are chosen by investigator involvement in 
experimental design.
2.1.3. The problem of active selection
AT authors state that, “The assembly is defined as “the total amount 
of selection necessary to produce an ensemble of observed objects."
Since the object or ensemble of objects forming does not exist yet in 
completed form, the selection required to achieve it is active, not pas-
sive. Evolution is only passive selection. It favors by differential survival 
and reproduction the fittest already-living organisms after-the-fact of 
their being alive and fittest.
Active selection is performed “in order to. …” (realize some goal). 
That is called Engineering, not “natural” science! One can find the 
phrase “in order to…” as Freudian slips in hundreds of abiogenesis pa-
pers. The authors exhibit total blindness to the fact that this magical 
phrase completely violates naturalistic presuppositions in favor of 
advocating intent and goal. They are only unknowingly affirming the 
third fundamental category of reality: Choice Causation (Abel, 2007, 
2008b, 2009b, 2010, 2011b, h, 2012, 2024a; Abel and Trevors, 2005, 
2006b; Trevors and Abel, 2004).
Physico-chemical interactions and reactions are simply not capable 
of active selection in pursuit of functional ensembles. Function is no 
better than non-function to an inanimate environment. Laws and con-
straints could care less whether anything functions.
Selection comes into play much earlier than initially envisioned by 
proponents of the all-sufficiency of irreversible nonequilibrium ther-
modynamics, Complexity Theory, Chaos Theory and AT. Even if spon-
taneous physicodynamic formation of biotic molecules is presupposed, 
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
one ensemble needs to be preferred over others to isolate and promote 
the continued existence and production of worthwhile ensembles. What 
would be the impetus of this in a prebiotic environment where no 
molecule is perceived to have value?
2.1.4. Synthetic organic chemistry requires very careful controls
The components of synthetic chemistry success must react in the 
right order at the right temperature, pressure, light, and in the right 
precise quantities with the needed pauses in reactivity to produce any-
thing other than useless tar (Thaxton et al., 2020; Tour, 2020, 2024). Not 
only does formation assembly difficulty become an issue, but also 
half-lives.
The carefully ordered steps and conditions required for synthetic 
chemistry and orchestration of any protolife have been extensively 
covered in a 2024 paper just published entitled, “Why Is Abiogenesis 
Such a Tough Nut to Crack” (Abel, 2024c) We will not rehash here all of 
that relevant material.
2.2. Functional molecule and integrated circuit limitations of AT
There would be little point to pursuing AT if each ensemble of in-
terest did not possess some non-trivial utility. The definition of “useful” 
should also be isolated from the valuation of human agents. The ques-
tion is, could the molecules produced as described by AT serve any 
stand-alone ontological purpose within an inanimate environment? 
How would the environment have recognized, cared about, or mar-
shalled any usefulness? How would these spontaneous molecular as-
semblies have been preserved and accumulated? How were these 
individual molecular assemblies orchestrated into a protometabolism?
Can physicodynamics, including irreversible nonequilibrium ther-
modynamics, actually orchestrate and organize formal functions? The 
ultimate in functionality is found in biofunction, even at the subcellular 
level of the simplest known organisms. But the problem for AT begins at 
a much simpler level than that. How well does AT address the source of 
any kind of non-trivial spontaneous pragmatism?
Physicodynamics is blind to function. Inanimate nature could care 
less whether anything “works” in a formal sense. The “work” of physics 
has nothing to do with utility.
AT can measure the difficulty of spontaneous molecular formation. 
But can it measure the difficulty of fashioning highly functional mole-
cules, biotic and biogenic molecules especially. Doing so requires pre-
supposing life rather than explaining its formation using nothing but 
isolated molecular assembly measures. The life that is just presupposed 
axiomatically is highly programmed, cybernetically processed, and 
computational. All of these features of life are formal, not physicody-
namic. Formalisms alone generate the potential bio-functionality of any 
molecular assembly. The bottom-up approach to abiogenesis lacks all 
empirical accountability. “Self-organization” and “emergence” of formal 
functions are not observed. They are both just blindly believed. We can’t 
even define “biotic” outside of the presupposed context of formal life. 
Organic molecules are not necessarily biotic or biogenic.
Zenil et al., in particular, challenges whether AT can differentiate 
between biotic and abiotic molecular assemblies, and the difficulty of 
their formation. (Abrah˜ao FS et al., 2024; Ozelim et al., 2024; Zenil, 
2023; Zenil and Tour, 2024).
What exactly was the natural cause of the effect of the orchestration 
of even a theoretical homeostatic protometabolism? To just keep 
repeating “self-organization” and “emergence” over and over is nothing 
more than pulling a rabbit out of a hat.
Why would a prebiotic environment care whether anything func-
tioned? What would have been the source of any motivation to prefer or 
pursue function? 
⁃ What were the means of such an achievement?
⁃ Has chance and necessity ever produced sophisticated functions?
⁃ Why would any accidental function have been preserved?
⁃ Exactly how does AT differentiate between functional vs. nonfunc-
tional molecular assemblies?
⁃ Is there any natural process directionality toward the formation of 
useful assemblies? Or is the usefulness of any assembly purely 
happenstantial?
⁃ Will AT elucidate the purely physicodynamic causative route to 
useful assemblies as opposed to non-useful assemblies?
⁃ How and why would any spontaneous usefulness be preserved and 
expanded upon by an inanimate environment?
⁃ How many molecular assemblies with happenstantial sophisticated 
function would AT authors expect to spontaneously form in the same 
place at the same time?
2.3. Evolutionary limitations of AT
Given enough eons of time, AT proponents believe that laws, con-
straints, large phase spaces of possibilities, and thermodynamics can 
produce formalistic physical entities and systems. Formalisms include 
sophisticated functions normally associated only with engineering. 
Evolution is claimed to polish the result of these non-evolutionary, 
purely thermodynamic and physicodynamic products.
The first problem with this perspective, as discussed above, is that 
physicodynamics itself provides no directionality toward the formation 
of useful assemblies or their holistic cooperation (Abel, 2006, 2007; Abel 
and Trevors, 2005; Trevors and Abel, 2004). Sooner or later, evolution 
has to be included in AT’s causative mix. AT does attempt to include 
evolution in its model.
Neo-Darwinian Evolution is nothing more than the differential sur-
vival and reproduction of the fittest already-programmed, already- 
cybernetically processed, already-living organisms. Neo-Darwinian 
evolution is after-the fact—altogether passive and secondary to pheno-
typic benefit. Natural selection is incapable of active selection at the 
programming level in pursuit of eventual utility via computational 
halting (The Genetic Selection (GS Principle (Abel, 2009c, 2011f)). 
Evolution has no goal. Neo-Darwinian evolution, therefore, is irrelevant 
and worthless to abiogenesis research. If evolution is going to be of any 
help at all, it will have to be molecular/chemical pre-Darwinian 
evolution.
Even molecular evolution requires selection to optimize function. It 
has been shown that selection in molecular evolution must be active 
selection, not secondary passive selection as seen with “natural selec-
tion” (Abel, 2006, 2007, 2024a; Abel and Trevors, 2005; Trevors and 
Abel, 2004). Primary, secondary and tertiary molecular structure must 
be actively selected prior to the realization of any utility, not secondarily 
favored because of their only later-realized pragmatic contribution. For 
example, nucleosides must be individually actively selected for poly-
merization into a certain sequence of rigidly-bound 3′5′ phosphodiester 
bonds in order for that sequence to prescribe the transcription and 
translation of needed proteins. That is active selection, not secondary 
passive selection.
The problem is, no known basis for active selection in pursuit of 
function exists in an inanimate naturalistic environment. Little else ex-
ists that could even hopefully explain the spontaneous orchestration of 
any formal organization. Empirical evidence is painfully lacking of 
quanta dispersal over many degrees of microscopic freedom producing a 
single sophisticated protein (Axe, 2000, 2004), or orchestrating the 
slightest hint of formal function (Abel, 2007, 2008a, b, 2009b, c, 2010, 
2011a, c, d, e, f, h, k, l, 2012, 2015; Abel and Trevors, 2005, 2006b, 
2007; Durston et al., 2007; Durston and Chiu, 2011; Trevors and Abel, 
2004).
Even “trial and error” quests are deliberate searches. Trial-and-error 
quests are motivated by intent, purpose and goal. Neither molecular nor 
neoDarwinian evolution has any goal.
Just being far from equilibrium does not necessarily produce func-
tionality, let alone biofunction or homeostatic metabolism. And how 
could a prebiotic environment even identify functionality?
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
How were their primary structures sequenced so as to produce 
instructive value in a completely different language of polyamino acid 
primary structure sequencing? How were secondary and tertiary struc-
tures anticipated when primary structure formed? Efficacious prescrip-
tive sequencing was required during pre-function polymerization. That 
required active selection, not passive after-the-fact selection. And it’s 
not just protein genesis. Thousands of CircRNA’s had to have been 
programmed for regulation.
Molecular evolution theory has no basis for selection other than 
greater molecular stability and self-catalysis of massive quantities of one 
entity (Abel, 2009c, 2011f, 2024a, c). Molecular stability has nothing to 
do with utility. Some of the most toxic molecules to life are the most 
stable molecules (e.g. heavy metals). Massive self-replication of one 
RNA analog would deplete the environment of the resources for hun-
dreds of other needed molecular entities to form.
2.4. Cybernetic limitations of AT
As established in section 2.1.2 and 2.1.3, a more appropriate use of 
the term “selection” is “active selection.” Choices must be made in the 
pursuit of utility that make the realization of that utility possible only 
after that active selection is made. The programming of computation is a 
classic example. So is the active selection of the next nucleoside to 
polymerize in a prescriptive programming string of nucleic acid. Biology 
as science cannot evade the question of how certain nucleosides are 
polymerized in a certain order so as to prescribe protein primary, sec-
ondary and tertiary structure. All of the chemical bonds are the same 3′5′ 
phosphodiester bonds. Any physicochemical constraint or law would 
produce a homopolymer rather than genetic code. The very key to ge-
netic coding is the lack of physicodynamic propensity in nucleoside 
selection.
In the absence of active selection, empirical evidence of any so-
phisticated function spontaneously arising from irreversible nonequi-
librium thermodynamics is virtually nonexistent. Claims to the contrary 
can invariably be shown to have had “investigator involvement” in their 
experimental design.
Three fundamental categories of reality exist, not just Chance and 
Necessity (Abel, 2011h). Causation of active selection cannot be phys-
ical (Abel, 2011k). It arises from the far side of the Cybernetic Cut (Abel, 
2008b; Abel, 2011b). The Cybernetic Cut is the great divide between 
Physicodynamic Causation (“necessity”) and formal Choice Causation. 
The decision-node programming choices of coded genetic prescription 
can arise only from the far side of the Cybernetic Cut. Physicodynamics 
has no ability to program computation or to orchestrate formal 
organization.
AT authors contend that, “For the shortest path to success, the as-
sembly space captures the minimal memory, in terms of the minimal 
number of operations necessary to construct an object based on objects 
that could have existed in its past.” (Sharma et al., 2023).
What determined the minimal number of operations necessary? 
Some law of physics? One of the four known forces? Do thermodynamic 
“possibilities” determine maximum cybernetic efficiency and sophisti-
cated success?
Only active selections at bona fide decision nodes produce the 
needed synthetic chemistry procedural steps. The authors are searching 
within their “assembly pool” for the minimal number of steps to 
computational success. Would this not be the essence of a cybernetic 
rather than a natural science problem? How did the laws of physics 
recognize or appreciate such an ideal goal? How did an inanimate 
environment ascertain what the optimized “assembly pool” steps should 
be? How did nature overcome Church’s and Turing’s halting problem 
(knowing how in advance to successfully compute an optimized solu-
tion) (Church, 1936; Turing, 1936)?
Say AT authors, “Once a pathway to assemble an object is discov-
ered, the object can be reproduced.” (Sharma et al., 2023) What exactly 
was the “discoverer” in a prebiotic environment? How did an inanimate 
environment know what to do with any gain even if it could recognize 
one? What was the “knower” of this gain? How was this pathway 
(justifiably called a “program” or “optimized algorithm”) “discovered”? 
Worse yet, discovery is not causative. It is an after-the-fact purely 
epistemological gain. Abiogenic science is interested in causes of real 
effects.
Did physicodynamics have some search criteria? Did the inanimate 
“objects” go looking to discover an optimized pathway to assembly? Or 
did all this just come together at the same place and time within eons of 
time? What is this ruse we keep proudly proclaiming to be “science”?
The quest of explaining “orchestration of formal systems” turns 
clearly cybernetic, as freely acknowledged by AT authors themselves, 
when they introduce the question of “What would be the fewest steps 
needed to accomplish the goal?” (Sharma et al., 2023) AT authors also 
ask the purely formal, cybernetic question, “What possible pathway 
would require the shortest processing time?” (Sharma et al., 2023) These 
are cybernetic questions, not natural science questions.
The problem is that cybernetics by definition pertains to control. 
Controls are not constraints (Abel, 2010). Controls require purposeful 
choices. Controls steer interactions toward formal success. Systems 
Biology is impossible without controls. We are shooting ourselves in the 
foot by disallowing discussion of steering and the needed formal controls 
when trying to elucidate the origins of Systems Biology. We are looking 
in the wrong place. Constraints are blind and indifferent to “usefulness.” 
We are looking to fixed laws when we should be looking to formal 
programming rules.
Bona fide organization lies in the engineering domain, not the 
physical science domain. The great hope of AT is that it could offer a 
solution to this naturalistic/physicalistic dilemma. The goal of natural-
istic science has always been to explain the origin of exquisite biological 
orchestration and organization without dependence upon formal choice, 
steering or controls. Our great white hope has always been “eons of 
time.” Time is not a cause of any effect! Our modus operandi has always 
been to replace any hint of “teleology” with “teleonomy” (Bartlett, 
2023a; Mayr, 1965; Pittendrigh, 1958; Reese, 1994). What’s the dif-
ference? The answer is that teleonomy tries to disallow the required 
active selection. We are long overdue to admit our failure at teleonomic 
pursuits (itself an oxymoron). The facts of controls rather than mere 
constraints speak for themselves.
Cybernetics deals with steering and control mediated by communi-
cation. Biosemiosis provides that communication. But biosemiosis re-
quires linguistic-like rules, not laws. These rules cannot be forced. Their 
use must be truly contingent, and they must be actively selected. Con-
straints not only are not purposefully chosen, they have never been 
observed to produce sophisticated formal function. The only thing ever 
observed to produce sophisticated functionality is controls, not con-
straints (Abel, 2010).
All known life is programmed and cybernetically processes compu-
tation. The programming of life is a cybernetic function. It prescribes, 
steers and controls life’s formal processes. The entire field of genetics, 
circRNA regulation, and the use of CRISPR-Cas3, CAS9 and Cas12 
technology proves the cybernetic and programming nature of life’s 
controls. Life is clearly not just chemistry. Life is instructed and 
controlled by genetic and epigenetic Prescriptive Information (Abel, 
2009a; D’Onofrio et al., 2012a, b), a special case of Szostak’s “functional 
information” (Hazen et al., 2007; Szostak, 2003), not mere Shannon 
entropy.
Prescription using representational material symbol systems is 
formal, not physical–as formal as mathematics (Abel, 2011e, 2024a, b, 
c). The prescription of formal function is instantiated into physicality 
using physical symbol vehicles (e.g., actively selected and sequenced 
nucleosides). These tokens may be physical, but they represent meaning.
Configurable switch-settings are also used to prescribe function 
(Abel, 2008b, 2010, 2011k, 2012, 2015). Configurable switches must be 
set in advance of realized integrated circuit efficaciousness. Decision 
node choices (e.g. nucleoside selection of which of four monomers to 
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
next polymerize to a forming nucleic acid strand) must be active, not 
passive or secondary (Abel, 2009c, 2011g, k, l, 2015, 2024a, c; Abel and 
Trevors, 2005; Durston et al., 2007). Such programming and computa-
tional processing is formal, not physical.
Physicodynamic assembly would not be formally controlled. It 
would be merely constrained. Neither chance nor necessity can explain 
the cybernetics of life.
Heritable linear digital prescriptions use Material Symbol Systems 
(Abel, 2011g; Rocha, 1995a, b, c). This is the very thing that makes 
neoDarwinian evolution possible. Prescription of formal function is a 
different modality altogether from the prescribed physical product itself 
(Abel, 2011j). The same is true of the physical objects (the tokens or 
physical symbol vehicles) used to instantiate that prescription of formal 
function (Abel, 2011g; Esposito et al., 2024).
Nucleotides and triplet codons are formal representational physical 
symbol vehicles used to prescribe formal meaning and function (Abel 
and Trevors, 2006a, 2007). So are the multidimensional 
translational-pausing sextet codes superimposed on the triplet amino 
acid sequencing coding (D’onofrio and Abel, 2014). So are epigenetic 
switch-settings (Hernday et al., 2002).
This manuscript may be recorded into cyberspace or recorded with 
paper and ink molecules. But its content is abstract, conceptual, non- 
physical and formal. DNA, RNA, chaperones and other useful poly-
peptides may be physical, but the formal Prescriptive Information 
instantiated into these molecules is the real issue.
Since all known life is programmed and cybernetically processed by 
nanomachinery, Turing’s halting problem is very relevant when AT 
purports to measure causation difficulty. If we are to measure the 
challenge or difficulty of achieving computation, we are going to need to 
measure the causative techniques of cybernetics, not mere thermody-
namic probabilism.
So, the fundamental question is, “Can AT really quantify this active 
selection cybernetic process difficulty?”
2.5. Measurement limitations of AT
AT contends that it can measure the difficulty of biotic molecular 
formation. If this were correct, it might make possible quantifying the 
difficulty not only of biomolecular synthesis, but of molecular evolution 
and possibly even biochemical pathway orchestration independent of 
any active selection.
AT’s assembly index does suggest some after-the-fact difference be-
tween biotic and abiotic compounds. But, as pointed out in Section 
2.1.1, this difference most likely relates more to molecular length than 
whether or not any molecule is biotic. Of course, no molecule is living. 
Many abiotic organic molecules exist, especially in association with 
hydrothermal vents or where olivine-rich magmatic systems get cooled 
down and hydrated (Andreani et al., 2023).
“Systems biology” is incredibly orchestrated in its concepts, organi-
zation, pathways and methods. Sooner or later, molecular evolution and 
even neoDarwinian evolution has to be included in the measurement of 
causation of biologically useful ensembles. Thus, for AT to put a dent 
into the abiogenesis problem, it must ultimately quantify both phys-
icodynamic and selection challenges in its measure of causation diffi-
culty. And the selection challenge measured must be active selection 
challenge, not passive after-the-fact selection challenge (Abel, 2009c, 
2011f, 2024a). Can active selection be measured at all with nothing but 
entropy measures?
The requirements of biotic molecules to do their specific needed 
tasks seem inexhaustible. The causation difficulty for bifunctional mo-
lecular assemblies is far, far greater than for non-functional stochastic 
ensembles. 
a. Wouldn’t some selections be more challenging to make than others?
b. Wouldn’t some active selections be more consequential than others?
c. Does AT address any engineering-like steering or controls that might 
be needed to generate function, as opposed to the mere mindless 
constraints of inertness (Abel, 2010)?
d. Are any active selections at all required to generate assemblies with 
sophisticated functions? The entire engineering field might tend to 
question whether natural science could address such active selec-
tions in pursuit of utility.
Ultimately, abiogenists wonder how useful AT quantifications will be 
in measuring the challenge of achieving formal organization, “wise” 
decision-node selections, integration of circuits, quality control, mini-
mization of required steps to computational success, orchestration of 
disparate biochemical pathways into homeostatic protometabolism and 
metabolism, the molecular machinery needed to process the prescriptive 
information of programming and cybernetic controls, the difficulty 
inherent in Turing’s “Halting Problem” (Church, 1936′Turing, 1936
#7143). The specific steering and controls needed to orchestrate proto-
metabolic function cannot be measured with fixed entropy units.
What exactly is AT’s “assembly space?” How does it differ from a 
physical phase space? Is it not the sum of all possible physicodynamic 
outcomes? Is this not directly analogous to and a measure of Shannon 
Uncertainty and entropy?
2.5.1. The utter inadequacy of Shannon Entropy measures
Randomness has never programmed any non-trivial computation. 
Probabilism cannot program. Measurements of phase space cannot 
program. If programming were done by constraint or law, there would 
be no contingency. Programming is impossible when constraints and law 
preclude contingency. Not just contingency, but purposeful choice 
contingency is the key to cybernetics and the engineering of nontrivial 
function.
Shannon realized early on, much to his chagrin, that it was impos-
sible to measure purposeful choices. Every choice involved in algo-
rithmic optimization is unique and highly contextual. Each choice has a 
different weight of importance and criticality to the success of the formal 
process. Thus, specific positive choices cannot be measured with fixed 
units. He was forced to settle for measuring Uncertainty, not Prescriptive 
Information (instructions or controls) (Shannon, 1948a, b; Shannon and 
Weaver, 1949).
Not even passive, after-the-fact mutation value can be measured with 
fixed units. Nearly all mutations are either deleterious or neutral. But 
how could the relative degree of “deleterious” be measured? How could 
the relative worth of an extremely rare questionably “good” mutation be 
measured? Some point mutations have major effects. Others have minor 
or seemingly no effects. That being the case, it is impossible to measure a 
particular mutation’s relative effect with fixed units.
Shannon got irritated when his Entropy measures were called “in-
formation” (Shannon and Weaver, 1949). None of the 
humanly-generated epistemological concepts of differential entropy, 
conditional entropy, joint entropy, mutual entropy, directed entropy, 
conditional mutual entropy, or relative entropy have any direct rele-
vance to measuring Szostak’s Functional Information (Hazen et al., 
2007; McIntosh, 2006; Sharov, 2009, 2010; Szostak, 2003) or Abel’s 
more refined Prescription Information (Abel, 2008b, 2009a, 2010, 2015; 
D’Onofrio et al., 2012a).
Use of the words “challenge” and “difficulty” by AT authors ac-
knowledges that the formation of these useful molecular assemblies was 
not straightforward. That challenge is not just probabilistic. Determi-
native factors are needed. Physicochemical interactions producing 
formal functions require steering and control toward utility. Thus, the 
naturalistic goal of AT ought to include the calculation of the formation 
challenges of uniquely worthwhile ensembles forming spontaneously. In 
abiogenesis research, only “usefulness” would contribute to naturalistic 
notions of “self-organization” or “emergence” of protocells.
All nucleosides are polymerized with the same 3′5′ phospho-diester 
bond forming difficulty. This has nothing to do with the difficulty of 
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
prescribing polyamino acid sequencing so as to instruct a functional 
protein or circRNA production. And we are not even addressing the 
problem of multidimension coding’s such as the superimposed trans-
lational pausing coding needed for proper protein folding (D’onofrio 
and Abel, 2014). A sextet code prescription is superimposed on the 
triplet coded prescription, providing a completely different class and 
multi-dimensional set of instructions in a different language. That’s 
formalism, not mere physico-dynamics. It’s rule-based, not law-based. 
Obedience to rules is voluntary. Failure to obey rules typically results 
in loss of function.
Prescriptive Information was required to instruct the generation of 
sophisticated functionality in a prebiotic environment. This requirement 
of orchestration and programming is by far the most plaguing problem 
of abiogenesis science (Abel, 2015). Of interest to abiogenists is the 
ontological cause of utility within an inanimate context.
Shannon theory (itself conducted only by human agents) gives us the 
total number of binary-equivalent options (possibilities) from which an 
ideal path could be chosen. Shannon’s measure of Uncertainty does not 
measure the optimal choices that get us to the destination the fastest, or 
with the greatest computational efficiency. Shannon theory makes no 
purposeful choices. Shannon theory tells us nothing about how an al-
gorithm got optimized. The AT measurement is bogus. This supposedly 
naturalistic model is not naturalistic.
Shannon’s “reduced uncertainty” measurements are calculated after- 
the-fact of having achieved computational halting through wise pro-
gramming choices by agents. It represents the difference between all 
possible “steps” and the specific steps that produced the history of suc-
cessful computation. AT is blind to which happenstantial “choices” from 
among real computational options will halt. Again, that requires formal 
cybernetics, not inanimate physical law, constraint measurements, or 
possibility space.
We can measure Shannon’s Uncertainty to measure probability 
space. But that has nothing to do with function. An agent must use 
Reduced Uncertainty which first requires known halting Prescriptive 
Information to subtract from the statistical phase space. Even then, the 
measurement is only a measure of reduced uncertainty, not a measure of 
the specific Prescriptive Information choices that instruct halting suc-
cess most efficiently.
Reduced Uncertainty also relates only to the solution of a specific 
problem of interest. An inanimate environment has no problems of in-
terest. All of this requires agency, not just physicodynamic interactions.
The bottom line is that what is being appealed to is really nothing 
more than a mere phase/probability space, not a cybernetic (steered 
toward utility) space. What is actually being sold is a supposedly natu-
ralistic “algorithmic optimization” that in reality does not exist. A mere 
probability space cannot generate algorithms, achieve sophisticated 
assemblies, meaningful messages, or computation.
How exactly are the required purposeful choices being produced or 
measured? Only agents care about achieving a goal with the fewest 
number of operations. That is called cybernetics, not natural science! 
Laws and constraints can do no such thing.
The authors are proposing to measure the degree of causation diffi-
culty of molecular ensembles. Says Sharma et al., 
“We introduce a measure called assembly (A), capturing the degree of 
causation required to produce a given ensemble of objects.” (Sharma 
et al., 2023)
Is it fair to ask for clarification of the nature of these ensembles? Are 
these molecular ensembles all-inclusive? Are they all of equal value as 
stochastic ensembles? Do they include highly improbable and highly 
functional proteins, for example?
Axe found that the overall prevalence of protein sequences per-
forming a specific function by any domain-sized fold may be as low as 1 
in 1077, adding to the body of evidence that functional folds require 
highly extraordinary sequences (Axe, 2000, 2004).
Do these molecular assemblies include exons, highly functional 
introns, over 100,000 Circular RNA’s (circRNAs) (Liu et al., 2023; Liu 
and Chen, 2022a, b), microRNA sponges and regulators (Hansen et al., 
2013; Memczak et al., 2013), back-splicing (Welden et al., 2022), etc., 
with all of their instantiated linear digital nonphysical Prescriptive In-
formation (D’Onofrio et al., 2012a, b)? Do these “assemblies” include 
the specific locations of all the methyl or acetyl groups at certain posi-
tions to effect epigenetic controls? Did the “objects” record the pathway 
for their future synthesis?
AT authors constantly appeal to “discovery.” 
a) What did the “discovering,” chance or necessity?
b) What did the active-selection programming?
c) What equipment processed the programming?
d) What took notes and recorded all of the successful decision-node 
choices that could lead to future needed computational haltings?
e) How did inanimacy select for function over non function?
f) Did the four known forces of physics care whether the “assembly” 
achieved highly integrative homeostatic metabolic function rather 
than useless tar?
g) What is the difference in quantification between holistic formal 
success or failure?
h) How does the Assembly Index quantify the difficulty level of 
accomplishing even any of these specific tasks?
For AT to put a dent into the abiogenesis problem, it must quantify 
both physicodynamic and evolutionary challenge. The “causation diffi-
culty” of biotic molecules would likely be quite different from that of 
abiotic molecules.
Zenil et al. in three very recent 2024 papers continues to demonstrate 
that AT lacks empirical evidence that it is different from or outperforms 
other complexity indexes in connection with selection for molecular 
utility and evolution (Abrah˜ao FS et al., 2024; Ozelim et al., 2024) Zenil 
contends that AT proponents are promoting hyperbolic claims.
2.5.2. Can prescriptive information be measured?
Say AT authors, “The ‘assembly index’ is the number of steps on a 
shortest path producing the object.” 
• How was the shortest path determined?
• Was the shortest path physicodynamically determined, or was it 
chosen?
• Did the “objects” do the choosing?
• Did randomness actively “select” the shortest path to success?
• Did constraints or the laws of physics choose the shortest path to 
success?
No scientific justification exists for believing that stand-alone onto-
logical physicodynamic factors pursued the goal of “the shortest path.” 
Chance and necessity could not have generated or optimized process 
efficiency.
In reality, the “degree of causation difficulty” measurement would be 
the degree of cybernetic/computational difficulty. That would be a 
measurement of engineering difficulty, not a measurement of sponta-
neous physicodynamic difficulty. But, of course, the Prescriptive Infor-
mation needed to instruct what path to take is not directly measurable, 
as Shannon realized. Even after the specific halting computational path 
is enumerated, that particular path still lacks a direct measurement of 
effectual choices. Shannon Reduced Uncertainty does not instruct what 
choices specifically compute.
Turing’s halting problem is found to be inherent in this “degree of 
difficulty” quest. Can the laws of physics and chemistry outsmart 
Turing’s halting problem? Intelligent programmers can’t. Measurements 
of physicodynamic interactions cannot quantify cybernetic/computa-
tional/engineering function.
AT authors acknowledge that “Molecules with a high assembly index 
are very unlikely to form abiotically, and the probability of abiotic 
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
formation goes down as the value of the assembly index increases.” But 
computational and cybernetic success is far more problematic than that. 
The Universal Plausibility Metric ξ is way less than 1.0 for spontaneous 
formation of most any sophisticated protein (Abel, 2009e, d, 2011c, i). 
No plausible scientific explanation exists within this toy model.
Hazen et al. (Hazen et al., 2024) disagree with the contention that 
only life can generate molecular structures with an MA index (Molecular 
Assembly measure) ≥ 15. Both Hazen et al. and Zenil take issue with 
AT’s ability to differentiate between living and nonliving systems using 
single scalar values.
2.6. Human conceptualization limitations of AT
AT “reimagines the concept of matter" within assembly spaces,” 
(Sharma et al., 2023).
What exactly does our human “imagining” and “conceiving” today 
have to do with historical ontological Abiogenesis (what actually 
happened in an inanimate environment back then)? 
a. What did the imagining and conceiving in a prebiotic environment?
b. Did the physical “objects” do the imagining, or the AT imaginers 
about the objects?
c. Does this imagining constitute a physical ontological cause of purely 
physicodynamic effects?
d. Is this truly a naturalistic prebiotically plausible model?"
The imaginings of AT theorists are being manufactured not by 
“possibility space” or “eons of time,” but by purposeful agent choices of 
possibilities made in order “to make our model work for us.” The “rec-
onceptualizing” of human investigators did the choosing of the shortest, 
most efficient path, and then measured the shortest steps producing each 
biotically useful assemblies.
3. Experimental data and controls
Can there possibly be any more ideal data “sample size” than the 
entire history of human observation? What does this ideal sample size 
tell us about the hypothesis of “self-organization” and “emergence” of 
highly optimized, sophisticated, uniquely functional “molecular 
assemblies”?
We could calculate a very crude total number of observations in 
human history. Crude though it may be, that number would nonetheless 
certainly establish an excellent sample space and source of controls for 
all known human observations.
The Population Reference Bureau (PRB) suggests that approximately 
108 billion people have lived on earth. That’s 1.08 × 1011 people. 
Suppose each person averaged only a hundred observations per day. 
That would be 36,500 observations per year per person, or 3.65 × 104. If 
the average life expectancy was only 50 years, that would be (3.65 ×
104) times (5 × 101) per each person’s lifetime.
(1.08 × 1011) X (3.65 × 104) X (5 × 101) = 1.971 × 1017 = Total 
Observations. Most of these would not have been recorded. But one 
recorded observation can summarize the history of many observers and 
observations. We’ll tentatively use 1015 observations as a very crude, 
relative number of all human observations throughout history.
The hypothesis inviting falsification in this paper is the following:
“None of the “molecular assemblies” listed in Table 1 has ever been 
observed to “self-organize” or “emerge” spontaneously from inanimate 
nature in the history of human observation.”
4. Results
Suppose no “molecular assembly” theorist can cite a single incident 
of spontaneous “self-organization” or “emergence” of any one of these 
entities in this table, independent of active agent selection.
The hypothesis not only stands unfalsified, but should immediately 
rise well above theory status to virtual paradigm level. The total absence 
of any such observations in human history affirms in a powerful way the 
fundamental F > P Principle (The Formalism > Physicality Principle) 
(Abel, 2011e). This Principle emphasizes Formalism’s dominion and 
control over physicality. The F > P Principle defines the ontological 
primacy of Formalism and its governance of Physicality. Physicality is 
governed by Mathematical laws. We dichotomize natural science from 
Engineering for good reasons.
Table 1 
Some simple, common “molecular assemblies” never having been observed in human history to come into existence apart from agent active selection, steering and 
control with the aim of achieving usefulness.
Simple Molecular Assemblies 
with uniquely valuable 
functions:
Controls: 
Huge sample size of all 
human observations in 
recorded history
Total number of human observations of self- 
assembly/self-organization/emergence of 
each of these entities in recorded history
% of spontaneous 
emergence out of total # of 
historical observations
Universal Plausbility Metric for 
the hypothesis of this 
“emergence” and “self- 
organization”
Paper clip >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Pencil >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
8 ½ X 11clean white sheet of 
paper
>1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
A Highlighter >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Wooden clothespin >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Rubber stamp saying “Filed” >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Stapler >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Music stand >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Clock >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Printer >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Suspension Bridge >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Guggenheim museum building >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Mars rocket >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Multi-step biochemical 
pathway
>1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Representational sign/symbol 
system
>1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Molecular machines >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Subcellular Nanocomputers >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Subcellular Computation >1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
Homeostatic metabolism far 
from equilibrium in a hostile 
environment
>1015 0 0 ξ = 0, or <1.0
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
A simple paper clip comes into existence only by active selection, not 
by raw physicodynamics. Active selection is a formalism. Previous 
research has demonstrated that active selection is absolutely essential 
even for molecular evolution to occur (Abel, 2024a).
The Data is perfectly clear. The results indicate the inadequacy of 
what natural science has always labeled “natural causation” to generate 
any of these formally motivated and enabled molecular assemblies. 
These are all molecular assemblies specifically tailored to perform 
needed functions to which the laws, constraints and forces of physics 
and chemistry are blind. In short, these entities, devices, tools, machines 
as effects have never been observed to come into existence from 
“Physicodynamic Causation” alone. Some additional factor is required 
for their generation into existence.
5. Discussion of results
The Universal Plausibility Principle requires peer review rejection of 
any hypothesis in any field of natural science that measures out with a 
Universal Plausibility Metric of ξ = < 1.0 (Abel, 2009e, 2011i). The 
hypothesis that any one of the effects in this table was caused by 
Physicodynamics alone is fully negated by the Universal Plausibility 
Principle published in 2009 (Abel, 2009d, 2011i) No letters to the Edi-
tor, no conference debate objections, and no sequentially published 
criticisms of this natural science-wide general Principle of Scientific 
Method Analysis has ever arisen in 15 years.
Even if the estimate of total number of human observations in history 
were greatly lowered to only 1010, the results would be the same. The 
Universal Plausibility Metric ξ would still be below <1.0, requiring peer- 
review rejection of the self-organization/spontaneous emergence hy-
pothesis as a respectable model for plausible consideration as a 
respectable scientific hypothesis.
Belief that any one of these molecular assemblies in the table self- 
organized and emerged spontaneously (naturalistically from Phys-
icodynamics alone) is scientifically implausible, and should be rejected 
by any Editor and reputable peer review. Assembly theory is bogus even 
before trying to measure the level of difficulty.
What accounts for none of these molecular assemblies ever having 
been observed to “organize itself into existence”? Why has not a single 
one of these “molecular assemblies” ever spontaneously “emerged”? The 
answer is that all of them require steering, controls (not mere constraints 
(Abel, 2010), a valuing of functionality, aims, goals, and 
engineering-like decisions to bring them into existence). Physicody-
namic laws and constraints alone cannot generate them. The four known 
forces of physics and thermodynamic possibilities are inadequate to 
explain their causation, existence and utility.
6. Conclusions from the data
How did any molecular assembly in Table 1 come into existence, 
then? Only by outright engineering choices. No other form of causation 
other than Choice Causation can cause the effect of an algorithmically 
optimized paper clip.
Highly tailored functionality cannot be optimized in molecular as-
semblies without active selection at the time of assembly. Algorithmic 
optimization is impossible without Choice Causation. Active Selections 
in pursuit of function had to be made prior to the existence of any of 
those functions. Function not only had to be anticipated, but pursued 
through decision-node choices and particular configurable-switch set-
tings needed to integrate circuits.
Paper clips, pencils, 8 ½ X 11 clean white smooth pieces of paper, 
Highlighters, clothespins, and everything else in Table 1 came into ex-
istence only via controls, not constraints or laws. Algorithmic optimi-
zation decisions and choices originate only from the far side of the 
Cybernetic Cut, not the near side (Abel, 2008b, 2011b). Very real Choice 
Causation was conducted into physicality via the one-way Configurable 
Switch Bridge that alone traverses the infinitely deep ravine between 
formalism and physicality. The mathematical laws of physics, for 
example, emanate from the far side of the Cybernetic Cut. Nothing on 
the near physical side can influence anything on the far side of the Cy-
bernetic Cut. The configurable Switch Bridge is a narrow one-way bridge 
over the infinitely deep ravine that divides formalism from physicality 
(Abel, 2008b, 2011b).
Self-organization is a nonsense term and concept that is self- 
contradictory. “Self-organization” and “emergence” are notions that 
have absolutely no place in natural science, and constitute a non-viable 
hypothesis that should be rejected by editors and peer review in any 
natural science journal.
7. Overall discussion
Jonathan Bartlett makes a valiant effort to sort out teleonomy from 
teleology in “Causal Capabilities of Teleology and Teleonomy in Life and 
Evolution” (Bartlett, 2023b) The whole point of teleonomy is to natu-
ralize teleology. Teleology can only originate from the far side of the 
Cybernetic Cut (Abel, 2008b, 2011b, 2024a, b, c). Teleonomy does not 
explain how physicodynamics alone on the near side could have pursued 
or generated the formal programing choices needed for cybernetic 
computational success.
Life is fundamentally formal. Life is ongoing computational success, 
otherwise known as correlated, integrated cybernetic haltings. The 
latter is every bit as formal as mathematics, logic theory, language, and 
representational symbol systems. None of these aspects of reality can be 
reduced to mere physico-chemical phenomena.
Time, including four billion years of time, is not a cause of any effect! 
Lee Cronin says the mechanism was four billion years of “technology”— 
“four billion years of search, destroy and survive.”— (Cronin, 2023) Are 
“search” and “technology” natural science terms? Do they have natu-
ralistic meaning, or formal engineering/cybernetic meaning? How 
exactly did an inanimate, prebiotic environment “search” for or achieve 
“technology”? Can we not see how utterly fallacious is the entire pre-
supposition of a purely physicalistic orchestration, assembly and spon-
taneous generation of life? Even “trial and error” constitutes a search 
mechanism. An inanimate environment conducted no searches!
The most fundamental need of life-origin research is to elucidate the 
source of orchestrational prowess needed to prescribe and formally 
organize even the simplest imaginable homeostatic proto-metabolism 
(Abel, 2011b, d, e, f, h, k, 2012, 2015). It requires explaining the 
mechanisms of generating the eventual cybernetic processing of that 
programming by sophisticated machinery. Biochemical pathways must 
not only be prescribed; they must be formally processed by subcellular 
nanocomputers. Molecular machine utility must be orchestrated into 
highly conceptual integrated circuits. Add to this the myriads of syn-
thetic biochemical problems (Thaxton et al., 2020; Tour, 2020, 2024).
Does AT really measure the steering and control needed to craft the 
primary, secondary and tertiary structure of highly efficacious enzymes? 
If AT pre-assumes nothing more than chance and necessity, ignoring the 
third fundamental category of reality (Active Selection) (Abel, 2011h, 
2024a), it is guaranteed that it’s measurements of difficulty will be 
bogus.
The reason “laws do not predict emergence,” as AT authors admit, is 
that laws cannot produce Choice Causation in pursuit of formal function 
(Active Selection from among real physicodynamic options).
Successful measurement of the challenge of functional assembly of 
each and every physico-chemical sophisticated molecule, and the diffi-
culty of orchestrational integration, should not be naively proclaimed.
AT is little more than the same embarrassing boondoggle of Richard 
Dawkin’s 1986 Blind Watchmaker model of supposed evolution of a 
linguistically functional phrase (Dawkins, 1986). The model was alto-
gether dependent upon the agent experimenter’s successive active se-
lections. Dawkins chose which phrase to keep building on in the 
step-wise construction of message meaning. Linguistic rules must be 
followed in any language. Dawkins was blind to his own investigator 
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
involvement in his experimental design. So are Sharma et al.
Agent Choice Causation and agent Concept are being snuck in 
through the back door of AT’s supposedly naturalistic model. Imagina-
tion is being conveniently confused with “history” and “possibilities” in 
“conceiving” computational success without any basis for active selec-
tion. AT ignores Turing’s cybernetic halting problem.
Quantum mechanics doesn’t even come close to explaining the en-
gineering realities of subcellular life. As is the case with irreversible 
nonequilibrium thermodynamics, mere probabilism obtains, not any 
active selection that might cause the effect of formal “usefulness.” 
Quantum mechanics is inseparable from extensive epistemological 
confusion and misrepresentations of pseudo-engineering prowess.
AT cannot measure the orchestrational challenge of even a theoret-
ical protometabolism. Life is not just a “molecular assembly.” Physico- 
chemically, assembly is nowhere near as likely as disassembly. Life is 
a highly integrated formal system of innumerable cybernetic computa-
tional operations. Life performs innumerable sophisticated holistic 
functions in concert through time far from equilibrium. Life consists of 
Sustained Functional Systems (SFS) (Abel, 2012b), not just thermody-
namic momentary states. Though instantiated into physicality, life is 
fundamentally formal rather than physicodynamic.
Life is the ultimate in algorithmic optimization. Algorithms cannot 
be optimized without active selection. Selections must be made “in order 
to…” Such choices cannot be attributed to evolution. Choices at true 
decision nodes must be made prior to the realization of any secondarily 
favored phenotypic function of already-living organisms.
8. Conclusions
“AT” does not appear to be a naturalistic prebiotic cause-and-effect 
model that will benefit abiogenesis research. Present-day reconceptu-
alization’s of physicality in the minds of scientist agents have little 
relevance to what actually happened physicodynamically in a prebiotic 
environment. Abiogenists need stand-alone models of self-organization 
and emergence that can be empirically verified without investigator 
involvement in experimental design.
AT authors have erroneously promoted AT’s capability of differen-
tiating biological from inanimate physical phenomena. No real diver-
gence of Assembly Theory from LZ compression exists in the model. AT 
authors’ claims are very overstated based on the data and methods of 
analysis. Instead, AT shows asymptotic convergence to mere LZ 
compression and Shannon Entropy (Abrah˜ao FS et al., 2024; Ozelim 
et al., 2024; Uthamacumaran et al., 2024; Zenil, 2023, 2024). Nothing 
new exists in AT quantification approaches relevant to distinguishing 
the formation of life from nonlife. Their AT assembly index reduces to 
nothing more than a special case of Zenil’s decade-old block Decom-
position Method. AT simply rehashes elementary principles of 
complexity that have nothing to do with abiogenesis.
In reality, empirical evidence of formal “self-organization” or 
“emergence” is sorely lacking. Something would have to already exist in 
order to organize itself into existence. “Self-organization” is a nonsense 
term that has no place in scientific literature. Under no circumstances do 
formalisms ever spontaneously “emerge” from physicodynamics. All 
formalisms invariably require active selection from among real phys-
icodynamic options if those formalisms are to be instantiated into 
physicality. Life is first and foremost a constellation of instantiated 
formalisms. Life is the ultimate in a concert of integrated halting com-
putations (Abel, 2011l).
Mere entropic and statistically-based complexity is not synonymous 
with life. Many inanimate phenomena are complex. Life is conceptually 
complex, not just complex. Conceptual complexity originates only from 
the far side of the Cybernetic Cut—the great ravine that divides mass/ 
energy physicodynamics from formal active selection, Choice Causation 
and Prescriptive Information generation (Abel, 2008b). Controls from 
the far side of the Cybernetic Cut constitute the very hallmark of life. 
This is clearly established by life’s programming with Prescriptive 
Information that employs Material Symbol Systems. Representational 
instructions are instantiated into physicality using physical symbol ve-
hicles. The cybernetic processing of life’s programming requires very 
sophisticated nanocomputers and molecular machines. Not a single one 
of these highly unique devices has ever been observed to be generated by 
spontaneous molecular assembly. The same Cybernetic Cut divides en-
gineering from natural science.
AT “measurers” are intelligent choosing agents who conflate mere 
complexity and “novelty” with homeostatic metabolism in their minds. 
Formal orchestration is required to organize even a theoretical proto-
metabolism. Neither the physical “objects” (the spontaneous molecular 
“assemblies” [stochastic ensembles]) nor the fixed laws and constraints 
of physics and chemistry can account for the hundreds of highly tailored 
essential players needed for abiogenesis. No basis for orchestration of 
any bona fide formal organization is presented by AT. Spontaneous 
homeostatic protometabolism is just religiously and blindly believed to 
have occurred in accord with the purely metaphysical Kuhnian para-
digm rut that pre-assumes axiomatically that “Physicality is sufficient.” 
The cardinal faith and fanatical pontification of philosophic naturalism 
is that inanimate “Physicodynamics orchestrated life.”
Irreversible nonequilibrium thermodynamics has not lived up to its 
hype. Neither have Complexity, Chaos and Assembly Theories. Molec-
ular evolution is impossible without active selection (Abel, 2009c, 2011f, 
2024c). If AT, Complexity Theory, Chaos Theory, Irreversible 
Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics, Quantum Mechanics and Molecular 
Evolution Theory are collectively so capable of explaining abiogenesis, 
why have we not seen scores of instances of spontaneous generation of 
life over the last few centuries? We have never witnessed the sponta-
neous formation of a simple piece of metal alloy of constant diameter 
called “wire.” What empirical or rational justification exists for believing 
that homeostatic metabolism just “emerged” from nothing but chance 
and necessity?
Science, biology especially, must stop excluding the third repeatedly 
observable fundamental category of reality—Active Selection (Abel, 
2011h, 2024b, c)—from its study of objective reality. It must at least be 
willing to acknowledge the reality of subcellular biological engineering 
and computation when it sees it. Science requires self-honesty, not 
obfuscation. The programming, cybernetic processing, computational 
halting, nanocomputers, and molecular machines employed by even the 
simplest organisms are all formalisms. Life is controlled, not con-
strained. Life is rule-based, not law-based. Life is as fundamentally 
formal, abstract, conceptual and nonphysical as the mathematical laws of 
physics themselves.
Funding
The Origin of Life Science Foundation, Inc. Abe3-2024.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2024.105378.
References
Abel, D.L., 2006. Life origin: the role of complexity at the edge of chaos. In: Chandler, J., 
Kay, P. (Eds.), Washington Academy of Science 2006, Lecture Delivered at the 
Headquarters of the. National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA (pdf of PowerPoint 
available from: www.DavidAbel.us. Last accessed 11/2024. 
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Abel, D.L., 2007. Complexity, self-organization, and emergence at the edge of chaos in 
life-origin models. J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 93, 1–20 (also available from: www.Dav 
idAbel.us. Last accessed 11/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2008a. The Capabilities of Chaos and Complexity Society for Chaos Theory: 
Society for Complexity in Psychology and the Life Sciences. International Conference 
at Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA. 
Abel, D.L., 2008b. The ‘cybernetic Cut’: progressing from description to prescription in 
systems theory the open cybernetics and systemics. Journal 2, 252–262 (Also 
available at: www.DavidAbel.us. Last accessed 211/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2009a. The Biosemiosis of Prescriptive Information Semiotica 2009, vols. 
1–19 also available at: www.DavidAbel.us. Last accessed 11/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2009b. The capabilities of chaos and complexity. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 10, 247–291 
(Also availabel at. www.DavidAbel.us. Last accessed 249/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2009c. The GS (Genetic Selection) Frontiers in Bioscience 14, 2959-2969 
Principle (Also availabel at www.DavidAbel.us Last accessed Nov 2024).
Abel, D.L., 2009d. The universal plausibility metric (UPM) & principle (UPP). Theor. 
Biol. Med. Model. 6.
Abel, D.L., 2009e. The universal plausibility metric (UPM) & principle (UPP). Theor. 
Biol. Med. Model. 6, 27.
Abel, D.L., 2010. Constraints vs. Controls: progressing from description to prescription in 
systems theory open cybernetics and systemics. Journal 4, 14–27. http://DavidAbel. 
us. Last accessed 11/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2011a. The birth of protocells. In: Abel, D.L. (Ed.), The First Gene: the Birth of 
Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. LongView Press–Academic, Biol. Res. 
Div., pp. 189–230. New York, N.Y. http://DavidAbel.us. Last accessed in 111/2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2011b. The cybernetic Cut and configurable switch (CS) bridge. In: Abel, D.L. 
(Ed.), The First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. 
LongView Press–Academic, Biol. Res. Div, New York, N.Y., pp. 55–74, 55-74. 
http://DavidAbel.us. Last accessed in 11/2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2011c. Examining specific life-origin models for plausibility. In: Abel, D.L. 
(Ed.), The First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. 
LongView Press Academic, pp. 231–272. http://DavidAbel.us. Last accessed in 239/ 
2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2011d. The First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal 
Control. LongView Press-Academic: Biolog. Res. Div., New York, NY, p. 389.
Abel, D.L., 2011e. The formalism > physicality (F > P) principle. In: Abel, D.L. (Ed.), The 
First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. LongView 
Press Academic, New York, N.Y., pp. 325–351. http://DavidAbel.us (last accessed 
311/2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2011f. The genetic selection (GS) principle in: Abel, D.L. The First Gene: the 
Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. LongView Press–Academic, 
New York, N.Y., pp. 161–188. http://DavidAbel.us. Last accessed in Nov 2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2011g. Linear digital material symbol systems (MSS). In: Abel, D.L. (Ed.), The 
First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. LongView 
Press–Academic, Biol. Res. Div., pp. 135–160. New York, N.Y. http://DavidAbel.us. 
Last accessed in 111/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2011h. The three fundamental categories of reality. In: Abel, D.L. (Ed.), The 
First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. LongView 
Press-Academic: Biolog. Res. Div., New York, N.Y., pp. 19–54. http://DavidAbel.us. 
Last accessed in 11/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2011i. The universal plausibility metric and principle. In: Abel, D.L. (Ed.), The 
First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. LongView 
Press–Academic, New York, N.Y., pp. 305–324. http://DavidAbel.us (last accessed in 
Nov 2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2011j. What is ProtoBioCybernetics? In: Abel, D.L. (Ed.), The First Gene: the 
Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. LongView Press-Academic: 
Biolog. Res. Div., New York, N.Y., pp. 1–18. http://DavidAbel.us. Last accessed in 
11/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2011k. What utility does order, pattern or complexity prescribe? In: Abel, D.L. 
(Ed.), The First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal Control. 
LongView Press–Academic, Biol. Res. Div., pp. 75–116. New York, N.Y. http://Dav 
idAbel.us. Last accessed in 111/2024. 
Abel, D.L., 2011l. Is life unique? Life 2, 106–134. https://doi.org/10.3390/life2010106 
(also available from: www.DavidAbel.us. Last accessed Dec, 2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2012. Moving ’far from equilibrium’ in a prebiotic environment: the role of 
Maxwell’s Demon in life origin. In: Seckbach, J., Gordon, R. (Eds.), Genesis - in the 
Beginning: Precursors of Life, Chemical Models and Early Biological Evolution. 
Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 219–236. http://DavidAbel.us. Last accessed in 211/2024). 
Abel, D.L., 2015. Primordial Prescription: the Most Plaguing Problem of Life Origin 
Science LongView. Press Academic, New York, N. Y. 
Abel, D.L., 2024a. Selection in molecular evolution. Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Science 107, 54–63.
Abel, D.L., 2024b. What is Life? Archives of Microbiology and Immunology 8, 428–443.
Abel, D.L., 2024c. Why is abiogenesis such a Tough Nut to Crack? Archives of 
Microbiology and Immunology 8, 338–364.
Abel, D.L., Trevors, J.T., 2005. Three subsets of sequence complexity and their relevance 
to biopolymeric information. Theor. Biol. Med. Model. 2, 29–45. www.DavidAbel.us
(Last accessed Nov, 2023). 
Abel, D.L., Trevors, J.T., 2006a. More than Metaphor: Genomes Are Objective Sign 
Systems Journal of BioSemiotics, vol. 1, pp. 253–267 (also available from: www.Dav 
idAbel.us. Last accessed 211/2024). 
Abel, D.L., Trevors, J.T., 2006b. Self-Organization vs. Self-Ordering events in life-origin 
models Physics of Life Reviews 3, 211–228. www.DavidAbel.us. Last accessed Nov 
2024). 
Abel, D.L., Trevors, J.T., 2007. More than metaphor: genomes are objective sign systems. 
In: Barbieri, M. (Ed.), BioSemiotic Research Trends. Nova Science Publishers, New 
York, pp. 1–15. Downloadable from. http://DavidAbel.us. Last accessed 11/2024). 
Abrah˜ao Fs, H.-O.S., Kiani, N.A., Tegn´er, J., Zenil, H., 2024. Assembly Theory is an 
approximation to algorithmic complexity based on LZ compression that does not 
explain selection or evolution. PLOS Complex Systems 1.
Andreani, M., Montagnac, G., Fellah, C., Hao, J., Vandier, F., Daniel, I., Pisapia, C., 
Galipaud, J., Lilley, M.D., Früh Green, G.L., Borensztajn, S., M´enez, B., 2023. The 
rocky road to organics needs drying. Nat. Commun. 14, 347.
Axe, D.D., 2000. Extreme functional sensitivity to conservative amino acid changes on 
enzyme exteriors. J. Mol. Biol. 301, 585–595.
Axe, D.D., 2004. Estimating the prevalence of protein sequences adopting functional 
enzyme folds. J. Mol. Biol. 341, 1295–1315.
Bartlett, J., 2023a. Causal capabilities of teleology and teleonomy in life and evolution. 
Organon F 30, 222–254.
Bartlett, J.I., 2023b. Causal capabilities of teleology and teleonomy in life and evolution. 
Organon F 30, 222–254.
Benner, S.A., 2023. Assembly Theory and Agnostic Life Finding. Primordial Scoop, 
e20230324.
Branscomb, E.R.M., 2019. On the beneficent thickness of water. Interface Focus 
92019006120190061.
Cardoso, S.S.S., Cartwright, J.H.E., Cejkova, J., Cronin, L., De Wit, A., Giannerini, S., 
Horvath, D., Rodrigues, A., Russell, M.J., Sainz-Diaz, C.I., Toth, A., 2020. 
Chemobrionics: from self-assembled material architectures to the origin of life. Artif. 
Life 26, 315–326.
Church, A., 1936. An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory. Am. J. Math. 58, 
345–363.
Copley, S.D., Smith, E., Morowitz, H.J., 2007. The origin of the RNA world: co-evolution 
of genes and metabolism. Bioorg. Chem. 35, 430–443.
Cronin, L., 2023. Lee Cronin on Life, Assembly Theory, Evolution, Entropy, Time | Thing 
in Itself W/Ashar Khan.
Cronin, L., Fridman, L., 2024. Assembly Theory of Evolution Explained.
Cronin, L., Walker, S.I., 2016. ORIGIN OF LIFE. Beyond prebiotic chemistry. Science 352, 
1174–1175.
D’onofrio, D.J., Abel, D.L., 2014. Redundancy of the genetic code enables translational 
pausing. Front. Genet. 5, 140. Open access. 
D’Onofrio, D.J., Abel, D.L., Johnson, D.E., 2012a. Dichotomy in the definition of 
prescriptive information suggests both prescribed data and prescribed algorithms: 
biosemiotics applications in genomic systems Theor. Biol Med Model 9, 8. Also 
available at: www.DavidAbel.us. last accessed 11/2024). 
D’Onofrio, D.J., Abel, D.L., Johnson, D.E., 2012b. Dichotomy in the definition of 
prescriptive information suggests both prescribed data and prescribed algorithms: 
biosemiotics applications in genomic systems. Theor. Biol. Med. Model. 9, 8. Last 
accessed 9/2024). 
Dawkins, R., 1986. The Blind Watchmaker. W. W. Norton and Co, New York. 
Durston, K.K., Chiu, D.K., Abel, D.L., Trevors, J.T., 2007. Measuring the Functional 
Sequence Complexity of Proteins Theoretical Biology & Medical Modelling, vol. 4, 
pp. 1–14 (Also available from: www.DavidAbel.us. Last Accessed 11/2024. 
Durston, K.K., Chiu, D.K.Y., 2011. Functional sequence complexity in biopolymers. In: 
Abel, D.L. (Ed.), The First Gene: the Birth of Programming, Messaging and Formal 
Control. LongView Press–Academic, Biol. Res. Div., New York, N.Y., pp. 117–133
Esposito, J., Kakar, J., Khokhar, T., Noll-Walker, T., Omar, F., Christen, A., James 
Cleaves, H., Sandora, M., 2024. Comparing the complexity of written and molecular 
symbolic systems. Biosystems 244, 105297.
Glansdorf, P., Prigogine, I., 1971. Thermodynamics of Structure, Stability, and 
Fluctuations. Wiley, London. 
Gordon, B.L., 2013. Biological information and self-organizational complexity theory: 
introductory comments. In: Marks II, R.J., Behe, M.J., Dembski, W.A., Gordon, B.L., 
Sanford, J.C. (Eds.), Biological Information: New Perspectives. World Scientific, 
Cornell Conference Proceedings, pp. 509–512.
Guimar˜aes, R., 2015a. The self-referential genetic code is biologic and includes the error 
minimization property. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 45, 69–75.
Guimaraes, R.C., 2004. The genetic code as a self-referential and functional system. 
International conference on computation. Communications and Control 
Technologies 7, 160–165.
Guimaraes, R.C., 2010. Metabolic basis for the self-referential genetic code. Orig. Life 
Evol. Biosph.
Guimaraes, R.C., 2011. Metabolic basis for the self-referential genetic code. Orig. Life 
Evol. Biosph. 41, 357–371.
Guimaraes, R.C., 2014. Essentials in the life process indicated by the self-referential 
genetic code. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 44, 269–277.
Guimaraes, R.C., 2015. The self-referential genetic code is biologic and includes the error 
minimization property. Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 03/2015 82–86.
Guimaraes, R.C., 2017. Self-Referential encoding on modules of anticodon pairs—roots 
of the biological flow system. Life 7, 39.
Guimar˜aes, R.C., 2015b. Essentials in the life process indicated by the self-referential 
genetic code. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 2015, 1–11.
Guimar˜aes, R.C., 2019. Roots of complexity in the self-referential genetic code. In: 
Wegner, L.H., Lüttge, U. (Eds.), Emergence and Modularity in Life Sciences. Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 117–143.
Guimaraes, R.C., Moreira, C.H., de Farias, S.T., 2008. A self-referential model for the 
formation of the genetic code. Theor. Biosci. 127, 249–270.
Hamming, R.W., 1980. The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics. Am. Math. Mon. 
87, 81–90.
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Hansen, T.B., Jensen, T.I., Clausen, B.H., Bramsen, J.B., Finsen, B., Damgaard, C.K., 
Kjems, J., 2013. Natural RNA circles function as efficient microRNA sponges. Nature 
495, 384–388.
Hazen, R.M., Griffin, P.L., Carothers, J.M., Szostak, J.W., 2007. Functional information 
and the emergence of biocomplexity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 (Suppl. 1), 
8574–8581.
Hazen, R.M.B., Peter, C., Cleaves, I.I., James, H., Downs, Robert T., Krivovichev, Sergey 
V., Wong, Michael L., 2024. Molecular Assembly Indices of Mineral 
Heteropolyanions: Some Abiotic Molecules Are as Complex as Large Biomolecules, 
vol. 21. Journal of the Royal Society Interface.
Hernandez, C., Michaelian, K., 2022. Dissipative photochemical abiogenesis of the 
purines. Entropy 24.
Hernday, A., Krabbe, M., Braaten, B., Low, D., 2002. Self-perpetuating epigenetic pili 
switches in bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (Suppl. 4), 16470–16476.
Jaeger, J., 2024. Assembly theory: what it does and what it does not do. J. Mol. Evol. 92, 
87–92.
Kolmogorov, A.N., 1965. Three approaches to the quantitative definition of the concept 
"quantity of information". Probl. Inf. Transm. 1, 1–7.
Kolmogorov, A.N., 1983. Combinatorial foundations of information theory and the 
calculus of probabilities. Russ. Math. Surv. 38, 29–40.
Kondratyeva, L.G., Dyachkova, M.S., Galchenko, A.V., 2022. The origin of genetic code 
and translation in the framework of current concepts on the origin of life. 
Biochemistry (Moscow) 87, 150–169.
Lahav, N., 1991. Prebiotic co-evolution of self-replication and translation or RNA world? 
J. Theor. Biol. 151, 531–539.
Lahav, N., 1993. The RNA-world and co-evolution hypotheses and the origin of life: 
implications, research strategies and perspectives. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 23, 
329–344.
Lambert, P.A., 2020. The order-chaos dynamic of creativity. Creativ. Res. J. 32, 431–446.
Liu, C., Wu, X., Gokulnath, P., Li, G., Xiao, J., 2023. The functions and mechanisms of 
translatable circular RNAs. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therapeut. 384, 52–60.
Liu, C.X., Chen, L.L., 2022a. Circular RNAs: characterization, cellular roles, and 
applications. Cell 185, 2016–2034.
Liu, C.X., Chen, L.L., 2022b. Circular RNAs: characterization, cellular roles, and 
applications. Cell 185, 2390.
Liu, Y., Mathis, C., Bajczyk, M.D., Marshall, S.M., Wilbraham, L., Cronin, L., 2021. 
Exploring and mapping chemical space with molecular assembly trees. Sci. Adv. 7, 
eabj2465.
Łukaszyk, S., 2024. Assembly Theory of Binary Message Bitstrings.
Marshall, S.M., C, Carrick, E., et al., 2021a. Identifying molecules as biosignatures with 
assembly theory and mass spectrometry. Nat. Commun. 12.
Marshall, S.M., Mathis, C., Carrick, E., Keenan, G., Cooper, G.J.T., Graham, H., 
Craven, M., Gromski, P.S., Moore, D.G., Walker, S.I., Cronin, L., 2021b. Identifying 
molecules as biosignatures with assembly theory and mass spectrometry. Nat. 
Commun. 12, 3033.
Mathis, C., Patarroyo, Y.K., Cronin, L., 2024. Understanding Assembly Indices, Molecular 
Assembly. Cronin Group.
Mayr, E., 1965. Cause and effect in biology (About Teleonomy). In: Lerner, D. (Ed.), 
Cause and Effect. Free Press, New York, pp. 33–50.
McIntosh, A.C., 2006. Functional information and entropy in living systems. In: 
Brebbia, C.A., Suchrov, L.J., P, P. (Eds.), Design and Nature III: Comparing Design in 
Nature with Science and Engineering. WIT Press, U.K. 
Memczak, S., Jens, M., Elefsinioti, A., Torti, F., Krueger, J., Rybak, A., Maier, L., 
Mackowiak, S.D., Gregersen, L.H., Munschauer, M., Loewer, A., Ziebold, U., 
Landthaler, M., Kocks, C., le Noble, F., Rajewsky, N., 2013. Circular RNAs are a large 
class of animal RNAs with regulatory potency. Nature 495, 333–338.
Michaelian, K., 2017a. Microscopic dissipative structuring and proliferation at the origin 
of life. Heliyon 3, e00424.
Michaelian, K., 2017b. Microscopic dissipative structuring at the origin of life. bioRxiv, 
179382.
Michaelian, K., 2018. Homochirality through photon-induced denaturing of RNA/DNA at 
the origin of life. Life 8.
Michaelian, K., 2021. The dissipative photochemical origin of life: UVC abiogenesis of 
adenine. Entropy 23, 217.
Michaelian, K., 2022. Non-equilibrium thermodynamic foundations of the origin of life. 
Foundations 2, 308–337.
Michaelian, K.R.O., 2019. Prebiotic fatty acid vesicles through photochemical dissipative 
structuring. Rev. Cubana Quím. 31, 354–370.
Miles, B., 2023. Can Physics Predict Evolution? - Assembly Theory Explained.
Morales, J.M., Michaelian, K., 2020. Photon dissipation as the origin of information 
encoding in RNA and DNA. Entropy 22.
Nicolis, G., Prigogine, I., 1977. Self-Organization in Nonequilibirum Systems: from 
Dissipative Structures to Order through Fluctuations. Wiley-Interscience, New York. 
Nicolis, G., Prigogine, I., 1989. Exploring Complexity. Freeman, New York. 
Onsager, L., 1931. Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. Physical review. 
American Physical Society (APS) 37, 405–426.
Onsager, L., 1968. Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Ozelim, L., Uthamacumaran, A., Abrah˜ao, F.S., Kiani, N.A., Zenil, H., 2024. Assembly 
theory reduced to Shannon entropy and rendered redundant by naive statistical 
algorithms. arxiv_logo_cs_arXiv:2408.15108 10.
Ozturk, S.F.a.S., Dimitar, D., 2022. On the origins of life’s homochirality: inducing 
enantiomeric excess with spin-polarized electrons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 119.
Pittendrigh, C.S., 1958. Adaptation, natural selection, and behavior; Coined 
"Teleonomy". In: Roe, A., Simpson, G.G. (Eds.), Behavior and Evolution. Yale 
University Press, New Haven, pp. 390–416, 394. 
Prigogine, I., 1961. Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes, second ed. 
Interscience, New York. 
Prigogine, I., 1962. Introduction to Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics. Wiley- 
Interscience, New York. 
Prigogine, I., 1967. Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes. John 
Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, USA. 
Prigogine, I., 1980. From Being to Becoming. W. H. Freeman and Co, San Francisco. 
Prigogine, I., 1997. The End of Certainty. The Free Press, New York, pp. 161–162.
Prigogine, I., Lefever, R., Goldbetter, A., Herschkowitz-Kauffman, M., 1969. Symmetry 
breaking instabilities in biological systems. Nature, Lond. 223, 913.
Prigogine, I., Mayne, F., George, C., de Haan, M., 1977. Microscopic theory of 
irreversible processes. PNAS USA 74, 4152–4156.
Prigogine, I., Nicholis, G., Babloyantz, A., 1972a. Thermodynamics of evolution. The 
functional order maintained within living systems seems to defy the Second Law; 
nonequilibrium thermodynamics describes how such systems come to terms with 
entropy. Physics Today November 23–28.
Prigogine, I., Nicholis, G., Babloyantz, A., 1972b. Thermodynamics of evolution. The 
idea of nonequilibrium order and of the search for stability extend Darwin’s concept 
back to the prebiotic. Physics Today December 38–44.
Prigogine, I., Nicolis, G., 1971. Biological order, structure and instabilities. Q. Rev. 
Biophys. 4, 107–148.
Prigogine, I., Stengers, I., 1984. Order out of chaos. Heinemann 285–287, 297–301. 
London. 
Reese, H.W., 1994. Teleology and teleonomy in behavior analysis. Behav. Analyst 17, 
75–91.
Rocha, L.M., 1995a. Artificial semantically closed objects. Communication and 
Cognition-Artificial Intelligence 12, 63–90.
Rocha, L.M., 1995b. Contextual genetic algorithms: evolving developmental rules. In: 
Moran, J., Moreno, A., Merelo, J.J., Chacon, P. (Eds.), Advances in Artificial Life. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 368–382.
Rocha, L.M., 1995c. Self-Reference in Cognitive and Biological Systems.
Schwieterman, E.W.K., Nancy, Y., Parenteau, Mary N., Harman, Chester E., 
Dassarma, Shiladitya, Fisher, Theresa M., Arney, Giada N., Hartnett, Hilairy E., 
Reinhard, Christopher T., Olson, Stephanie L., Meadows, Victoria S., Cockell, Charles 
S., Walker, Sara I., Grenfell, John Lee, Hegde, Siddharth, Rugheimer, Sarah, 
Hu, Renyu, Lyons, Timothy W., 2018. Exoplanet biosignatures: a review of remotely 
detectable signs of life. Astrobiology 18, 663–708.
Shannon, C., 1948a. Part I and II: a mathematical theory of communication. The Bell 
System Technical Journal XXVII, 379–423.
Shannon, C., 1948b. Part III: a mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System 
Technical Journal XXVII, 623–656.
Shannon, C.E., Weaver, W., 1949. The Mathematical Theory of Communication. 
University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL. 
Sharma, A., 2023. Sequential amplification of amino acid enantiomeric excess by 
conglomerate and racemic compound: plausible prebiotic route towards 
homochirality. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 13 October.
Sharma, A., Czegel, D., Lachmann, M., Kempes, C.P., Walker, S.I., Cronin, L., 2023. 
Assembly theory explains and quantifies selection and evolution. Nature 622, 
321–328.
Sharov, A., 2009. Role of utility and inference in the evolution of functional information. 
Biosemiotics 2, 101–115.
Sharov, A.A., 2010. Functional information: towards synthesis of biosemiotics and 
cybernetics. Entropy 12, 1050–1070.
Stevenson, D., 2002. Co-evolution of the genetic code and ribozyme replication. J. Theor. 
Biol. 217, 235.
Szostak, J.W., 2003. Functional information: molecular messages. Nature 423, 689.
Tagami, S., Li, P., 2023. The origin of life: RNA and protein co-evolution on the ancient 
Earth. Dev. Growth Differ. 65, 167–174.
Thaxton, C.B., Bradley, Walter L., Olsen, Roger L., Tour, James, et al., 2020. The Mystery 
of Life’s Origin Discovery Institute.
Torrenegra-Rico, J.D., Arango-Restrepo, A., Rubí, J.M., 2022. Nonequilibrium 
thermodynamics of Janus particle self-assembly. J. Chem. Phys. 157.
Tour, J., 2020. The Origin of Life Has Not Been Explained.
Tour, J., 2024. Public Challenge to Jack Szostak and 9 Other Abiogensist Specialists to 
Answer Any One of Five Questions.
Trevors, J.T., Abel, D.L., 2004. Chance and Necessity Do Not Explain the Origin of Life 
Cell Biol Int, vol. 28, pp. 729–739 (Also available at: www.DavidAbel.us. Last 
accessed 711/2024). 
Turing, A.M., 1936. On computable numbers, with an application to the entscheidungs 
problem. Proc. Roy. Soc. London Mathematical Society 42, 230–265 [correction in 
243, 544-546]. 
Uthamacumaran, A., Abrah˜ao, F.S., Kiani, N.A., Zenil, H., 2024. On the salient 
limitations of the methods of assembly theory and their classification of molecular 
biosignatures. arXiv:2210.00901v9 [cs.IT] Cornell U [v9] Wed, 17 Apr 2024 00:32: 
39 UTC (4,841 KB). 
Walker, S., 2024. Assembly theory: Part of the biological physics/physical biology 
seminar series on may 3, 2024. https://sites.google.com/view/bppb-seminar.
Welden, J.R., Margvelani, G., Arizaca Maquera, K.A., Gudlavalleti, B., Miranda Sardon, S. 
C., Campos, A.R., Robil, N., Lee, D.C., Hernandez, A.G., Wang, W.X., Di, J., de la 
Grange, P., Nelson, P.T., Stamm, S., 2022. RNA editing of microtubule-associated 
protein tau circular RNAs promotes their translation and tau tangle formation. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 50, 12979–12996.
Wigner, E.P., 1960. The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural 
sciences. Comm. Pure Appl. 13.
Wong, J.T., 1975. A co-evolution theory of the genetic code. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 
A. 72, 1909–1912.
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Zenil, H., 2023. The 8 Fallacies of Assembly Theory – Medium.
Zenil, H., 2024. Lee Cronin’s Assembly Theory Disputed & Debunked by Dr. Hecor Zenil.
Zenil, H., Tour, J., 2024. Harvard Debate between James Tour and Lee Cronin with 
Hector Zenil Critique.
D.L. Abel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BioSystems 247 (2025) 105378 
13
