===== PAGE 1 =====
Consciousness can't be uploaded
Digital immortality is a metaphysical mirage
1st September 2025
 cite
William Egginton | Decker Professor in the Humanities, Johns Hopkins, and author of The Rigor of
Angels: Borges, Heisenberg, Kant and the Ultimate Nature of Reality.
2,077 words
Read time: approx. 10 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
Uploading minds to computers isn’t just technically impossible—the whole idea rests
on a deep misconception of consciousness and our place in reality. So argues William
Egginton, whose recent book explores the relationships between the philosophies of
Kant, Heisenberg and Borges. Drawing a parallel between minds and spacetime
singularities inside black holes, he argues that to try to know such things involves
trying to go beyond mere appearances to reality as it is in itself—a futile project, he
claims. And if minds cannot be truly known, they certainly can’t be copied or uploaded
to computers. Futurists like Ray Kurzweil and Dmitry Itskov, who aim for cybernetic
immortality, are chasing a metaphysical mirage.
 
Uploading minds
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
Penrose’s theory
of consciousness
supported by new
quantum evidence
New studies
suggest
consciousness
exists in
organisms
without brains
Patterns are alive,
and we are living
patterns
Kierkegaard, Bob
Dylan, and how to
become yourself
Related Videos:
Consciousness
has evolutionary
roots, with Eva
Jablonka
Philosophers often talk about consciousness as if it were a problem. Better yet, two
problems: a hard one and an easy one. The so-called easy one (which the
psychologist Steven Pinker has joked is about as easy as getting to Mars) merely
involves explaining how the brain evolved to perform the complex tasks we associate
with human intelligence, such as judging, deciding, communicating decisions through
language, and acting upon them. The hard problem, in contrast, refers to the goal of
explaining how the brain produces the experiences we associate with every aspect of
being alive: the sensations of colors, sounds, flavors, or the experience of being
someone who exists here and now and needs to decide about what to do or where to
go next. Some philosophers have thrown up their hands in frustration at just how hard
a task explaining all that is; others have just thrown the task away, denying there even
is a problem in the first place. For those who have decided to take it seriously, a
curious genre of inquiry has taken root, in which horror, science fiction, and fantasy
become the staging ground for thought experiments about what in fact accounts for
human experience.
___
A similar paradox emerges when we treat consciousness as
an object of knowledge, by which I simply mean something
that can be studied and understood externally.
___
One common trope in these musings is that my first-person experience of the world
might be something transferable from my body. Of course, this idea is neither new nor
limited to philosophers using science fiction to speculate about consciousness. The
same conceit animates ancient and current religious beliefs about the immortality of
the soul and reincarnation. In Plato’s dialogue Phaedo, we learn of Socrates’s belief
that his own soul will survive his death. A more recent manifestation of this trope
imagines consciousness as pure information, something one could code into software
and upload onto a mainframe prior to death, thus extending life indefinitely. Indeed,
the futurist Ray Kurzweil, who popularized the use of the word “singularity” for the
ever-approaching moment when humans and machines merge, is reportedly planning
to upload his memories as soon as such an interface becomes possible. He already
created an AI version of his father, which he claims, despite its relatively rudimentary
form, allows him to experience a kind of relationship with him beyond the grave. But
thinking of the first-person experience of existence as something we could ever fully
explain, reproduce, gain access to, or transfer between bodies entails a singularity in
a very different sense from the one Kurzweil is counting on.

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
Free will is real
Consciousness is
quantum
mechanical, with
Stuart Hameroff
Freedom and fate
 
SUGGESTED VIEWING
Consciousness in the clouds
With Massimo Pigliucci, Shini Somara, Anders Sandberg,
Nadine Dijkstra, Roman Yampolskiy
The unreality of space and time

Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.

===== PAGE 4 =====
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
