===== PAGE 1 =====
TwistedMerge: Certified Higher-Order Diagnostics and Abstention for Model Merging
Ting Gonga,∗, Shitan Xub
aDepartment of Mathematics, University of Washington, Box 354350, Seattle, WA 98195-4350, USA
bBeijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Peking University, No. 5 Yiheyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100871, P .R. China
Abstract
Model merging combines independently trained or fine-tuned models, but pairwise alignability does not imply globally consistent
alignment. We formulate merging as a finite descent problem in which checkpoints are local objects, alignment maps are transitions,
and cycle products are residuals. TwistedMerge is a conservative certification pipeline that separates fixed-chart averaging,
synchronization-removable gauge inconsistency, a certified central obstruction on a specified comparison complex, and nonabelian
holonomy. A residual is promoted to a cohomology class only after inverse-consistency, coefficient-identification, centrality, and
closure tests; otherwise the method abstains and returns an ordinary or synchronized fallback. We prove a constant-edge no-go result,
frozen-complex three-way and predeclared-family error-control theorems, and a refinement test for comparison-complex sensitivity.
A planted neural alignment defect is removed by cycle-consistent synchronization, showing that a nonzero cycle score alone is not
a higher obstruction. Controlled central systems recover the predicted non-coboundary and projective-rank behavior, while noisy
estimates move from certification to abstention without false lifts on the tested controls. A trained low-rank-adapter audit shows that
naive factor averaging depends on the chosen GLr representative, whereas global factor synchronization and dense-delta SVD are
stable. On natural checkpoint collections, cycle residuals do not predict merge degradation and no natural central or period-index
class is certified. The results position descent theory as a falsifiable certification and abstention framework.
Keywords:model merging, gauge synchronization, higher-order diagnostics, cohomology, holonomy, abstention
1. Introduction
Model merging combines independently trained or fine-tuned
checkpoints without retraining a single model from scratch.
Most methods either assume a common parameter chart or es-
timate pairwise alignments before averaging. A nonzero cycle
residual is tempting to interpret as a higher obstruction. The
main idea of this paper is that this inference is generally in-
valid. Cycle inconsistency may be caused by a synchronization-
removable gauge defect, a misspecified coefficient system, in-
coherent comparison contexts, or estimation noise. A cohomo-
logical interpretation is warranted only after the comparison
complex, coefficient identifications, centrality, closure, and per-
mitted repair model have been fixed and tested.
This dependence on the comparison complex is decisive. If
the checkpoint complex is a full simplex and the coefficient
group is constant and abelian, then all positive-degree cohomol-
ogy vanishes. A nonzero finiteH 2 certificate therefore requires
missing or unavailable higher comparison contexts, and those
absences must be determined before the target residual is in-
spected. We accordingly treat the complex K as part of the
scientific design.
TwistedMerge is the resulting certification pipeline. Check-
points are local objects, pairwise alignments are transitions,
and triangle products are residuals. The pipeline separates
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses:tgong2@uw.edu(Ting Gong),
shitanxu@bicmr.pku.edu.cn(Shitan Xu)
four regimes: fixed-chart averaging, synchronization-removable
gauge inconsistency, a certified central class on a specified com-
parison complex, and nonabelian holonomy. Its output is three-
way—trivial,nontrivial on K, oruncertified—and an uncertified
structural branch returns to an ordinary or synchronized valida-
tion fallback. Projective or branch predictors are admitted only
after separate construction and invariant-readout tests; they are
not identified with the vanishing of the original class.
1.1. Contributions and claim boundary
The paper makes three contributions.
1. We formalize a finite certification problem that distin-
guishes raw cycle inconsistency, strict gauge synchroniza-
tion, a closed central H2 obstruction on a frozen compari-
son complex, and nonabelian holonomy. The construction
uses disjoint roles for complex selection, transition fitting,
certification, candidate selection, and final testing.
2. We prove paper-specific no-go and error-control results.
Context-independent central edge matrices cannot realize
the one-negative-face tetrahedral class; a frozen-complex
three-way rule controls false trivial and false nontrivial
declarations under estimated transitions; a simultaneous
extension controls multiplicity over a predeclared family
of complexes; and a refinement proposition states exactly
which certificates persist, disappear, or fail to extend when
simplices are changed.
3. We validate the framework through causal, controlled, and
natural experiments. A planted neural alignment defect
arXiv:2607.20887v1  [cs.LG]  23 Jul 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
Freeze K = Φ( DK)
before residual
or test access
Fit transitions on Dalign
Apply inverse, projection,
centrality, closure, and
margin gates on Dcert
Strict or synchronization-
removable
ordinary/synchronized candidate
single model, 1× inference
Certified central
branch
trivial/nontrivial
on K /uncertified
optional verified
rank-r predictor
Noncentral holonomy
optional invariant
branch predictor
branch multiplier recorded
Uncertified structure
ordinary or syn-
chronized fallback
single model, 1× inference
Select admitted can-
didates on Dselect;
evaluate the frozen
choice once on Dtest
Figure 1: Core certification flow. The comparison complex is frozen before transition fitting and residual inspection. Structural branches are admitted only after their
own certificates, and any increase in rank or branch count is reported as an output cost. Uncertified branches return to a 1×ordinary or synchronized fallback.
is removed by strict synchronization; trained low-rank
adapters expose the representation dependence of naive
factor averaging; controlled projective systems verify certi-
fication and abstention gates; and natural checkpoint collec-
tions fail the proposed higher-order predictive and central-
class tests.
The contribution is a certification, falsification, and no-go
framework. A nonzero class inH2(K; A) rules out only the tested
A-valued edge repair on the stated K and no natural Brauer or
period-index class is certified in the present experiments.
1.2. Relation to recent work
Model-merging methods make different assumptions about
the parameter coordinates in which the local models are com-
pared. Git Re-Basin aligns permutation-equivalent networks to
a reference model before averaging [1], while C2M3 imposes cy-
cle consistency on permutation alignments across several models
[2]. Task Arithmetic [3], TIES-Merging [4], and DARE [5] oper-
ate on parameter updates relative to a shared base model. SLERP
instead interpolates along a spherical path in a chosen parameter
geometry [6]. Yang et al. give a broad survey of model-merging
methods, theories, and applications [ 7]. A recent large-scale
study evaluates six merging methods across four open-weight
language models, twelve fine-tuned checkpoints per base model,
and sixteen benchmarks, and finds that Task Arithmetic is the
only tested method that reliably improves performance in its
in-the-wild setting [8].
Recent work has also moved beyond purely pairwise model-
merging diagnostics. Zheng and Allen-Blanchette use Hodge
decomposition to diagnose higher-order merge failures on a
simplicial structure [9]. Karuturi et al. analyze the GLr gauge
symmetry of LoRA through its principal-bundle geometry and
discuss its implications for adapter merging [10]. Javidnia de-
velops a sheaf-theoretic atlas of neural representations and mea-
sures shearing, jamming, and loop holonomy in a frozen large
language model [11]. These works are adjacent to the present
paper, although they address different structural and certification
questions.
The distinction from Hodge decomposition is important. A
harmonic component gives a useful numerical decomposition
of a residual. In our framework, a residual determines a central
cohomology class only after the coefficient system, centrality,
and cocycle closure have been certified. The distinction from
the LoRA gauge analysis is also explicit. The GLr symmetry
is standard background, while our experiment audits the rep-
resentation dependence, global synchronization, systems cost,
and fallback behavior of concrete factor-merging rules. The
relation to gauge-theoretic superposition is conceptual: our lo-
cal objects are checkpoints and adapter updates, while Javidnia
studies semantic feature charts inside a frozen language model.
The implementation, reports, and audited experimental ar-
tifacts used in this paper are available in the TwistedMerge
repository [12].
1.3. Organization
Section 2 defines the frozen comparison protocol, separates
standard background from paper-specific results, proves the no-
go, single-complex and familywise error-control, refinement,
and invariant-readout statements, and gives the core certifica-
tion pipeline. Section 3 presents the primary causal, adapter,
controlled-certification, and natural falsification experiments.
Section 4 states the realization, scale, comparison-complex, and
decision-utility limitations. Extended proofs, the full algorithm,
and secondary experiments are collected in the appendices.
2. Finite comparison and certification theory
In this section, we specify a finite certification problem.
Standard descent and projective-representation statements are
used as background; the paper-specific contribution lies in
the comparison-complex no-go conditions, the frozen-complex
three-way certificate, and the conservative interpretation of the
resulting diagnostics. Extended proofs and background material
are included in the appendices of this paper, beginning with
Appendix Appendix B.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Table 1: Claim–evidence matrix. Metrics in different rows answer different hypotheses and are not combined into one performance leaderboard.
Hypothesis Data regime Output type Primary metric Conclusion
Cycle inconsistency can be
synchronization-removable
exact-copy MNIST MLPs
with one corrupted edge
single synchronized
model
merge degradation strict synchronization removes the
planted defect; cycle score is not an
H2 certificate
Naive adapter-factor
averaging is
representation-dependent
five groups of trained
rank-4 residual adapters
single merged
update
update and prediction
invariance
factor averaging changes under
equivalent GLr representatives;
global synchronization and dense
SVD are stable
A prescribed central class
can obstruct the permitted
repair
tetrahedralµ 2 oracle
witness
diagnostic only exact coboundary test the one-negative-face class is
nontrivial on∂∆ 3 but is not an
end-to-end constant-edge neural
realization
Conservative abstention
prevents unsupported lifts
controlled
finite-Heisenberg systems
under noise
diagnostic and
optional projective
realization
coverage, uncertainty,
false-lift rate
small-noise positives are certified,
intermediate noise abstains, and
tested negative controls do not lift
Natural cycle residual
predicts merge failure
120 natural checkpoint
collections
diagnostic only leave-one-setting-out
R2
the hypothesis is unsupported;
validation quantities are more
predictive
Table 2: Comparison with recent higher-order, gauge, and sheaf-theoretic work.
Work Object of study Higher-order object Gauge or coefficient
treatment
Primary objective
Zheng–Allen-Blanchette
[9]
model-merge residuals on
a simplicial structure
Hodge components of
higher-order failure
simplicial residual
decomposition
diagnosis of failures beyond
a star-shaped or pairwise
merging pipeline
Karuturi et al. [10] LoRA factor space principal-bundle geometry
of GLr symmetry
exact rank-space gauge geometric implications for
optimization and adapter
merging
Javidnia [11] local semantic charts in an
LLM
loop holonomy, shearing,
and jamming
chart transport with
information-geometric
weighting
interpretability and transfer
bounds in a frozen LLM
This paper checkpoint transitions on
a frozen finite complex
central 2-cochain or class,
or nonabelian holonomy
coefficient identification,
closure, no-go tests, and
abstention
certification of when
higher-order language is
warranted in model merging
Table 3: Status and role of the principal mathematical statements. “Adapted” means that a standard fact is specialized to the model-merging setting; it is not claimed
as a new theorem of algebraic geometry.
Result Status Source or basis Role in the pipeline
Effective descent and central obstruction standard; adapted descent and gerbe theory [13, 14] separates ordinary gluing from a fixed-cover central
obstruction
Full-simplex higher-cohomology vanishing standard contractibility of a simplex prevents a nonzero constant-coefficient certificate on
a complete nerve
Constant-edge tetrahedral no-go paper-specific Proposition 2.3.6 shows that the one-negative-face witness cannot
come from six context-independent central edge
matrices
Distance and three-way margin rule paper-specific
adaptation
finite-dimensional distance stability controls trivial/nontrivial/uncertified decisions under
estimated transitions
Frozen-complex error control new in this paper Theorem 2.2.9 prevents the comparison complex from being chosen
using the residual under test
Predeclared-family error control new in this paper Theorem 2.2.10 controls multiplicity when several complex
thresholds are audited
Refinement-persistence test new in this paper Proposition 2.2.11 formalizes sensitivity to adding, deleting, or
subdividing comparison simplices
Projective rank thresholds and invariant pooling standard; adapted projective representations and invariant maps supplies necessary rank and path-independence gates
Exact ReLU and LoRA gauges standard; adapted positive homogeneity and rank-factor
symmetry
identifies representation-dependent averaging rules
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
2.1. Status of the mathematical results
2.2. Finite comparison data and descent background
In this subsection, we review the traditional mathematical
theory of twisted sheaves and descent obstructions. We use
the abstract language of algebraic geometry here; readers who
want the learning-theoretic interpretation may compare the terms
below with the dictionary in Section Appendix A.1.
Before we begin, we fix a small notational convention. We
will sometimes write the trivial obstruction as 1 and sometimes
as 0. This is only a matter of notation: for multiplicative groups
the identity is written as 1, while for rings, modules, or additive
cohomology groups the identity is written as 0. Thus a condition
such asg i jg jkgki =1 is the multiplicative form of strict descent,
while the corresponding cohomology class is written as [c]=0.
Definition 2.2.1(Learning site, cover, and overlaps).Alearning
siteC learn is a category equipped with a Grothendieck topology.
Its objects are local learning contexts, and its covering families
specify which collections of local contexts are regarded as jointly
covering a global learning problem.
Let X∈C learn. A finite learning cover of X is a covering
family
U={u i :U i−→X} i∈I
in the chosen Grothendieck topology.
Assume that the relevant fiber products exist. For an ordered
tuple (i0,...,i p), we write
Ui0···ip =U i0×X Ui1×X···× X Uip.
In particular,
Ui j =U i×X U j,U i jk =U i×X U j×X Uk.
The object Ui j is the context on which two local models are
compared, while Ui jk is the context on which the compatibility
of three pairwise comparisons can be tested.
Definition 2.2.2.Let U ={Ui→X} i∈I be a finite learning cover.
Itsnerve N(U) is the simplicial object whose p-simplices are
the overlap objects Ui0···ip, with the usual face and degeneracy
maps.
After passing to an incidence complex, a simplex (i0,...,i p)
is present when the corresponding overlap object is noninitial,
or nonempty in settings where an underlying-space notion of
emptiness is available. No higher overlap is deleted merely for
computational convenience. A deliberately selected or truncated
family of simplices will instead be called a finite comparison
complex in the sense of Definition 2.2.3.
Definition 2.2.3.In a computational model-merging problem,
one may instead specify a finite simplicial complex K directly.
Its vertices index local models or checkpoints, an edge (i j) indi-
cates that models Mi and M j are compared on prescribed data
Di j, and a face (i jk) indicates that the three pairwise alignments
can be composed and evaluated on a common comparison con-
textD i jk.
We call such a K afinite comparison complex. It need not be
the nerve of a cover in a Grothendieck topology. We call K a
cover nerveonly when there is a specified cover U ={Ui→X}
for which K = N(U) and the comparison contexts Di0···ip arise
from the corresponding overlapsU i0···ip.
Definition 2.2.4.Afinite model-merging descent instanceis a
tuple
D=

K,{M i}i∈K0,{Dσ}σ∈K,{g i j}(i j)∈K1,A

,
where:
1.Kis a finite comparison complex;
2.M i is the local model attached to the vertexi;
3.D σ is the common comparison context attached to a sim-
plexσ∈K;
4.g i j : Mi|Di j−→M j|Di j is an alignment or transition map
attached to the oriented edge (i j);
5.A is a coefficient system in which central residuals are
recorded.
Throughout the paper, products of transition maps are writ-
ten inpath order: gi jg jk means first apply gi j and then apply
g jk, equivalently g jk◦g i j in the conventional right-to-left nota-
tion for composition. Matrix formulas may be read either as
path-ordered symbols or in row-vector coordinates. In the ex-
act setting, we impose the inverse convention g ji = g−1
i j . For
an oriented face ( i jk), the corresponding triangle residual is
hi jk = gi jg jkgki. When K = N(U) and the objects Mi, com-
parison contexts Dσ, and maps gi j arise by restriction from a
sheaf or stack on Clearn, the finite descent instance is the finite
restriction of an ordinary ˇCech descent problem. For a general
finite comparison complex K, the tuple D is a combinatorial di-
agnostic model. It is not, by itself, a descent datum on a learning
site, and a class in H2(K; A) is not automatically a class in the
cohomology ofC learn.
Remark2.2.5 (Three levels of cohomology).The following
objects should be distinguished:
H2(K;A), ˇH2(U;A),H 2(Clearn;A).
The first is the simplicial cohomology of a finite comparison
complex. The second is the ˇCech cohomology of a specified
cover. The third is the cohomology of the full learning site.
When K = N(U), a finite central cocycle may be interpreted
as a class in ˇH2(U; A). It may be identified with a class in
H2(Clearn; A) only when an appropriate comparison theorem
applies, for example when the chosen cover is sufficiently acyclic
for the coefficient system A. Without such a hypothesis, the
obstruction computed by TwistedMerge is a class or residual on
the chosen finite complex only.
Remark2.2.6 (Scope of a finite obstruction certificate).A cer-
tificate is relative to the permitted corrections and to the chosen
comparison contexts. A nonzero class in H2(K; A) means that
the measured central residual cannot be removed by multiplying
the transition maps by an A-valued 1-cochain on the edges of
K. In particular, a different gauge group, a refined or enlarged
comparison complex, a nonlinear retraining procedure, a projec-
tive representation, or an invariant branch readout may change
the computational problem. For this reason, the implementation
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
records the three statusestrivial,nontrivial on K, anduncertified.
The last status is used whenever centrality, closure, coefficient
identification, or the statistical margin is not established.
Remark2.2.7.Suppose that K contains every subset of its vertex
set as a simplex. Then K is a full simplex and is contractible.
Consequently, for a constant abelian coefficient groupA,
Hq(K;A)=0 for everyq>0.
Thus a nonzero finite H2 certificate requires nontrivial incidence
data: some higher overlaps must be absent, unavailable, or
deliberately excluded from the comparison complex.
In particular, the tetrahedral benchmark used below takes
K = ∂∆3, the boundary of a tetrahedron, rather than the full
simplex∆ 3. The missing 3-simplex represents the absence of a
fourfold compatibility datum in that controlled construction. We
use this example as an explicit finite obstruction witness. The
tetrahedral boundary is part of the controlled incidence structure
of the synthetic witness.
Definition 2.2.8(Frozen construction of the comparison com-
plex).Let the available data be separated into
DK,D align,D cert,D select,D test.
The complex-construction data DK contain only information
used to decide whether a common comparison context is avail-
able, such as sample overlap, task overlap, communication avail-
ability, or a predeclared reliability score for composing restric-
tions. For every nonempty set of verticesσ, fix an availability
score qσ(DK) and a thresholdλdimσ before fitting transition maps
or inspecting residuals. Define
σ∈K⇐⇒q τ(DK)≥λ dimτ for every nonemptyτ⊆σ,
and a common comparison contextD τ
is available for each suchτ.
This downward-closed rule produces a simplicial complex. The
rule, thresholds, and data split are frozen before gi j, hi jk, Def(bc),
validation performance, or test performance are examined. Ab-
sence of a simplex means that the corresponding common con-
text was not certified as available by this rule.
Theorem 2.2.9(Frozen-complex three-way error control).Let
K = Φ(DK)be constructed by Definition 2.2.8, and assume that
DK is independent of the certification data. Conditional on K,
let c∈Z 2(K;V)and suppose that
Pr ∥bc−c∥≤ε|K ≥1−δ.
Set
L=max{0,Def( bc)−ε},U=Def( bc)+ε,
and fix0 ≤a<b . After centrality, coefficient identification, and
closure have passed, return
trivial if U≤a,
nontrivial on K if L≥b,
uncertified otherwise.
On the stated event, a class with Def(c) >a is never declared
trivial, and a class with Def(c)<b is never declared nontrivial.
Moreover, every class withDef(c)≤a− 2ε is declared trivial,
while every class with Def(c)≥b +2ε is declared nontrivial.
The same probability bound holds unconditionally because K
was selected independently of Dcert.
Proof. By the 1-Lipschitz property of distance to the fixed sub-
spaceB 2(K;V),
|Def(bc)−Def(c)|≤ε.
Hence L≤Def (c)≤U . The two no-false-decision statements
follow immediately. IfDef(c)≤a− 2ε, then U≤Def (c)+2ε≤a .
If Def(c)≥b +2ε, then L≥Def (c)− 2ε≥b . Conditioning
on the independently constructed K and then averaging over K
preserves the probability bound.
Theorem 2.2.10(Simultaneous control over a predeclared com-
plex family).LetΛbe finite, and let Kλ = Φλ(DK),λ∈ Λ, be a
predeclared family of comparison complexes constructed with-
out access to Dcert. For eachλ, let cλ∈Z 2(Kλ; V)and suppose
that, conditional on DK,
Pr ∥bcλ−c λ∥≤ε λ|D K
≥1−δ λ.
Define
Lλ =max{0,Def( bcλ)−ε λ},U λ =Def( bcλ)+ε λ.
Then, with probability at least1− P
λ∈Λδλ, all intervals
[Lλ,Uλ]
simultaneously contain Def(cλ). On this event, any complex se-
lected after inspecting the certification data still satisfies the
no-false-trivial and no-false-nontrivial conclusions of Theo-
rem 2.2.9, provided that its decision uses the simultaneous inter-
val. Moreover, a declaration that a class is nontrivial throughout
a predeclared subfamilyΛ 0⊆ Λimplies Def(cλ)≥b λ for every
λ∈ Λ0, while a declaration of triviality throughoutΛ 0 implies
Def(cλ)≤a λ for everyλ∈Λ 0.
Proof. For each λ, the distance-to-coboundaries map is 1-
Lipschitz, so the stated estimation event implies Lλ≤Def (cλ)≤
Uλ. A union bound gives simultaneous coverage for the fi-
nite family. Every subsequent choice of λ, including a data-
dependent one, is then made on an event on which all intervals
are valid. The final two statements follow by applying the lower
or upper bound to every member ofΛ 0.
Proposition 2.2.11(Refinement persistence and sensitivity).Let
i : K,→L be an inclusion of finite simplicial complexes and let
A be an abelian coefficient group.
1. If cL∈Z 2(L; A), then i∗cL∈Z 2(K; A)and i∗[cL]=[ i∗cL].
Consequently, if the restricted class is nonzero onK, then
[cL]is nonzero on L.
2. A class on K need not extend to L. In particular, the one-
negative-faceµ2 cocycle on ∂∆3 does not extend to a co-
cycle on∆ 3, because its alternating boundary product is
−1.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
3. Removing one face from ∂∆3 produces a2-ball and kills
H2 with constant coefficients, while barycentric subdivi-
sion preserves the class under the canonical cohomology
isomorphism.
Thus a certificate should be reported together with a predeclared
filtration or sensitivity family of comparison complexes. Persis-
tence across admissible refinements is stronger evidence than
nontriviality for one post hoc complex.
Proof. The restriction map is a cochain map and therefore in-
duces the stated map on cohomology. If [ cL]=0, then its
restriction is zero, proving the contrapositive of the first claim.
The second claim is the tetrahedral closure calculation. The
third follows from contractibility of a triangulated 2-ball and
homotopy invariance under subdivision.
Definition 2.2.12.Asheaf of local modelson Clearn is a sheaf of
sets whose elements over U are local learned objects and whose
restriction maps satisfy the sheaf condition. More generally, a
stack of local models M is a category fibered in groupoids satis-
fying descent; we write M (U) for its groupoid of objects overU.
A stack is the natural ambient structure when local models have
nontrivial automorphisms, such as hidden-unit permutations,
ReLU scalings, or other gauge symmetries.
LetU ={Ui→X} be a cover. Adescent datumconsists
of local objects Mi∈M (Ui) and transition isomorphisms gi j :
Mi|Ui j−→M j|Ui j satisfying g ji = g−1
i j . Strict descent requires
the cocycle condition gi jg jkgki =1 on every triple overlap Ui jk.
If descent is effective for M overU, such a datum glues to an
ordinary global object inM(X).
More generally, the triple product may fail by a defect
gi jg jkgki = ci jk, where ci jk ∈A (Ui jk) for a coefficient sheaf
A. If the ci jk form a ˇCech 2-cocycle on the coverU, we write
[c]U ∈ ˇH2(U; A) for its fixed-cover class. If this class deter-
mines a class in the cohomology of the learning site through
the relevant comparison map, we denote the resulting class by
[c]∈H 2(Clearn; A). A system of local objects whose gluing is
controlled by this class is called a [ c]-twisted descent datum.
When the coefficient system and the ambient stack support the
standard notion of twisted sheaves, we also call it a [c]-twisted
sheaf. If A is an abelian coefficient sheaf lying in the center of
the relevant gauge groups, then we call [c] a central obstruction
class. In particular, cyclic coefficient groups such asµn give the
basic examples of central obstructions.
Example 2.2.13.Below are several examples arising in learning
theory.
• Model merging.The objects Ui are training runs, clients,
tasks, or local model charts. The objectsMi are checkpoints
or local models, and the transition maps gi j are alignments,
such as permutation, orthogonal, diagonal, or monomial
alignments. A nontrivial triple product gi jg jkgki , 1 is a
cycle-consistency or holonomy defect.
• Same-base task vectors and fixed-chart methods.Suppose
that we have chosen a common chart V→X of the global
learning space. A base model M0 is a reference section
over this chart. If every local model Mi is represented in
the same chart, then one can form the task vector∆ i =
Mi−M 0. Thus Task Arithmetic, TIES, and DARE work
after a choice of global trivialization: the transition maps
have effectively been fixed in advance. SLERP is similar,
except that it uses the chosen chart as a weight geometry
in which interpolation is defined. Without a common chart
V→X , the expressions∆ i and the interpolation paths are
not intrinsic.
• Projective latent representations.If local latent coordinates
are comparable only projectively, then the transition maps
live in PGLr. Lifting them to GLr may fail by a Gm-valued
2-cocycle. This is the obstruction measured by the bound-
ary map arising from
1→G m→GL r→PGL r→1.
Thus a projective system of local latent representations
may define a projective descent datum whose obstruction
lies in H2(Clearn; Gm). The cohomological Brauer group
is the torsion subgroup Br′(Clearn) := H2(Clearn; Gm)tors.
The Azumaya Brauer group Br(Clearn) maps naturally to
Br′(Clearn); we identify them only in settings where this
map is known to be an isomorphism.
Remark2.2.14 (Finite central classes and Brauer classes).Let
X be a scheme, or an algebraic stack for which the Kummer
sequence is exact on the chosen étale site, and suppose that n
is invertible on X. Then the Kummer sequence gives an exact
sequence
0−→Pic(X)/n−→H 2
´et(X;µ n)−→Br ′(X)[n]−→0.
Consequently, a nonzero class in H2
´et(X;µn) need not have
nonzero image in H2
´et(X; Gm). It may lie in the image of
Pic(X)/n. In the finite computational setting, a µn-valued certifi-
cate should therefore first be called a finite central obstruction
on the chosen comparison complex. We use the term Brauer
class only after a specified site-level comparison and a nonzero
torsion image in H2
´et(X; Gm), equivalently a nonzero class in
Br′(X), have been established.
Theorem 2.2.15(Descent obstruction).Let Clearn be a learn-
ing site, and let M be a stack of local models with effective
strict descent for a coverU ={Ui→X} . Let G be the sheaf
of gauge groups acting on the local objects, and let A be an
abelian coefficient sheaf lying in the center of G. Suppose that
we are given local objects Mi∈M (Ui)and transition isomor-
phisms gi j : Mi|Ui j −→M j|Ui j such that, on triple overlaps,
gi jg jkgki = ci jk for some ci jk∈A (Ui jk). Then c ={ci jk} is a ˇCech
2-cocycle. Its cohomology class[ c]∈ ˇH2(U; A)is invariant
under objectwise gauge changes and under changes of the edge
representatives by A-valued1-cochains.
Moreover, if[c]=0, then the transition maps can be corrected
by an A-valued edge correction so that they satisfy strict descent;
hence, by effective descent, the local objects glue to an ordinary
global object. If[ c], 0, then no such edge correction can make
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Table 4: Exact sensitivity of the controlled tetrahedral certificate to the comparison complex. This is a topology audit, not a natural-data experiment.
Complex Status of the one-negative-face data Conclusion
∂∆3 closed and non-coboundary nontrivial class inH 2(∂∆3;µ 2)
∆3 boundary assignment fails
3-simplex closure
no extension as a cocycle on the filled simplex
∂∆3 with one face removed restriction lies on a 2-ballH 2 =0; no higher certificate remains
Barycentric subdivision of∂∆ 3 pullback cocycle class persists under subdivision
the datum into strict descent. Thus the data remain nontrivial
as twisted descent data on the chosen cover. If the induced
class in the cohomology of the learning site is nonzero, the same
conclusion holds at the site level. When the ambient theory
admits effective descent for[ c]-twisted objects, these data define
a nontrivial twisted object rather than an ordinary global object.
Proof. We omit restriction symbols from the notation. Since
A lies in the center of the gauge group, the defect terms ci jk
commute with the transition maps. The relation gi jg jkgki = ci jk
is equivalently gi jg jk = ci jkgik. On a quadruple overlap Ui jkl,
compare the productg i jg jkgkl in two ways. First,
(gi jg jk)gkl =c i jkgikgkl =c i jkciklgil.
Second,
gi j(g jkgkl)=g i jc jklg jl =c jklgi jg jl =c jklci jlgil.
So ci jkcikl = c jklci jl. This is exactly the ˇCech 2-cocycle condition
for the multiplicative cochain c = {ci jk}, up to the standard
convention for ordering the indices. Thus c defines a class
[c]∈ ˇH2(U;A).
We next check gauge invariance. A change of local gauges re-
places the transition maps by conjugate transition maps. Since A
is central, the corresponding defect terms are unchanged. More
generally, if we modify the transition maps by an A-valued 1-
cochaina={a i j}, settingg′
i j =a i jgi j, then the new defect is
c′
i jk =a i ja jkakici jk =(δa) i jkci jk.
Thus the cocycle changes only by a ˇCech coboundary, so the
class [c] is well-defined.
If [c]=0, then there exists an A-valued 1-cochain a ={ai j}
such that ( δa)i jk = c−1
i jk. For the corrected transition maps
g′
i j = ai jgi j, the new defect is c′
i jk =( δa)i jkci jk =1. Hence
the corrected transition maps satisfy strict descent. Since strict
descent is effective for M over the cover, the local objects glue
to an ordinary global object.
Conversely, if some A-valued edge correction made the tran-
sition maps satisfy strict descent, then the new defect would be
trivial. The formula above would then imply thatc differs from 1
by a ˇCech coboundary, so [c]=0. Therefore, if [ c], 0, no such
edge correction is possible. The datum remains nontrivial as
twisted descent data on the chosen cover. If the induced class in
H2(Clearn; A) is nonzero, the same obstruction persists at the site
level. Existence of a corresponding twisted object is a separate
effectivity statement in the ambient theory.
Remark2.2.16.Under the centrality assumption in Theo-
rem 2.2.15, the defect terms take values in an abelian coefficient
sheaf A, or more generally in a central subsheaf of the gauge
group. They form an ordinary ˇCech 2-cocycle on the chosen
cover and define a class [ c]U ∈ ˇH2(U; A). When the corre-
sponding comparison map is available, this fixed-cover class
determines a class [c]∈H 2(Clearn; A). This is the situation mod-
eled by the controlled central and projective examples, including
theµ n- andG m-valued cases.
For a genuinely nonabelian gauge group G, the same formula
should not be read as an ordinary abelian cohomology class.
If gi jg jk = ci jkgik, then on quadruple overlaps the terms ci jk
satisfy a twisted nonabelian compatibility condition, involving
conjugation by the transition maps:
ci jkcikl =g i jc jklg−1
i j ci jl.
Thus the obstruction is a nonabelian descent or holonomy object
rather than an element of ordinaryH 2(Clearn;G).
Equivalently, in the usual language of nonabelian cohomology
and gerbes, one does not only remember a G-valued 2-cocycle.
One also has aband, or outer automorphism datum, recording
how the local copies of G are identified up to inner automor-
phism. This is why outer automorphism groups naturally appear
in nonabelian descent. Once the band is fixed, the remaining
central ambiguity is controlled by the center Z(G), and central
obstruction classes live in ordinary abelian cohomology with co-
efficients in this center or in the corresponding central coefficient
sheaf. For this theory, see [13].
In our terminology, the central/projective experiments are
modeled by the ordinary H2 theory above. By contrast, the
executed two-loop S 3 and D4 experiment should be read as a
nonabelian holonomy experiment. The branch construction does
not kill an abelian H2 class; rather, it represents the nontrivial
holonomy on branches and then applies invariant pooling. This
is the condition Pρ(h)= P, which makes the holonomy invisible
after pooling even though it remains nontrivial before pooling.
In the executed construction, this is a structural certificate and
not an accuracy-advantage result.
2.3. The computational aspect of the theory
In this subsection, we discuss the computational implementa-
tion of the descent-theoretic framework. The goal is to explain
how the abstract objects above become concrete procedures
for model merging. In particular, we describe greedy soup
as fixed-chart search over a finite family of candidate predic-
tors, analogous to empirical global-section search; task-vector
methods as fixed-chart descent; ReLU gauge alignment as a
monomial-gauge synchronization problem; the H2(µ2) certifi-
cate as a central obstruction test; and the period-index mecha-
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
nism as an arithmetic gate for admissible projective ranks in the
controlled systems.
Let K be either the nerve of a specified finite cover or a finite
comparison complex in the sense of Definition 2.2.3.
Definition 2.3.1.Let
D=

K,{M i}i∈K0,{Dσ}σ∈K,{g i j}(i j)∈K1,A

be a finite model-merging descent instance, and let G be the
structure group containing the transition maps. We assume that
every unoriented edge is given one orientation and thatg ji = g−1
i j
in the exact setting.
For an oriented face (i jk)∈K 2, define thetriangle residual
hi jk =g i jg jkgki =g i jg jkg−1
ik .
The element hi jk∈G measures the failure of the three pairwise
transition maps to satisfy strict descent on the face ( i jk). The
collection h ={hi jk}(i jk)∈K2 is initially a collection of G-valued
triangle holonomies.
Definition 2.3.2.Let A⊆Z (G) be an abelian central subgroup.
We say that the triangle residual isexactly A-centralif hi jk∈A
for every oriented face (i jk)∈K 2.
In this case, the assignment ci jk = hi jk defines a multiplicative
2-cochain c∈C 2(K; A). We call c thecentral residual 2-cochain.
If the residuals are only approximately central, and if a projection
or rounding map πA : G−→A has been fixed, then one may
define a projected 2-cochain bci jk = πA(hi jk). The projected
cochainbcis a numerical diagnostic.
Definition 2.3.3.Assume that A is a constant abelian coeffi-
cient group. For a multiplicative 2-cochain c∈C 2(K; A), its
coboundary is the 3-cochainδ2c∈C 3(K; A) given on an oriented
3-simplex (i jkl) by
(δ2c)i jkl =c jklc−1
ikl ci jlc−1
i jk.
The cochain c is a 2-cocycle if and only if ( δ2c)i jkl =1 A for
every oriented 3-simplex (i jkl)∈K 3.
Thus
Z2(K;A)=ker

δ2 :C 2(K;A)−→C 3(K;A)

.
Only whenc∈Z 2(K;A) does it determine a cohomology class
[c]∈H 2(K;A)=Z 2(K;A)/B 2(K;A).
Remark2.3.4.Definition 2.3.3 is written for a constant abelian
coefficient group A. If A is a nonconstant coefficient system,
local system, or sheaf of central groups, the formula forδ2 must
include the appropriate restriction or transport maps.
Proposition 2.3.5.Let( i jkl)∈K 3 be an oriented 3-simplex.
Assume that:
1. the maps gab are all defined on a common quadruple com-
parison context Di jkl;
2.g ba =g−1
ab ;
3. for every oriented face( abc)of( i jkl), the triangle residual
cabc =g abgbcg−1
ac lies in the central subgroup A⊆Z(G).
Then
(δ2c)i jkl =c jklc−1
ikl ci jlc−1
i jk =1 A.
Consequently, exact central triangle residuals obtained from
a coherent collection of transition maps on common higher
overlaps define a 2-cocycle.
Proof.Usingg i jg jk =c i jkgik andg ikgkl =c iklgil, we obtain
(gi jg jk)gkl =c i jkciklgil.
On the other hand,g jkgkl =c jklg jl, and hence
gi j(g jkgkl)=g i jc jklg jl.
Sincec jkl is central, this equals
c jklgi jg jl =c jklci jlgil.
Associativity gives ci jkcikl = c jklci jl. Since all four terms lie in
the abelian group A, this is equivalent to c jklc−1
ikl ci jlc−1
i jk =1 A.
Proposition 2.3.6.Let K = ∂∆3, let G be a group, and let
A⊆Z (G)be an abelian central subgroup. Assign one context-
independent element gi j∈G to every oriented edge, with g ji =
g−1
i j . Suppose that
hi jk =g i jg jkgki∈A
for all four faces. Then
h123h−1
023h013h−1
012 =1.
Consequently, for constant coefficients A, the resulting face
cochain represents the zero class in H2(∂∆3;A).
Proof.From the definitions,
g01g12 =h 012g02,g 02g23 =h 023g03,
so
(g01g12)g23 =h 012h023g03.
On the other hand,
g12g23 =h 123g13,g 01g13 =h 013g03,
and centrality ofh 123 gives
g01(g12g23)=h 123h013g03.
Associativity therefore implies h012h023 = h123h013, which is
equivalent to the stated alternating product identity. This identity
is the evaluation of the face cochain on the fundamental class of
∂∆3, so the class is zero.
Remark2.3.7.The one-negative-face µ2 cocycle used below
is a cocycle-level oracle witness. It cannot be produced by
six globally composable, context-independent edge matrices
satisfying the hypotheses of Proposition 2.3.6. A genuine ˇCech
realization requires overlap-dependent transition sections gi j :
Di j→G , whose restrictions to different triple contexts need not
be represented by one common matrix, or a projective bundle
construction in which the missing fourfold comparison context
is part of the geometry.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Remark2.3.8.Proposition 2.3.5 applies to exact transition maps
defined coherently on common higher overlaps. Its hypotheses
need not hold in a numerical model-merging problem.
Closure may fail, or may be uncertified, when:
1. the opposite edge maps are fitted independently and g ji ,
g−1
i j ;
2. the triangle residuals are not central;
3. a nearest-central projection πA is applied to noncentral
residuals;
4. different faces are evaluated on different comparison data
and do not restrict to a common quadruple context;
5. the transition maps are known only approximately;
6. the coefficient identifications vary from face to face.
For these reasons, the output of a numerical central projection
should first be called a projected 2-cochain. It should be called
a cocycle, obstruction class, or Brauer-type class only after a
cocycle-closure test has been passed.
Definition 2.3.9(Distance to coboundaries and obstruction
norm).Let V be a finite-dimensional normed vector space in
which the central coefficient data have been encoded additively.
Consider the cochain complex
C1(K;V)
δ1
−→C2(K;V)
δ2
−→C3(K;V),
and write
Z2(K;V)=kerδ 2,B 2(K;V)=imδ 1.
For an arbitrary 2-cochain u∈C 2(K; V), define its distance to
coboundaries by
Def(u) :=dist

u,B 2(K;V)

=inf
a∈C1(K;V)
∥u−δ 1a∥.
Thus, for everya∈C 1(K;V),
∥u−δ 1a∥≥Def(u).
If u is closed, so that u∈Z 2(K; V), then Def(u) depends only
on the cohomology class
[u]∈H 2(K;V)=Z 2(K;V)/B 2(K;V).
In this case, we may also write Obs([u]) := Def(u) and call this
quantity the obstruction norm of the class [u]. Since the cochain
spaces are finite-dimensional,
Obs([u])=0⇐⇒[u]=0.
If u is not known to be closed, then Def(u) is only a distance-
to-coboundaries diagnostic. It is not the norm of a cohomology
class, because [u] is not defined unlessδ 2u=0.
We record three elementary facts that will be used below.
Proposition 2.3.10(Defect distance and stability).Let K be
finite.
1. Suppose that V is a finite-dimensional inner-product space
and that C•(K; V)is equipped with the induced finite
cochain inner product. Let
H 2(K;V)=kerδ 2∩kerδ ∗
1
be the space of harmonic 2-cochains. If c∈Z 2(K; V), then
Def(c)=Obs([c])=



ΠH 2(K;V) (c)



,
whereΠ H 2(K;V) denotes orthogonal projection onto
H 2(K;V).
2.If c, bc∈C 2(K;V)and∥ bc−c∥≤ε, then
|Def(bc)−Def(c)|≤ε.
In particular, if Def(c) > 2ε, then Def(bc) > ε. Hence
the observed residual cannot be explained by an ε-sized
perturbation of a trivial coboundary.
3.Let g i j,g jk,g ki andbgi j,bg jk,bgki be matrices satisfying
∥gab∥≤M,∥ bgab−g ab∥≤σ
for the three edges(ab)=(i j),(jk),(ki). Then
∥bgi jbg jkbgki−g i jg jkgki∥≤3M 2σ+3Mσ 2 +σ 3.
Proof. For part (1), we use the standard finite cochain Hodge
decomposition for simplicial complexes; see, for example, [15,
16]. Since K is finite and V is finite-dimensional, all cochain
spaces are finite-dimensional inner-product spaces, and one has
the orthogonal decomposition
C2(K;V)=imδ 1⊕H 2(K;V)⊕imδ ∗
2.
Becausecis closed, one has
c∈kerδ 2 =  imδ∗
2
⊥.
Therefore the imδ∗
2 component of c vanishes, and there exist
a∈C 1(K; V) and h∈H 2(K; V) such that c =δ1a + h. The two
terms are orthogonal. Hence the closest element of imδ 1 to c is
δ1a, and therefore
Def(c)=dist (c,imδ 1) =∥h∥.
Sinceh= Π H 2(K;V) (c), we obtain
Def(c)=Obs([c])=



ΠH 2(K;V) (c)



.
For (2), the distance to any fixed subset of a normed vector
space is 1-Lipschitz [17]. Indeed, for anya∈C 1(K;V),
∥bc−δ 1a∥≤∥ bc−c∥+∥c−δ 1a∥.
Taking the infimum over a gives Def(bc)≤ε + Def(c). Inter-
changingcand bcgives Def(c)≤ε+Def( bc). Hence
|Def(bc)−Def(c)|≤ε.
If Def(c)>2ε, then Def( bc)≥Def(c)−ε>ε.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
For (3), write
bgab =g ab +e ab,∥e ab∥≤σ.
Then
bgi jbg jkbgki−g i jg jkgki =e i jg jkgki +g i je jkgki
+g i jg jkeki +e i je jkgki
+e i jg jkeki +g i je jkeki
+e i je jkeki.
Using submultiplicativity of the matrix norm [18], the first three
terms are each bounded by M2σ, the next three terms are each
bounded byMσ 2, and the last term is bounded byσ 3. So
∥bgi jbg jkbgki−g i jg jkgki∥≤3M 2σ+3Mσ 2 +σ 3.
This proves the proposition.
Proposition 2.3.11(Margin-consistent distance decision).Let
V be a finite-dimensional normed coefficient space, let c∈
C2(K;V), and let bc satisfy
Pr ∥bc−c∥≤ε ≥1−δ.
Write∆ = dist(c,B 2(K; V)). Consider the decision rule that
declares a positive distance from coboundaries whenDef(bc)>τ .
If c∈B 2(K; V)and τ>ε , then the rule makes no false positive-
distance declaration on the stated event. If∆>0and
ε<τ<∆−ε,
then the rule correctly detects positive distance from cobound-
aries on the same event. If, in addition, both the coefficient
identification and cocycle closure ofbc are certified, this positive-
distance conclusion may be promoted to a nontrivial class in
H2(K;V).
Proof.The distance to a fixed subspace is 1-Lipschitz, so
Def(bc)−Def(c)
≤ε.
If c is a coboundary, then Def(c)=0 and hence Def(bc)≤ε <
τ. If Def(c)= ∆ > 0, then Def(bc)≥ ∆−ε > τ. The final
cohomological interpretation follows only after the separate
closure gate, because an arbitrary 2-cochain does not define a
class inH 2.
Remark2.3.12.Proposition 2.3.11 suggests a three-way numer-
ical output. A closed class is declared trivial when an upper
confidence bound lies below a triviality threshold, nontrivial
when a lower confidence bound lies above a nontriviality thresh-
old, and uncertified otherwise. Before closure has been certified,
the same bounds refer only to distance from coboundaries. For
a finite coefficient group A embedded in a metric ambient space,
let sA be the minimum ambient distance between distinct ele-
ments of A. If the exact coefficient is a∈A and an estimate u has
ambient distance less than sA/2 from a, then nearest-coefficient
projection recovers a uniquely. In a numerical pipeline, the
projection should be accepted only when the uncertainty bound,
not merely the point estimate, lies inside such a half-separation
margin. The robust calibration experiments in Section 3.4.2
implement this conservative abstention principle.
Remark2.3.13.Part (2) is a metric stability statement for ar-
bitrary 2-cochains and does not require cocycle closure. Its
interpretation as stability of a cohomological obstruction re-
quires the relevant cochains to be closed. Without closure, Def
remains a distance-to-coboundaries diagnostic rather than the
norm of anH 2 class.
Proposition 2.3.10(3) controls the perturbation of the triangle
residual under small pairwise alignment errors. Suppose further
that the central projection πA : G−→A is L-Lipschitz on the
relevant neighborhood. If the edgewise alignment error is at
mostσ and the exact transition maps have norm at most M, then
the projected triangle residual satisfies a bound of the form
∥bc−c∥≤L

3M 2σ+3Mσ 2 +σ 3
,
with the corresponding normalization when the cochain norm
aggregates over several faces. Combining this with Proposi-
tion 2.3.10(2) gives a metric robustness criterion. If both c and
bc are closed, the same estimate gives stability of the obstruc-
tion norms. Without closure, the conclusion concerns only the
distance-to-coboundaries diagnostic.
2.3.1. Compilation of results for related algorithms
We record three elementary computational facts that explain
how several existing algorithms appear in the descent-theoretic
language. The first concerns fixed-chart task-vector methods,
the second concerns exact ReLU gauge symmetries, and the
third gives the minimal centralH 2(µ2) obstruction certificate.
Proposition 2.3.14(Task vectors require a common chart).Let
Θbe a finite-dimensional parameter vector space with a non-
trivial gauge group G acting linearly on it. Let θ0∈ Θbe a base
model and let θi∈ Θbe a fine-tuned model. The task vector
∆i = θi−θ 0 is not an intrinsic object on the quotient param-
eter stack[Θ /G]. Rather, it is defined only after choosing a
common parameter coordinate system, or a specified alignment
convention, in which bothθi andθ0 are represented. Thus alge-
braic operations on task vectors are gauge-dependent unless a
common base chart or an alignment convention has been fixed.
Proof.The subtraction map
d:Θ×Θ→Θ,d(θ,η)=θ−η
is defined in the chosen parameter vector space. If the same
gaugea∈Gis applied to both entries, then
d(aθi,aθ 0)=a(θ i−θ 0).
Thus the difference is equivariant for the diagonal action of G
onΘ × Θ. This is the situation in which a common chart has
been chosen: both the base model and the fine-tuned model are
expressed in the same trivialization.
However, the quotient stack [Θ/G] allows the two representa-
tives to be changed independently. The relevant ambiguity is the
action ofG×GonΘ×Θ, given by
(ai,a 0)·(θ i,θ 0)=(a iθi,a 0θ0).
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
The difference map d is not invariant, or even equivariant with
respect to a single copy ofG, for this independent action. Indeed,
independent gauges produce
d(aiθi,a 0θ0)=a iθi−a 0θ0,
and there is in general no elementa∈Gsuch that
aiθi−a 0θ0 =a(θ i−θ 0).
Equivalently, the map d does not descend fromΘ × Θto the
quotient stack [Θ/G]×[Θ/G].
A simple way to see the obstruction is to take θi = θ0 = θ.
Then the task vector in the common chart is zero:θ−θ =0. But
after changing only the gauge of the second representative, one
obtainsθ−a 0θ, which is generally nonzero. Since the zero vector
is fixed by every linear gauge transformation, this new vector
cannot be obtained from the old one by a single global gauge
transformation unless a0θ =θ. Thus the difference depends on
the chosen representatives.
We then have that task vectors are well-defined only after
fixing a common chart, such as a shared base model and a shared
parameter coordinate system, or after choosing transition maps
that align the local charts. Without such a choice, the expression
θi−θ 0 is a chart-dependent representative rather than an intrinsic
object on the quotient by gauge symmetries.
Remark2.3.15.This is the fixed-chart assumption behind Task
Arithmetic, TIES, DARE, and other task-vector methods: the
local models have already been placed in a shared coordinate
chart. SLERP is similar in spirit, but uses a chosen weight
geometry.
Theorem 2.3.16(Exact monomial ReLU reparameterization).
Consider a one-hidden-layer ReLU network
f(x)=W 2σ(W1x+b 1)+b 2,
whereσ = ReLU is applied coordinatewise. Let M = DP be a
positive monomial matrix, where D is a positive diagonal matrix
and P is a permutation matrix. Define
W′
1 =MW 1,b ′
1 =Mb 1,W ′
2 =W 2M−1,b ′
2 =b 2.
Then the reparameterized network computes exactly the same
function:
W′
2σ(W′
1x+b ′
1)+b ′
2 =W 2σ(W1x+b 1)+b 2.
The same argument applies layerwise to adjacent layers of a
multi-layer ReLU MLP , provided that the inverse monomial
transformation is applied to the following layer.
Proof. Since D has positive diagonal entries and P is a permu-
tation matrix, ReLU is equivariant under M = DP: σ(Mz)=
Mσ(z) for every vector z. Applying this with z = W1x + b1, we
get
σ(W′
1x+b ′
1)=σ(M(W 1x+b 1))=Mσ(W 1x+b 1).
Therefore
W′
2σ(W′
1x+b ′
1)+b ′
2 =W 2M−1Mσ(W1x+b 1)+b 2
=W 2σ(W1x+b 1)+b 2.
Thus the function is unchanged. The multi-layer statement
follows by applying the same calculation to one hidden layer at
a time and compensating the monomial change in the next linear
layer.
Remark2.3.17.This theorem separates exact gauge equiv-
alence from empirical performance. Monomial gauges are
exact ReLU reparameterizations before averaging. Whether
monomial-aligned averaging improves test accuracy is a sepa-
rate empirical question.
Remark2.3.18 (Batch-normalization boundary).Theo-
rem 2.3.16 applies directly to ReLU layers without stateful
normalization between the compensated linear maps. A separate
ResNet-18 identity audit in the repository checks what remains
exact in the presence of BatchNorm. Compatible graph-wide
channel permutations, including residual branches, shortcut
projections, BatchNorm affine parameters and buffers, and
classifier inputs, preserve predictions in both evaluation and
training modes within the preregistered floating-point tolerance.
Positive channel scaling is more delicate: with frozen running
statistics it is exact in evaluation mode only for the explicit affine
or epsilon-aware running-affine parameterizations tested there.
Scaling running means and variances alone is not exact when
the BatchNorm constant ε is positive, and arbitrary positive
scaling is not claimed to be exact in training mode. These are
functional identity tests, not merging-performance results.
Theorem 2.3.19.Let K be the boundary of a tetrahedron, with
vertex set{0,1,2,3}and face set
K2 ={012,013,023,123}.
Letµ2 ={±1}. A face cochain assigns a sign c f ∈µ 2 to each
face, and an edge cochain assigns signs bi j∈µ 2 to edges, with
coboundary(δb)i jk = bi jb jkbki. Since K has dimension2, every
face cochain is a2-cocycle. Such a cochain c is a coboundary
if and only if Q
f∈K 2 c f = +1. In particular, the sign pattern
with exactly one negative face represents the nonzero class in
H2(S 2;µ 2)µ 2.
Proof. First suppose c = δb. Multiplying over all four faces
gives Y
f∈K 2
c f =
Y
(i jk)∈K2
bi jb jkbki.
Every edge of the tetrahedral boundary appears in exactly two
faces. Hence every edge sign appears twice in the product, and
sinceb 2
i j =1, the total product is+1.
Conversely, identifyµ2 with F2 by sending−1 to 1 and+1
to 0. Then multiplication of signs becomes addition in F2. The
tetrahedral boundary is a triangulation of S 2, so H2(K; F2)F 2.
Since K has four faces, dimC 2(K; F2)=4, and therefore im(δ :
C1→C 2) has codimension one inC 2(K;F 2). The condition
Y
f∈K 2
c f = +1
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
is exactly one linear condition in additive F2 notation, namely
that the sum of the four face labels is zero. This codimension-
one subspace contains imδ by the first paragraph, so it is exactly
imδ . Thus c is a coboundary if and only if the product of its
face signs is+1.
If exactly one face is negative, then the product of the four
face signs is −1, so the cocycle is not a coboundary. Since
H2(S 2;µ 2)µ 2, it represents the nonzero class.
Remark2.3.20.This tetrahedral example is the minimal cocycle-
level witness used in our controlled obstruction experiments. It
proves that the one-negative-face cochain is not removable by a
µ2-valued edge cochain on∂∆3. The prediction-level two-branch
(q =2) task in Section 3.4.1 is therefore recorded separately
from this non-coboundary certificate.
The unsigned product criterion in Theorem 2.3.19 is specific
to µ2. Indeed, inversion is trivial in µ2, so orientation signs
do not alter the product. For a general coefficient group µn,
the corresponding expression must be written using the chosen
orientation of the tetrahedral boundary. With the convention
∂[0123]=[123]−[023]+[013]−[012],
the oriented evaluation of a multiplicative 2-cochain c on the
fundamental 2-cycle is c123c−1
023c013c−1
012. Thus one should not
replace this alternating expression by the unsigned product of
the four face values whenn>2.
Remark2.3.21.For the controlled µ2 experiments, we distin-
guish the exact cohomological certificate from a raw numerical
face statistic. For aµ2-valued face cochain c ={c f} f∈K 2, define
its negative-face rate by
R−(c)= 1
|K2|#{f∈K 2 :c f =−1}.
This quantity records the proportion of faces carrying a negative
triangle residual. It is not, in general, invariant under the addition
of a coboundary.
For the chosen tetrahedral representative with exactly one
negative face, one has R−(c)=0 .250. The exact certificate of
nontriviality is instead
Y
f∈K 2
c f =−1,
or equivalently c<B 2(K;µ2). Thus the value 0 .250 is a raw
representative-level residual statistic, while the nontriviality of
the class is established by the finite coboundary certificate of
Theorem 2.3.19.
2.3.2. Period-index and rank-lift gates
We now recall the period-index distinction for central ob-
struction classes. In the classical theory, period and index are
invariants of Brauer classes and twisted sheaves [19, 20]. In our
setting, the same distinction explains why detecting the order of
an obstruction is not enough: one must also know which ranks
can support a compatible projective or twisted realization.
Definition 2.3.22.Let A be an abelian coefficient sheaf onClearn,
and let [c]∈H 2(Clearn; A) be a torsion central obstruction class.
Theperiodof [c] is its order in cohomology:
per([c])=min{n>0 :n[c]=0}.
When A = Gm, this is the usual period of a cohomological
Brauer class.
Definition 2.3.23.Suppose that [ c] is a central class in a setting
where [c]-twisted locally free objects and their ranks are defined.
Theindexof [c] is the rank-divisibility invariant
ind([c])=gcd
n
r>0 : there exists a rankr[c]-twisted
locally free object
o
.
In the standard Brauer settings in which twisted locally free
objects realize the class, this rank gcd agrees with the usual
index. Over a field, the latter is the degree of the division algebra
in the Brauer class; equivalently, it is the greatest common
divisor of the degrees of central simple algebras representing
that class.
In the computational setting, letR be the finite set of candidate
ranks searched by the algorithm. When the set of passing ranks
is nonempty, we define the tested lift threshold by
rtest([c];R)=min
n
r∈R: the implemented rank-rconstruction
passes the stated test
o
.
If no candidate rank passes, we set rtest([c]; R)= +∞. This is
an empirical search statistic rather than the classical index. It
depends on the candidate set, optimization procedure, imple-
mentation, and acceptance tolerances. It may be identified with
ind([c]) only when a separate mathematical argument proves
that the implemented construction realizes the minimal possible
rank.
Proposition 2.3.24(Period and index over a field).Let F be a
field and let α∈Br (F). Then per(α)|ind (α), and per(α)and
ind(α)have the same prime divisors [19, Theorem 2.8.7].
Thus the period-index problem asks, for a given class of fields
or spaces, to bound ind(α) in terms of per(α). In other words,
after the period detects the order of the Brauer class, one asks
how large the smallest rank or degree realizing that class must
be.
Remark2.3.25.Classical period-index conjectures seek bounds
on ind(α) in terms of per(α) under specific hypotheses on the
field, variety, characteristic, and torsion. The precise expo-
nent depends on the geometric and cohomological setting. The
present paper does not use any general period-index conjecture;
it uses only the distinction between the order of a class and the
rank divisibility of objects realizing it.
For background and recent progress on the period-index prob-
lem, see the introduction of [21]. Some important related works
include [20, 22–24].
Definition 2.3.26(Projective-representation index).LetΓbe a
finite group and let [α]∈H 2(Γ; k×) be represented by a normal-
ized cocycleα. Define
indrep([α])=gcd
n
dimW: Wis a nonzero finite-dimensional
α-projective representation
o
.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Table 5: Qualitative structural coverage of model-merging methods. This table records which mechanisms are explicitly present in the method; it is not an accuracy
leaderboard.
Method Validation Sync. Perm. ReLU gauge Sign/sparse Cycle/hol. Central obs. Nonabelian lift Reject
Weight averaging no no no no no no no no no
Model Soups yes no no no no no no no no
C2M3-style no yes yes no no cycle no no no
SLERP optional no no no no no no no no
Task Arithmetic optional no no no no no no no no
TIES optional no no no yes no no no no
DARE optional no no no yes no no no no
TwistedMerge yes yes yes yes partial yes yes yes yes
Here “Validation” means that validation selection is intrinsic to the stated method; “optional” means that validation can be used to tune or select the method but is not
part of its defining algebraic operation. “Sync.” means synchronization of alignments or gauges; “Perm.” means permutation gauge handling; “ReLU gauge” means
monomial positive-scaling/permutation gauges; and “Sign/sparse” means coordinatewise sign or sparsity handling. In the column headed “Cycle/hol.,” “cycle”
denotes the cycle-consistency mechanism ofC 2M3, whereas “yes” denotes the broader cycle and holonomy diagnostics of TwistedMerge. “Central obs.” means
central/projective obstruction detection; “Nonabelian lift” means a branch representation with invariant pooling; and “Reject” means a conservative no-lift rule when
the relevant structural certificate is unavailable.
Cohomologous cocycles define equivalent projective-
representation categories and hence the same set of repre-
sentation dimensions, so this quantity depends only on [α]. It
is the appropriate rank-divisibility invariant for the controlled
finite-group experiments. It should not be identified with
a classical Brauer index without an additional geometric
realization.
Proposition 2.3.27(Clock–shift divisibility).Let ζ be a prim-
itive d-th root of unity. If invertible matrices A,B∈GL r(C)
satisfy
AB=ζBA,
then d|r . Conversely, the standardd×d clock and shift matrices
satisfy this relation, and direct sums realize every rank divisible
by d.
Proof.Taking determinants gives
det(A) det(B)=det(ζBA)=ζ r det(B) det(A),
so ζr =1 and hence d|r . The standard clock matrix Z =
diag(1,ζ,...,ζ d−1) and cyclic shift matrix X satisfy ZX =ζXZ .
Direct sums preserve the relation.
Theorem 2.3.28(Finite Heisenberg rank threshold).Let k be
algebraically closed, suppose that char(k) ∤d , and assume that
k contains a primitive d-th root of unityζ. Let
V=(Z/dZ) 2m,
and write its elements as(x,y)with x,y∈(Z/dZ) m. Define
α((x,y),(x ′,y′))=ζ y·x′
.
Then
per([α])=d,ind rep([α])=d m.
In particular, everyα-projective representation has dimension
divisible by dm, and one of dimension dm exists.
Proof. Bilinearity of the exponent shows thatα is a normalized
2-cocycle. Since its values lie inµd, the order of [α] divides d.
Its commutator bicharacter is
β(v,v′)=α(v,v ′)α(v′,v)−1 =ζ y·x′−y′·x.
This bicharacter is nondegenerate and assumes the primitive
valueζ. If [α] had order e<d , thenαe would be a coboundary,
whose commutator bicharacter is trivial; hence βe =1. The
primitive valueζwould then satisfyζ e =1, a contradiction. So
per([α])=d.
For one Weyl pair, the standard clock and shift matrices give
a d-dimensionalα-projective representation. Tensoring the m
pairs gives a homomorphism
kα[V]−→M d(k)⊗m≃M dm(k).
The d2 Weyl operators span Md(k), and their tensor products
span Mdm(k). Hence the image is the full matrix algebra. Both
algebras have dimension |V| = d2m over k, so the homomor-
phism is an isomorphism. Every finite-dimensional module over
Mdm(k) is a direct sum of copies of its dm-dimensional simple
module. Consequently every α-projective representation has
dimension divisible by dm, and dimension dm occurs. Thus
indrep([α])=d m.
Theorem 2.3.29(Projective lifting obstruction).Let U ={Ui→
X} be a cover in Clearn, and suppose that ¯gi j : Ui j−→PGL r is a
PGLr-valued ˇCech1-cocycle. Thus ¯gi j¯gjk = ¯gik on every triple
overlap Ui jk, together with the usual conventions ¯gii =1, and
¯gji =¯g−1
i j .
Assume that lifts egi j : Ui j−→GL r have been chosen on the
pairwise overlaps, after refining the cover if necessary; after
such a refinement, retain the notationU. Then, on every triple
overlap Ui jk, there is a unique scalar function ci jk∈G m(Ui jk)
such thategi jeg jk =c i jkegik. Equivalently,
egi jeg jkeg−1
ik =c i jkIr.
The collection c ={ci jk} is a Gm-valued ˇCech2-cocycle and
defines a fixed-cover class[ c]U ∈ ˇH2(U; Gm). This class is
independent of the chosen lifts.
Moreover,[ c]U =0if and only if the lifts can be modified
by scalar functions so as to give GLr-valued transition maps
satisfying strict descent on the same coverU.
The image of[c]U under the natural comparison map
ˇH2(U;G m)−→H 2(X;G m),
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
where H2(X; Gm)denotes cohomology on the induced site
Clearn/X, is the obstruction class associated with the central
extension
1−→G m−→GL r−→PGL r−→1.
This site-level class vanishes if and only if the corresponding
PGLr-torsor lifts to a GLr-torsor, equivalently if strict GLr-
valued transition maps exist after possibly refining the cover.
Proof. Since the projective transition maps satisfy ¯gi j¯gjk = ¯gik,
the element egi jeg jkeg−1
ik maps to the identity in PGLr. It lies in
the kernel of GLr −→PGL r, which is the central subgroup
Gm. Consequently, there is a unique ci jk∈G m(Ui jk) such that
egi jeg jk =c i jkegik.
We next verify the ˇCech 2-cocycle condition. On a quadruple
overlap Ui jkl, associativity gives two expressions for egi jeg jkegkl.
First
(egi jeg jk)egkl =c i jkegikegkl =c i jkciklegil.
On the other hand,
egi j(eg jkegkl)= egi jc jkleg jl =c jklegi jeg jl =c jklci jlegil,
where we used the fact that c jkl is scalar and therefore central.
It follows that ci jkcikl = c jklci jl. Equivalently, c jklc−1
ikl ci jlc−1
i jk =1.
This is the multiplicative ˇCech 2-cocycle condition. Hence
c∈Z 2(U;G m) and defines a class [c]U∈ ˇH2(U;G m).
Suppose that the lifts are changed by scalar functions:
eg′
i j =a i jegi j,a i j∈G m(Ui j).
Then
eg′
i jeg′
jk =a i ja jkegi jeg jk =a i ja jkci jkegik =a i ja jka−1
ik ci jkeg′
ik.
Thus the new scalar cocycle is
c′
i jk =a i ja jka−1
ik ci jk =(δa) i jkci jk.
Hence c′ and c differ by a ˇCech coboundary, so [c]U is indepen-
dent of the chosen lifts.
If [c]U =0, then there is a Gm-valued ˇCech 1-cochain a =
{ai j} such that (δa)i jk = c−1
i jk. Replacing egi j byeg′
i j = ai jegi j gives
c′
i jk =( δa)i jkci jk =1. Hence eg′
i jeg′
jk = eg′
ik, so the modified lifts
satisfy strict GLr-descent onU.
Conversely, suppose that strict GLr-valued transition maps
bgi j lifting the same projective cocycle exist on U. Since bgi j
andegi j have the same image in PGLr, there are scalar functions
ai j∈G m(Ui j) such thatbgi j = ai jegi j. The strict cocycle condition
for thebgi j implies 1=( δa)i jkci jk. Thus c is a ˇCech coboundary
and [c]U =0.
Finally, the exact sequence of sheaves
1−→G m−→GL r−→PGL r−→1
gives the usual connecting obstruction from PGLr-torsors to
H2(X; Gm). The image of [c]U in site cohomology is precisely
this obstruction class. Its vanishing is equivalent to the existence
of a GLr-torsor lifting the given PGLr-torsor, which may require
refining the original cover.
Theorem 2.3.30(Rank-realization gate).Let[ c]∈H 2(Clearn; A)
be a central obstruction class for which an index ind([c])is de-
fined. If a rank-r locally free[ c]-twisted realization exists, then
ind([c])|r . Consequently, a candidate rank r with ind([c]) ∤r
must be rejected by any conservative realization gate. Con-
versely, if the category of twisted objects is closed under direct
sums and contains a rank- ind([c])object, then every positive
multiple of ind([c])is an admissible rank for such a realization.
Proof. By definition, ind([c]) divides the rank of every locally
free twisted object representing the class [ c]. Hence a rank- r
twisted realization can exist only if ind([c])|r . This proves the
conservative rejection rule.
For the converse, suppose that E is a rank ind([c]) twisted
object. Then for any m≥ 1, the direct sum E⊕m is again [c]-
twisted and has rank mind ([c]). Thus every multiple of the index
is admissible under the stated closure assumption.
Corollary 2.3.31(Algorithmic period-index rule).In the cen-
tral/projective module ofTwistedMerge, the period determines
the torsion type of the obstruction, while a certified classical
index, projective-representation index, or proved lower-bound
gate restricts the eligible ranks. The algorithm should activate a
rank-r construction only when the available theorem or certifi-
cate permits that rank. If no such rank certificate is available, the
arithmetic status remains uncertified; divisibility by the period
alone is not sufficient.
Remark2.3.32.This is the mathematical reason for separat-
ing period from index in the experiments. In the controlled
clock–shift and finite-Heisenberg systems, the phase order gives
the period while the projective-representation index gives the
arithmetic rank threshold. More generally, a period records
torsion type, whereas an index records rank divisibility for the
corresponding geometric or projective realization.
Remark2.3.33 (Arithmetic admissibility is not a construction).
The divisibility condition ind([c]) |r , or indrep([α]) |r in a
controlled finite system, is necessary for the corresponding rank.
The algorithm separates four events:
rank admissible,lift constructed,
readout invariant,candidate validated.
Only a candidate passing all four stages enters the validation
envelope.
Proposition 2.3.34(Descent after invariant pooling).Let K
be connected, let G act on a lifted feature space W through
a representation ρ : G→GL (W), and choose a root vertex.
Let H≤G be the subgroup generated by the path-difference
holonomies based at that root; equivalently, after a spanning tree
is chosen, H is generated by the fundamental-cycle holonomies
associated with the non-tree edges. Suppose that P : W→Y
satisfies
Pρ(h)=P for every h∈H.
Then the prediction obtained by transporting a local lifted fea-
ture to the root and applying P is independent of the chosen
transport path. It defines a globally consistent pooled predictor.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Proof. Let T p and Tq be the transport operators associated with
two paths from the same local chart to the root. With the chosen
path-order convention, the two operators differ by an element
of the residual holonomy subgroup: there is an h∈H such that
Tq =ρ(h)T p. Therefore
PTq =Pρ(h)T p =PT p.
Thus the pooled prediction is path-independent.
Remark2.3.35.For the regular representation of a finite group
Γ, the averaging map
P((vγ)γ∈Γ)= 1
|Γ|
X
γ∈Γ
vγ
satisfies Pρ(g)= P for every g∈ Γ. This is the mechanism
checked in the executed two-loop nonabelian experiment. It
explains how a nontrivial holonomy can remain present before
pooling while becoming harmless after the invariant readout.
2.4. Core certification pipeline
The mandatory part of TwistedMerge is a certification and
abstention pipeline. Projective rank searches and nonabelian
branch representations are optional research branches; they are
not required to return a diagnostic decision.
Algorithm 1.Core TwistedMerge certification pipeline
Require: Checkpoints{Mi}; frozen complex-construction data
DK; alignment, certification, selection, and test splits; gauge
families; candidate central coefficient systems; structural
and statistical thresholds.
Ensure: A selected ordinary or synchronized predictor and a
diagnostic status for every tested structural branch.
1: Construct K = Φ(DK) before fitting transitions or inspecting
residuals.
2: Build ordinary fixed-chart candidates and estimate pairwise
transitions onD align.
3: Synchronize each admissible gauge family and add every
strict candidate that passes the pairwise gate.
4: On Dcert, compute inverse-consistency, projection-fidelity,
triangle, centrality, and closure diagnostics.
5: ifa central coefficient system passes all structural gatesthen
6: Compute a confidence interval for distance to cobound-
aries.
7: Returntrivial,nontrivial on K, oruncertifiedby Theo-
rem 2.2.9.
8: ifthe status is nontrivial and a proved projective-rank
construction is availablethen
9: Attempt it only at admissible ranks; admit it only
after overlap and readout verification.
10:end if
11:else
12: Treat the residual as noncentral holonomy or as uncerti-
fied; do not assign anH 2 class.
13:end if
14: ifa nonabelian representation and invariant readout are
independently certifiedthen
15: Admit the branch predictor and record its parameter,
memory, and inference multipliers.
16:end if
17: Select among admitted candidates on Dselect; evaluate the
frozen choice once onD test.
18: Return the selected predictor together with the complete
diagnostic and abstention record.
The detailed candidate-generation algorithm, all diagnostics,
and computational-cost accounting are given in Appendix Ap-
pendix C. The reduced form above makes the scientific claim
explicit: TwistedMerge is a regime classifier with conservative
fallback, we do not guarantee that a projective or branch candi-
date will outperform ordinary merging.
3. Primary experiments
The primary experiments are organized by hypothesis. They
ask whether a cycle defect is synchronization-removable,
whether a concrete factor-merging rule is gauge-invariant,
whether the three-way certificate has controlled decision utility
under noise, and whether the resulting diagnostics generalize
to natural checkpoint collections. Secondary benchmarks and
structural sanity checks are reported in Appendix Appendix E.
3.1. Primary hypotheses and statistical protocol
The inferential unit is an independently trained checkpoint
group or base-model seed. Exact algebraic rows are reported as
deterministic audits. Confirmatory and exploratory analyses are
separated in Table 6.
All final model choices use validation or selection data, while
test data are evaluation-only. The complex-construction rule is
conceptually assigned its own split DK. In the controlled tetra-
hedral witness, the incidence structure is prescribed by construc-
tion; in the natural checkpoint studies, no nontrivialK-based cen-
tral claim is promoted because an application-grounded complex-
selection and sensitivity protocol has not yet passed the required
gate.
Where several fixed settings or complex thresholds are in-
spected, exploratory screens are not promoted to a confirmatory
claim merely because one row passes. The one-of-sixteen fixed-
setting correlation result is reported as exploratory, while the
leave-one-setting-out study is the primary natural prediction
test. For a predeclared finite complex family, Theorem 2.2.10
supplies simultaneous error control through the reported P
λδλ
budget.
3.2. Primary practical audit: trained low-rank adapter gauges
The exact-gauge discussion above concerns hidden-unit co-
ordinates in ReLU networks. A later repository program tests
an analogous gauge issue on trained low-rank adapters of LoRA
form [25]. For a rank-rupdate
∆W=BA,B∈R dout×r,A∈R r×din,
the factorization is unchanged by
(B,A)7−→(BQ,Q −1A),Q∈GL r.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Table 6: Statistical protocol for the primary experimental claims.
Hypothesis Inferential unit Data roles Status Primary endpoint
Planted alignment defect is
removable
trained base-model
seed
train; align; evaluate controlled causal degradation relative to the
uncorrupted aligned merge
Adapter-factor merge is
gauge-stable
independently trained
adapter group
fixed trained group;
equivalent scrambles;
held-out evaluation
confirmatory gauge audit relative merged-update
change and prediction
disagreement
Central certificate abstains
safely
case/noise/noise-type
seed
exact generator;
certification only
controlled calibration certification coverage,
uncertainty, rejection, and
false-lift rate
Natural cycle residual predicts
degradation
complete checkpoint
collection
train; align;
leave-one-setting-out
prediction; test
preregistered confirmatory held-outR 2 for
weight-average degradation
Natural central or holonomy
branch activates
independently trained
collection or lineage
separate fitting, gating,
and evaluation
confirmatory negative
audit
preregistered gate pass and
incremental predictive or
corrective value
Thus an averaging rule applied directly to A and B should be
tested for invariance under equivalent rank-space representa-
tions.
The experiment reuses five independent groups of eight chart-
specific rank-4 residual adapters over frozen ResNet-18 CIFAR-
10 features. The primary audit uses three preregistered well-
conditioned gauge families—orthogonal, positive diagonal with
condition number at most 8, and dense with condition num-
ber at most 30—and twenty scrambles per family and group,
giving 300 primary rows. Individual effective updates, logits,
predictions, and validation accuracies are preserved to numeri-
cal precision. Naive factor averaging is not invariant, whereas
whitened global synchronization and deterministic full-delta
SVD are stable; Table 7 records the largest observed deviations.
Across all primary families, the reported group-bootstrap
difference in relative merged-update change between global syn-
chronization and naive averaging is−3.218202, with 95% con-
fidence interval [−3.437573,− 2.998831]. This is an invariance
result. Full-delta SVD is at least as stable and exceeds global
synchronization by 0.051725 in mean test accuracy across the
five trained groups. Moreover, every primary natural cycle-
aware row exceeds the preregistered cycle gate and selects the
dense full-delta SVD fallback; no factor-only natural holonomy
correction is obtained.
The associated process-isolated systems grid spans dimen-
sions 768–4096, ranks 4–32, and 4–16 adapters. All 336
method/shape cases and 1008 timed trials finish without fail-
ure or timeout. Pairwise and global factor-space methods make
no dense effective-update allocation. At dimension 4096, global
synchronization has lower measured incremental peak resident-
set size than deterministic dense SVD in all twelve rank/count
configurations and is faster in ten of the twelve; so the runtime
statement is not uniform. Table 8 gives one representative case.
The scope is limited. The trained corpus contains one resid-
ual LoRA-form feature layer and a classification head, not a
multi-layer transformer LoRA stack. The ill-conditioned 10 8
boundary is excluded from the primary claim and produces 204
alignment failures. The experiment does not establish adapter
fingerprinting, unrestricted GLr robustness, accuracy superiority,
uniqueness, or a natural Brauer or holonomy class.
The experiment is deliberately reported as a bounded systems
and invariance study. It does not satisfy the stronger modern-
scale test of multilayer transformer or vision-transformer
adapters proposed in Section 4; that experiment remains neces-
sary for a performance-oriented claim.
3.3. Causal parameter-level bridge: planted alignment incon-
sistency
The controlled obstruction examples below begin from pre-
scribed cocycles or holonomy representations. We add an inter-
mediate neural-network experiment in which the local functions
are held fixed while the observed alignment data are perturbed.
For each seed, one MNIST MLP is trained and four copies are
produced by exact hidden-unit permutations together with the
compensating classifier-column permutations. The copies are
functionally equivalent: the mean base accuracy is 0.8632, the
maximum measured copy-accuracy standard deviation is 0, and
the maximum logit disagreement is approximately 2.9×10 −6.
One observed alignment edge is then corrupted at four defect
levels. Table 9 and Figure 2 report the central-involution fam-
ily. Git Re-Basin-style [1] degradation increases monotonically
from 0 to 0.0387, and the Spearman correlation between cycle
score and degradation is 0.8741. C2M3-style [2] synchroniza-
tion removes the one-edge inconsistency at every level. The
rank-lift branch agrees with C2M3 and gives no additional gain.
A random noncentral corruption produces a weaker trend,
with Spearman correlation 0.6967 and high-defect degradation
0.0190. This comparison shows that the cycle statistic is not
a universal scalar explanation of every merging failure. More
importantly, the central planted family is a synchronization-
positive benchmark: the residual is removed by an ordinary edge
correction.
3.4. Controlled central and projective structures
We now turn to the controlled central and projective exper-
iments. Three levels must be kept separate. A cocycle-level
obstruction witness proves that a specified edge correction is im-
possible. A projective or Morita construction realizes a central
commutation relation at an admissible rank. A charted branch
predictor produces an invariant output on a controlled task. None
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
Table 7: Gauge stability on trained rank-4 residual adapters. The individual-adapter row checks preservation under the reparameterization itself; the remaining rows
compare merged outputs across equivalent representations.
Method or check maximum relative update change maximum logit change maximum prediction disagreement
Individual-adapter preservation 1.447298×10 −15 2.131628×10 −14 0
Naive factor average 1.034210×10 1 1.156529×10 1 0.579250
Whitened global synchronization 2.709900×10 −13 9.865442×10 −13 0
Deterministic full-delta SVD 2.711270×10 −15 1.154632×10 −14 0
Table 8: Representative process-isolated systems measurement at dimension 4096, rank 8, and eight adapters. Temporary-memory figures are analytical counts. These
numerical fixtures are scaled from the trained factors and do not provide application-accuracy evidence.
Method dense effective update incremental peak RSS temporary memory median time
Whitened global synchronization no 11,845,632 bytes 2,113,536 bytes 0.009687 s
Deterministic full-delta SVD yes 54,214,656 bytes 68,157,440 bytes 0.061481 s
Table 9: Causal planted-alignment benchmark on functionally identical MNIST MLP copies. The degradation is measured relative to the uncorrupted aligned merge.
Defect level Git Re-Basin degradationC 2M3 degradation Rank-lift minusC 2M3
none 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
low 0.0031 0.0000 0.0000
medium 0.0149 0.0000 0.0000
high 0.0387 0.0000 0.0000
None Low Medium High
Planted edge-defect level
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
0.040Mean degradation in test accuracy
0.0000
0.0031
0.0149
0.0387Git Re-Basin-style pairwise alignment
C 2M 3-style synchronization
Figure 2: Causal parameter-level alignment inconsistency. The vertical axis is
the decrease in test accuracy relative to the uncorrupted aligned merge. The
pairwise merge degrades with the planted edge defect, while cycle-consistent
synchronization removes this particular inconsistency.
of the last two statements implies that a non-coboundary cocycle
has become a coboundary.
3.4.1. Tetrahedral H2(µ2)witness and prediction-level branch
task
LetK=∂∆ 3 and let the face signs be
(c012,c 013,c 023,c 123)=(−1,+1,+1,+1).
By Theorem 2.3.19, this cocycle is not a coboundary. The
negative-face rate is 0.250, but the exact certificate is the product
of the four face signs, not the raw rate. By Proposition 2.3.6,
this one-negative-face pattern is not produced by six context-
independent edge matrices satisfying the exact central hypothe-
ses. We treat it as a cocycle-level oracle witness on the pre-
scribed comparison complex.
A separate controlled finite central task supplies a charted
representation with branch count q =2 and tests prediction-
level recovery. This is the benchmark shown in Table 11. Strict
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Test accuracy
Ordinary weight average
Git Re-Basin pairwise alignment
C 2M 3 synchronized
No-twist branch control
Validation-selected branch
ensemble
Distilled charted
single model
Parameter-matched
wide control
Random branch
ensemble
Wrong-context control
Wrong-twist control
Correct q = 2 charted branch
Learned context router
Width 32 Width 64
Figure 3: Controlled finite central charted-prediction benchmark on the full
accuracy scale [0, 1]. The branch count is q =2. The correct branch and router
recover the task, but this prediction-level result does not make the tetrahedral
non-coboundary class vanish.
pairwise and synchronized methods plateau at 0.7500, while the
correct q =2 branch and a learned context router reach 1.0000.
Wrong-context and wrong-twist controls remain at chance. The
successful rows show that the supplied charted representation
carries task-relevant central structure; they are not a construction
of ordinary edge-level descent for the non-coboundary tetrahe-
dral class.
The repository also contains a complete-graphµ2 edge-noise
sweep. The face cochain in this experiment is c =δb, so it is a
coboundary rather than a nontrivial H2 class. At low triangle-
residual rates, ordinary and rank-lifted predictions agree. At
residual rates 0.3992, 0.4795, and 0.4947, ordinary accuracy is
0.9214, 0.8100, and 0.7196, while the lifted branch remains at
0.9338, 0.9351, and 0.9356. This is a robustness experiment for
structured edge inconsistency.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
Table 10: Tetrahedral H2(µ2) cocycle-level witness. No rank-lift success is asserted for the non-coboundary class; the current edge-level algorithm records that no
permitted edge correction removes it.
Case Local loss Pairwise loss Negative-face rate Coboundary?
trivial face cocycle 0.000 0.000 0.000 yes
nontrivial face cocycle 0.000 0.000 0.250 no
Table 11: Controlled finite central charted-prediction benchmark with branch count q =2. Branch, router, and ensemble rows are not capacity-matched single-model
outputs.
Method Width 32 acc. Width 64 acc.
ordinary weight average 0.4993 0.4998
Git Re-Basin pairwise 0.7500 0.7500
C2M3 synchronized 0.7500 0.7500
no-twist branch control 0.7500 0.7500
validation-selected branch ensemble 0.7500 0.7500
distilled charted single model 0.7500 0.7500
parameter-matched wide control 0.7373 0.7393
random branch ensemble 0.5500 0.5167
wrong-context control 0.5000 0.5000
wrong-twist control 0.5000 0.5000
correctq=2 charted branch1.0000 1.0000
learned context router1.0000 1.0000
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Mean triangle-residual rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Mean test accuracy
Ordinary descent
Lifted branch predictor
Oracle local-model reference
Figure 4: Syntheticµ2 edge-noise sweep on the full accuracy scale [0, 1]. The
horizontal axis is the mean triangle-residual rate before complete edge-level
repair. Because the face cochain is induced from an edge cochain, it is a
coboundary and not a nontrivial H2 class. The lifted curve is a branch-prediction
control rather than a cohomology certificate.
3.4.2. Robust certification under noisy transition maps
The exact rank identities do not determine what to do with
noisy estimates. The robust calibration uses the three-way output
from Proposition 2.3.11. Hereτphase is the tolerance for the scalar
phase-relation residual. Under the selected policy
τcent =τ phase =3×10 −4,confidence margin=0.25,
the small-noise certification rate is 1, the false-central rate is
0, the false-lift rate is 0, the medium-noise uncertainty rate is
0.7233, and the large-noise rejection rate is 1. No grouped trivial
or noncentral control produces a false lift. Uncertain rows do
not activate a lift.
3.4.3. Decision utility and threshold sensitivity
The calibration can be read as a selective decision system.
“Coverage” is the fraction of designated small-noise positive
cases that receive a central/projective certificate; “selective error”
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Rate
Small-noise certification rate
False-positive central-certificate rate
False-positive lift rate
Medium-noise uncertainty rate
Large-noise rejection rate
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.7233
1.0000
Figure 5: Robust period-index certification and abstention. Intermediate noise is
assigned to an uncertain state rather than being forced into a binary decision.
is the false-lift rate among tested decisions; intermediate-noise
uncertainty records abstention rather than an error. Table 12
reports the precomputed policy sweep at fixed confidence margin
0.25.
The selected policy increases positive coverage while retain-
ing zero false lifts in this controlled grid. Its practical utility is
rejection of unsupported structure. A complete risk–coverage
study across architectures and distribution shifts remains open.
3.5. Natural-data and architecture boundary
The controlled experiments identify their coefficient group
and representation by construction. Natural neural checkpoints
do not provide this information. The repository contains several
repeated-seed and held-out tests designed to prevent a descriptive
residual from being promoted into a general obstruction claim.
3.5.1. Natural diagnostic prediction
An earlier quality-gated permutation/activation study using
the repository architecture labelled mlp2 evaluated sixteen pri-
mary fixed settings with thirty observed seeds per setting. One
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Table 12: Controlled coverage–abstention trade-offfor the centrality and phase tolerances. All tested policies have zero false-central and false-lift rate on the grouped
negative controls; the table does not claim calibration under natural distribution shift.
Tolerance small-noise coverage medium-noise uncertainty false-lift rate large-noise rejection
10−5 0.6417 0.8892 0 1.0000
3×10 −5 0.8017 0.8892 0 1.0000
10−4 0.9506 0.8892 0 1.0000
3×10 −4 1.0000 0.7233 0 1.0000
−0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Leave-one-setting-out R 2
Cycle residual
Pairwise alignment loss
Validation loss
Validation-loss delta
-0.206
0.387
0.511
0.972
Figure 6: Natural-data held-out prediction boundary. The horizontal axis is leave-
one-setting-out R2. “Validation-loss delta” is the validation-loss change relative
to the synchronized baseline used in the repository audit. The cycle residual
has negative held-out R2, while ordinary validation information is substantially
more predictive in this run.
setting passed the predefined positive-correlation gate: Fashion-
MNIST, N =3, no shift, activation matching, with Pearson corre-
lation 0.2420, bootstrap lower bound 0.0065, and Spearman cor-
relation 0.2629. The other fifteen settings did not pass. A later
monomial-gauge verifier, which varied MNIST and Fashion-
MNIST, N∈{ 3, 4}, widths 64, 128, no shift and input noise, and
monomial activation or weight matching, produced no passing
observed setting.
The preregistered held-out study uses 120 natural checkpoint
collections and leaves out one complete (N,width ) setting at a
time. Its primary predictor is the cycle residual and its target
is weight-average degradation. The cycle residual has Pearson
correlation−0.1828, Spearman correlation−0.2626, and held-
out R2 =−0.2055. Pairwise alignment loss has held-out R2 =
0.3872, while validation loss and validation delta have held-out
R2 =0.5108 and 0.9723. Thus cycle residual is not supported as
a general held-out predictor in this dataset.
3.5.2. Natural holonomy applications and model lineages
The most recent repository programs test whether the struc-
tural diagnostics yield a positive practical holonomy application.
The first program reuses a shared frozen-encoder CIFAR-10
corpus with eight D4 chart adapters and five training seeds.
Its held-out-selected weight-derived connections are trivial or
coboundary. Among fifteen nontrivial alternative seed–estimator
settings, all fifteen are noncentral under the strict, medium, and
loose tolerance policies. No natural seed–estimator setting is
a central finite-order candidate, so the term Brauer class is not
warranted for this corpus.
The predictive and corrective gates are also negative. Orbit
invariant pooling is 0.0160 below a generic mixture-of-experts
control and 0.0062 below a matched random-branch control,
with both reported confidence intervals excluding zero in the
unfavorable direction. A mixed natural/controlled linter im-
proves descriptively, but on natural rows alone the full holon-
omy diagnostic changes AUROC by −0.0273, with reported
95% cell-bootstrap interval [−0.0429,− 0.0057]. In controlled
finite-Heisenberg carrier layers on the same frozen-image fea-
tures and saved logits, the ( period,index ) cases (2, 2), (2, 4),
and (3, 3) recover the exact minimum structurally coherent ca-
pacity for all five seeds. The coherent lift nevertheless ties a
parameter-matched generic unitary carrier in accuracy in ev-
ery predicted-index comparison. This is a controlled structural
validation, not a superior practical capacity planner.
A separate confirmatory model-lineage audit uses one frozen
ResNet-18 encoder, rank-4 feature adapters, a classifier, three de-
terministic CIFAR-10 corruptions, and five independent training
seeds as the inferential units. Different learning orders produce
measurable terminal differences, but no loop/layer row passes the
frozen nonidentity-stability gate, no commutator row passes the
noncommutation gate, and the relevant admissible loop distances
are only 1.933× 10−14 to 6.229× 10−14. The four preregistered
predictive and corrective hypotheses all fail; in particular, there
are zero harmful raw merge rows and no held-out improvement
beyond pairwise drift. The largest raw adapter-layer distance is
0.9734, but it is not stable and is not promoted to a holonomy
signal.
These audits strengthen the conservative interpretation. The
supported practical use is certification and rejection: a selected
trivial connection is kept trivial, noncentral alternatives are not
forced into a Brauer interpretation, and unstable loop estimates
are not used to activate a lift.
The conclusion of the natural-data section is negative. The
repository does not certify a natural central, Brauer, or period-
index class; cycle residual is not a general held-out predictor;
and exact gauge refinements do not displace greedy soup as
the strongest generic boundary baseline in these experiments.
These outcomes are consistent with the conservative design of
Algorithm 2: when the structural gates do not pass, no lift is
activated.
3.6. Secondary evidence summary
The remaining experiments support the taxonomy. The
independent-seed MLP ladder places the selector at the greedy-
soup boundary; the matched attribution audit does not establish
a TwistedMerge-specific selector gain. Same-base task-vector
methods can outperform the original checkpoint-only soup be-
cause a common chart is supplied. Finite-Heisenberg and learned
time-frequency systems verify projective-representation rank
thresholds. The executed two-loop S 3 and D4 experiment ver-
ifies noncommuting holonomy and invariant pooling but has
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
Table 13: Recent practical holonomy and model-lineage audits. These are negative or controlled-structural results and do not establish a natural Brauer class, a
practical invariant-pooling advantage, or a general model-lineage holonomy predictor.
Audit Recorded outcome Interpretation
Natural central certificate 0 central finite-order candidates Brauer terminology not warranted
Invariant pooling−0.0160 vs generic MoE;−0.0062 vs random branch practical gate fails
Natural-only linter AUROC delta−0.0273, CI [−0.0429,−0.0057] no incremental mergeability value
Controlled real-feature carrier exact thresholds (2,2),(2,4),(3,3); accuracy delta 0 vs generic structural validation only
Model-lineage loops 0 stable nonidentity rows; 0 noncommuting rows no incremental predictive/corrective value
no discriminative accuracy value. Batch-normalization, CNN,
bridge-dataset, and branch-lift audits are engineering or bound-
ary results. Full tables, figures, and claim qualifications appear
in Appendix Appendix E.
4. Limitations and decisive next tests
The first limitation is the construction of K. Definition 2.2.8
gives an ex ante protocol, Theorem 2.2.10 controls a predeclared
threshold family, and Proposition 2.2.11 gives an exact topology-
sensitivity test, but the present natural checkpoint collections
do not yet supply an application-grounded higher-overlap rule
that persists across datasets and architectures. The controlled
tetrahedral boundary is prescribed; it should not be mistaken for
a topology discovered from four ordinary checkpoints.
The second limitation is a realization gap. The one-negative-
face µ2 class is a cocycle-level oracle witness. The separate
q =2 charted task realizes a twisted prediction rule, but it does
not make the original class a coboundary and it is not an ordinary
edge-level descent realization of the same neural system. The
decisive next controlled experiment should estimate overlap-
dependent transition sections and certify the nontrivial class and
the successful capacity-accounted projective predictor in one
data-generating mechanism.
The third limitation is scale. The low-rank-adapter audit uses
one residual feature layer over frozen ResNet-18 features. It is
not a multilayer LoRA stack on a transformer or vision trans-
former. A journal-level practical follow-up should compare
naive factor averaging, pairwise and global factor synchroniza-
tion, dense delta averaging or SVD, and applicable task-vector
baselines across several backbones, task families, adapter ranks,
and independent training groups. It should report accuracy, in-
variance error, peak accelerator memory, runtime, and inference
cost under a predeclared primary endpoint.
The fourth limitation is decision utility. The controlled cali-
bration reports a useful coverage–abstention trade-offand zero
false lifts on the tested negative controls, but it does not yet pro-
vide natural distribution-shift calibration, full gate ablations, or
regret relative to an oracle regime selector. The current natural
evidence instead shows that pairwise and validation diagnostics
are more predictive than cycle residual. Accordingly, the sup-
ported use of the certificate is conservative rejection rather than
natural accuracy forecasting.
Finally, several mathematical statements in the appendices are
standard or adapted background. The new theorem-level content
is deliberately isolated in Table 3. The neuro-algebraic-geometry
discussion is retained only as additional context.
5. Conclusion
Cycle inconsistency in model merging is not automatically
cohomology. A higher-obstruction claim depends on a frozen
comparison complex, coherent transition data, a fixed coefficient
system, centrality, closure, and a stated repair model. Twisted-
Merge organizes these requirements into a three-way certifica-
tion pipeline with ordinary or synchronized fallback.
The causal planted benchmark shows why the distinction mat-
ters: a nonzero cycle score can be produced by an inconsistent
observed edge and removed completely by synchronization. The
controlled central experiments show the opposite possibility rel-
ative to a prescribed complex: a closed central cocycle may be
non-coboundary, and noisy estimates should then be certified,
rejected, or left uncertain. The low-rank-adapter audit supplies a
practical gauge example in which naive factor averaging depends
on an equivalent representation, although dense SVD remains
the accuracy boundary. Natural checkpoint and lineage studies
do not support a general cycle predictor or a natural central class.
The established contribution is diagnostic. The framework
states what has been ruled out, what has merely been represented
in a larger predictor, and when no higher-order conclusion is
justified. The next decisive evidence must come from an ex
ante natural comparison complex, an end-to-end obstruction re-
alization, or a modern multilayer adapter study with measurable
decision and systems utility.
Code and data availability
The repository state audited for this revision is commit
b0e1ac4. The complete source package contains the clean
manuscript, a referee-change version, the bibliography, every
referenced figure, the source CSV files for generated figures,
deterministic plotting code, the comparison-complex and claim-
evidence audits, and the report snapshots used for the numerical
statements. No invalidated nonabelian accuracy-evidence arti-
fact is used.
Appendix A. Extended descent dictionary
The compact terminology used in the main text is expanded
here. The table is interpretive and does not identify a compu-
tational comparison complex with a site-level descent problem
without the hypotheses stated in Section 2.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
Appendix A.1. Full dictionary
Below we give a dictionary translating between descent-
theoretic terms and their learning-theoretic interpretations. This
dictionary is meant as a guide for the reader: it indicates which
practical learning objects should be kept in mind when abstract
terms such as covers, restriction maps, cocycles, and global
sections appear. The goal is to make the following technical
introduction readable both to mathematicians and to machine-
learning theorists.
RemarkAppendix A.1.1.The dictionary above includes both a
literal descent interpretation and a finite computational interpre-
tation. In the literal interpretation,U ={Ui→X} is a cover in
a specified learning site and N(U) is its nerve. In the computa-
tional interpretation, the algorithm may instead be given a finite
comparison complex K whose simplices record the available
pairwise and higher-order comparison data. These distinctions
are made precise in Definitions 2.2.1–2.2.4.
Appendix B. Additional theory and proofs
This appendix retains the fixed-chart empirical-descent proof
and the extended background used to relate the certification
pipeline to existing merging algorithms. Their placement here
should not be read as a claim of theorem-level novelty.
Appendix B.0.1. Greedy soup as a fixed-chart empirical descent
analogy
We now reinterpret greedy model soup [ 26] through a fi-
nite descent analogy. Fix a common parameter chart in which
checkpoint averaging is defined. Let S ={σ1,...,σ N} be a
finite set of trained checkpoints. For every nonempty subset
S⊆{ 1,...,N} , letσS denote the averaged predictor obtained
from{σi}i∈S . Model souping therefore produces the finite family
Psoup :={σ S :S⊆{1,...,N},S,∅}.
The validation set defines an empirical risk functional bR :
Psoup →R . These averaged checkpoints are candidate pre-
dictors in a fixed chart. They become literal sheaf-theoretic
global sections only when the relevant compatibility and effec-
tivity conditions have also been established. Greedy soup is a
greedy search overPsoup, analogous to empirical descent on a
finite family of global-section candidates.
Definition Appendix B.0.1(Empirical compatibility of soup
candidates).Let S⊆{ 1,...,N} be the current soup, and let
j<S be a new checkpoint. We say that σ j isempirically
compatiblewith σS if bR(σS∪{j} )≤ bR(σS ). Equivalently, adding
σ j does not decrease validation accuracy. Greedy soup accepts
exactly the empirically compatible candidates in its prescribed
validation order.
The next proposition records the elementary consequences
of this validation rule. The finite-class comparison event used
below is standard in empirical risk minimization and uniform-
convergence arguments [27, 28].
Proposition Appendix B.0.2(Greedy soup as empirical de-
scent).Let S 0⊆S 1⊆···⊆S T be the sequence of accepted
soups produced by greedy soup, and letPeval be the finite family
of predictors evaluated by the procedure.
1.The empirical risk is nonincreasing along accepted steps:
bR(σS T )≤ bR(σS T−1 )≤···≤ bR(σS 0).
Equivalently, validation accuracy is nondecreasing along
accepted steps.
2.Suppose that, with probability at least1−δ, one has
sup
σ∈Peval
R(σ)− bR(σ)
≤ε,
where R denotes population risk. Then, on this event,
R(σS T )≤min
i
R(σ{i})+2ε.
3. Under the same uniform comparison event, suppose that
σ j is rejected at the current soupσS , so that bR(σS∪{j} ) >
bR(σS ). Then adding σ j cannot improve population risk by
more than2ε:
R(σS∪{j} )≥R(σ S )−2ε.
If the algorithm uses the strict margin rule bR(σS∪{j} ) >
bR(σS )+τ, then
R(σS∪{j} )≥R(σ S )+τ−2ε.
Proof. For (1), at step t, the algorithm accepts j<S t only if
bR(σS t∪{j} )≤ bR(σS t). If the candidate is accepted, then S t+1 =
S t∪{j} , and hence bR(σS t+1)≤ bR(σS t). Rejected candidates leave
the soup unchanged. Induction gives the monotone chain.
For (2), let i∗ ∈arg min i R(σ{i}). The initial predictor σS 0
is chosen to be the best single checkpoint by validation, so
bR(σS 0)≤ bR(σ{i∗}). By (1), bR(σS T )≤ bR(σS 0). Using the uniform
comparison event twice gives
R(σS T )≤ bR(σS T )+ε≤ bR(σS 0)+ε≤ bR(σ{i∗})+ε≤R(σ {i∗})+2ε.
For (3), the uniform comparison event gives R(σS∪{j} ) ≥
bR(σS∪{j} )−ε . Since j is rejected, bR(σS∪{j} ) > bR(σS ), and the
same event gives bR(σS ) ≥R (σS )−ε . Combining these in-
equalities yields R(σS∪{j} )>R (σS )− 2ε. The margin version is
identical.
Corollary Appendix B.0.3(Validation envelope).Let F be a
finite family of candidate-predictor generators, such as weight
averaging, greedy soup, Task Arithmetic, DARE, TIES, and
SLERP. For each f∈F , letσ f be the candidate predictor pro-
duced by f . Let bf∈arg min f∈F bR(σ f )be selected by validation,
and let f∗∈arg min f∈F R(σ f )minimize population risk within
the same finite family. If
sup
f∈F
R(σ f )− bR(σ f )
≤ε,
then R(σbf )≤R(σ f∗)+2ε.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
Table A.14: Dictionary between descent-theoretic language and practical learning language.
Mathematical/descent term Practical learning interpretation
Global objectX, siteC learn, cover{U i→X} The whole merging problem, together with its decomposition into local
pieces such as clients, tasks, domains, or checkpoints.
OverlapsU i j andU i jk Places where local pieces are compared. Pairwise overlaps compare two
pieces; triple overlaps check whether the pairwise comparisons fit
together.
Local objectM i, restrictionM i|Ui j, and restriction maps A local model and the part of it visible on an overlap. The restriction
map is the operation that sends a local model to the part that can be
compared with another one.
Transition mapsg i j, gauges, gauge groupG, synchronization,
and nonabelianH 1
The data used to align local models. Gauge changes are allowed
changes of coordinates, and synchronization means choosing them so
that the alignments become mutually consistent. When the relevant
torsor problem is defined, nonabelianH 1 classifies gauge-descent data;
it is not a numerical mismatch score.
Descent datum, strict descent, gluing, and ordinary object A descent datum is the collection of local objects and their transition
maps. Strict descent means that these data satisfy the cocycle condition.
When descent is effective in the ambient category, they glue to an
ordinary global object or section; in the computational analogy, this
corresponds to a consistent global merge.
Global sections, space of global sections, andH 0 The possible globally consistent choices. In a literal descent problem,
these are global sections. In the computational analogy, greedy soup
searches only a prescribed finite family of fixed-chart candidate
predictors; it should not be identified with the full spaceH 0 unless the
relevant descent conditions have been established.
Triple-overlap defectc i jk, coefficient sheafA, 2-cocycle,
obstruction class [c]∈H 2(Clearn;A), and coboundary
Ifg i jg jkgki =c i jk, thenc i jk first records a triangle residual. When the
residuals lie in a fixed central coefficient system and satisfy cocycle
closure, they define a class on the chosen comparison complex or cover.
A site-level class is obtained only when the relevant comparison map
applies. If the certified class is trivial, it can be removed by an edge
correction; if it is nontrivial, strict gluing fails on the corresponding
complex or cover.
Twisted descent datum, failed gluing, and invariant readout In a genuine descent problem, a nonzero certified class prevents the
permitted edge correction from producing strict descent on the stated
complex or cover. The resulting datum is twisted; it determines a
twisted sheaf only when the ambient category supports such objects. A
projective or branch representation with invariant readout may still yield
a globally consistent predictor, but it does not make the original class
vanish.
Nerve of the cover and ˇCech complex The combinatorial and algebraic devices used to organize the
calculation. The nerve records local pieces, pairwise overlaps, and triple
overlaps; the ˇCech complex records the corresponding alignment and
obstruction data.
Obstruction score For an arbitrary projected 2-cochain, this is a numerical distance from
the space of coboundaries. It is interpreted as the norm of anH 2 class
only after cocycle closure has been certified.
Period per([c]) and index ind([c]) of an obstruction class
[c]∈H 2(Clearn;A), where per([c]) is the order of [c] and
ind([c]) is the rank-divisibility obstruction for twisted objects
realizing [c]
The period tells us the torsion type. The classical index, or the
projective-representation index in a controlled finite system, gives an
arithmetic rank-divisibility condition. Passing this condition does not by
itself construct a lifted predictor; the implemented overlap relations and
invariant readout must also pass.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Current predictor
σS∈P soup
Add checkpointj
candidateσ S∪{j}
Validation-risk check
bR(σS∪{j} )≤ bR(σS )?
Accept
S←S∪{j}
Reject
Sunchanged
yes no
Figure B.7: Greedy soup as a fixed-chart empirical descent analogy. A checkpoint is accepted only when the validation risk of the resulting averaged predictor does
not increase. The diagram describes a finite candidate-predictor search; it is not a computation of the full space of sheaf-theoretic global sections.
Proof. Since bf is chosen by validation, bR(σbf )≤ bR(σ f∗). There-
fore
R(σbf )≤ bR(σbf )+ε≤ bR(σ f∗)+ε≤R(σ f∗)+2ε.
RemarkAppendix B.0.4.Greedy soup is a greedy algorithm on
a finite family of candidate predictors in a fixed chart. It does
not compute the full sheaf of models or test twisted cocycle data.
Its validation rule is analogous to empirical descent only within
the prescribed finite family. This explains why greedy soup is a
strong baseline in low-obstruction settings and why it can still
miss structured compatibility information that is not represented
in its candidate pool.
Appendix C. Full algorithm and diagnostics
The following version exposes the optional rank, projective,
and nonabelian branches that were suppressed in Algorithm 1.
Appendix C.1. Detailed candidate-generation pipeline
In this subsection, we record the algorithmic form of Twist-
edMerge after the distinctions above. The guiding principle is
that a model merge is a search over candidate global predictors
together with a diagnosis of the comparison data. It also records
the gauge family, output type, capacity multiplier, synchroniza-
tion status, centrality and closure margins, projective rank gate,
invariant-readout certificate, and the reason for every abstention.
Definition Appendix C.1.1.Fix metrics dG on G and dA on A,
write dG(x,A )= infa∈A dG(x,a ), and let K+
1 be a choice of one
orientation for each unoriented edge. The diagnostics below are
used only when the corresponding edge, face, or tetrahedron
set is nonempty; otherwise that branch is skipped rather than
evaluated with a zero denominator. When a structured edge
familyS⊆G K+
1 is used, let
ΠS(g)= eg={ egi j}(i j)∈K+
1
be the fitted or projected edge connection, extended to reverse
orientations by inversion. If no structural projection is used, set
eg=g. Define
ehi jk = egi jeg jkegki, bci jk =π A(ehi jk)
whenever the coefficient projection is defined. We use the diag-
nostics
Einv =

1
|K+
1|
X
(i j)∈K+
1
dG(g jigi j,1 G)2

1/2
,
Eproj =

1
|K+
1|
X
(i j)∈K+
1
dG(gi j,egi j)2

1/2
,
Ecent =

1
|K2|
X
(i jk)∈K2
dG(ehi jk,A) 2

1/2
,
Ecob =inf
b∈C1(K;A)

1
|K2|
X
(i jk)∈K2
dA(bci jk,(δ 1b)i jk)2

1/2
.
WhenK 3 ,∅, define
Eclosed =

1
|K3|
X
(i jkl)∈K3
dA((δ2bc)i jkl,1 A)2

1/2
;
when K3 = ∅, set Eclosed =0 by convention. The projection
residual is an edge-level fidelity test: a small post-projection
cycle score is not accepted when the learned connection is far
from the structural family used to produce it. If dimK≤ 2,
closure is vacuous for dimensional reasons, but inverse consis-
tency, structural-projection fidelity, centrality, and distance to
coboundaries remain nonvacuous.
Here g ji in Einv denotes a reverse transition fitted indepen-
dently when such a fit is part of the protocol. If reverse transi-
tions are defined by g ji = g−1
i j rather than estimated separately,
then Einv =0 identically and serves only as a bookkeeping
check.
Definition Appendix C.1.2(Three-way certification).Let Lcob
and Ucob be lower and upper confidence bounds for the dis-
tance to coboundaries after the structural gates have passed. For
thresholdsτ 0 <τ 1, the central branch returns

trivial,U cob≤τ 0,
nontrivial onK,L cob≥τ 1,
uncertified,otherwise.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
Table C.15: Main modules of TwistedMerge. A module either produces a candidate predictor or records a diagnostic explaining why the corresponding branch is
unavailable.
Module Mathematical object Computation Output
Candidate predictorsP cand averages, soups, task-vector, and path candidates ordinary candidates
Pairwise alignment transitionsg i j permutation, monomial, block, or projective fitting aligned models and edge maps
Strict synchronization candidate untwisted datum synchronize gauges overKstrict candidate
Triangle diagnosticsg i jg jkgki cycle or holonomy residuals face-level defect data
Central certification bc∈C 2(K;A) inverse, projection, centrality, closure, margin trivial/nontrivial/uncertified
Projective rank gate per([α]) and ind rep([α]) arithmetic and representation checks admissible or rejected rank
Invariant readoutPρ(h)=Ppath-independence certificate charted predictor
Validation envelope empirical risk bRevaluate certified candidates only selected output
Conservative rejection abstention state retain ordinary candidates safe fallback
The same uncertified state is returned whenever inverse consis-
tency, centrality, coefficient projection, closure, or the confidence
margin fails.
Algorithm 2.TwistedMerge
Require: Checkpoints{Mi}n
i=1; alignment data Dalign; certifica-
tion data Dcert; selection data Dselect; optional held-out test
data Dtest; a specified finite comparison complex K and,
when applicable, a coverU with K = N(U); gauge families
G; candidate central coefficient systems and projectionsπA;
candidate ranksR; structural and statistical tolerances.
Ensure:A selected predictorM ∗ and a diagnostic recordR.
1: Initialize candidate setC←∅ and diagnostic record R←∅ .
2: Construct ordinary candidates: weight average, greedy soup,
and any available same-base task-vector or path candidates.
Add them to C and record output type and cost for each
candidate.
3:foreach gauge familyG∈Gdo
4: Estimate the edge transitions gi j∈G on Dalign and com-
pute pairwise alignment losses.
5:ifthe pairwise gate passesthen
6: Synchronize the edge gauges over K, construct the
strict candidateσ sync, and add it toC.
7:end if
8:Fit or project the structured edge connection eg= ΠS(g)
when applicable, and computeE inv andE proj onD cert.
9:Compute the triangle residuals ehi jk = egi jeg jkegki.
10: foreach candidate central coefficient system A and pro-
jectionπ A do
11:ComputeE cent relative toA.
12: ifthe inverse-consistency, centrality, and projection-
fidelity gates passthen
13:Form bci jk =π A(ehi jk).
14:ifK 3 ,∅then
15:ComputeE closed =∥δ 2bc∥.
16:else
17:SetE closed =0 for dimensional reasons.
18:end if
19:ifthe closure gate passesthen
20: Compute a confidence interval for Ecob =
dist(bc,B 2(K;A)).
21:ifthe status is trivialthen
22: Solve for an A-valued edge correction
and add the corrected strict candidate when the overlap
equations pass.
23:else ifthe status is nontrivial onKthen
24: ifa certified classical index, projective-
representation index, or proved rank lower-bound gate is
availablethen
25:foreach candidate rankr∈Rdo
26: if r passes the arithmetic rank
gatethen
27: Attempt the projective or
charted rank-rconstruction.
28: ifthe lifted overlap relations
and invariant-readout certificate passthen
29: Add the lifted candidate
and record its output type and cost.
30:else
31: Record construction or
readout rejection.
32:end if
33:else
34: Record arithmetic no-lift re-
jection for rankr.
35:end if
36:end for
37:else
38: Keep the central class statusnontriv-
ial on K; record the rank gate as uncertified and skip rank
constructions.
39:end if
40:else
41: Record central uncertified status and do
not activate a lift.
42:end if
43:else
44: Record a projected cochain that failed clo-
sure; do not assign anH 2 class.
45:end if
46:else
47: Record a noncentral, inverse-inconsistent, or
projection-unstable result for this coefficient system.
48:end if
49:end for
50:ifthe residual is treated as nonabelian holonomythen
51: Estimate generatorsγ1,...,γ s of the holonomy sub-
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
group.
52:Search for a representationρand pooling mapP.
53: if Pρ(γℓ)= P within tolerance for every generator
then
54: Construct the branch predictor, record its branch
and inference multipliers, and add it toC.
55:else
56:Record nonabelian no-lift rejection.
57:end if
58:end if
59:end for
60:Evaluate bR(σ) onD select for everyσ∈C.
61:Selectσ ∗∈arg minσ∈C bR(σ).
62:ifD test is suppliedthen
63:Evaluate the frozen selection once onD test.
64:end if
65:ReturnM ∗ =σ∗ andR.
The separation of Dalign, Dcert, Dselect, and Dtest is conceptu-
ally important. Alignment data estimate the transition maps,
certification data decide whether a structural branch is admis-
sible, selection data compare the resulting candidates, and test
data are evaluation-only. When data are limited, these roles can
be cross-fitted rather than literally assigned disjoint samples.
Let
CTM =C base∪C sync∪C proj∪C br
be the admitted candidate family. The final predictor is
σ∗∈arg min
σ∈CTM
bR(σ).
If no projective or nonabelian branch is certified, then Cproj∪
Cbr = ∅, and TwistedMerge reduces to validation selection
among ordinary and synchronized candidates. This is the con-
servative fallback used in the natural-data experiments.
Appendix C.1.1. Computational cost
Let|E(K)|,|F(K)|, and|T(K)| denote the numbers of edges,
faces, and tetrahedra. Let Calign be the cost of fitting one edge
alignment, Ctri the cost of one triangle diagnostic, and Cval the
cost of validating one candidate. The base connection and trian-
gle diagnostics cost
O |E(K)|C align +|F(K)|C tri
.
For each candidate coefficient system, one must additionally pay
for coefficient projection, closure on T(K), and the distance-to-
coboundaries computation; these costs depend on the represen-
tation of the coefficient group and on the chosen solver. Rank
and branch searches add their own construction costs. The final
validation cost is
O |CTM|Cval
.
A branch or rank lift may also have an inference multiplier,
which is recorded explicitly. The conservative design avoids the
construction and inference costs of structural branches whenever
their certificates are absent or uncertain.
Appendix D. Geometric discussion
The following discussion is conceptual background and is not
used in the experimental conclusions.
Appendix D.1. Neural quotient stacks and coarse spaces
We end the theoretical part with a remark on neuro-algebraic
geometry. The point is only to explain how the descent-theoretic
language above can be viewed as a finite computational shadow
of a more geometric object: the étale site of a neural variety, or
more naturally, of its quotient stack by gauge symmetries.
LetΘdenote the parameter space for a fixed neural architec-
ture, and let ev :Θ →Y be an evaluation map to a space of
functions, outputs, or finite evaluations. For a polynomial archi-
tecture A, one can regard this as an algebraic mapΘ A→F A,
whereΘ A is the parameter space of the architecture andFA is the
finite-dimensional affine space of functions, or finite evaluation
vectors, represented by the chosen algebraic output coordinates.
Then define the associated neurovariety
NA := im(ΘA→F A).
The coarse neurovariety records expressivity and algebraic con-
straints on the realizable functions. For ReLU networks, the
same picture should be understood stratumwise or piecewise al-
gebraically, since ReLU is piecewise linear rather than globally
algebraic. This viewpoint is compatible with recent work on
neuro-algebraic geometry and with earlier algebraic and tropical
approaches to neural networks [29–32].
However, the coarse neurovariety does not retain the auto-
morphism data of a parameter presentation. Neural parameter
spaces usually carry nontrivial gauge symmetries: hidden-unit
permutations, positive ReLU scalings, monomial gauges, and
changes of basis can change the parameters without changing
the represented function. Thus a natural object for descent is
the quotient stack NA =[Θ A/GA], where GA is the relevant
gauge group. This quotient stack records the parameter sym-
metries that the image in the coarse space alone does not retain.
The quotient stack remembers automorphisms of local models,
while the coarse quotient may forget them. This is important for
us because descent obstructions are sensitive precisely to such
automorphism data.
Definition Appendix D.1.1.Let N =[Θ/G] be a quotient stack
associated to a neural architecture. Itsétale learning siteis the
site N´et whose objects are étale charts U→N and whose covers
are étale covers. A local model over such a chart is a section
or object of the model stack over U, and transition maps on
overlaps record how two local parameter charts or latent charts
are identified.
In practice, TwistedMerge works with a finite comparison
complex K. When the local model charts arise from a genuine
coverU of a neural quotient stack, one may take K = N(U)
and interpret the computation as a finite ˇCech approximation.
In controlled or purely combinatorial experiments, however,
K is specified directly, and the resulting cohomology is the
cohomology of that finite comparison complex rather than an
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
Table C.16: Diagnostics returned by TwistedMerge. The diagnostic record is part of the output rather than an auxiliary log.
Diagnostic Meaning Use
Pairwise alignment loss discrepancy after an edge alignment edge-level compatibility
Inverse residualE inv discrepancy betweeng ji andg−1
i j coherent orientation data
Triangle residual value ofg i jg jkgki strict-descent failure
Centrality residualE cent distance toA⊆Z(G) applicability of abelian branch
Projection residualE proj learned-to-structural distance rejection of projection traps
Closure residualE closed size ofδ 2bcexistence of a cohomology class
Coboundary interval uncertainty for dist( bc,B 2) trivial/nontrivial/uncertified status
Period and index gate torsion type and rank divisibility arithmetic lift eligibility
Lifted-overlap residual error in implemented projective relations construction certificate
Pooling certificate verification ofPρ(h)=Ppath-independent readout
Output type and cost single, soup, ensemble, branch, diagnostic capacity-aware comparison
Validation risk empirical risk of each admitted candidate final selection
automatically identified class in the étale cohomology of the
neural stack.
Definition Appendix D.1.2.The cohomological Brauer group
of the neural stack is Br′(N) := H2(N´et,G m)tors. The Azumaya
Brauer group Br(N) maps naturally to Br′(N), and the two are
identified only when the comparison map is known to be an
isomorphism. Their elements measure torsion central or projec-
tive descent obstructions on the quotient stack; see, for example,
[33, 34].
Proposition Appendix D.1.3(A coarse quotient can forget twist-
ing).Let k be an algebraically closed field, letΘ A≃A N
k , and
let a finite group GA whose order is invertible in k act onΘ A.
Assume that the coarse quotient QA = ΘA/GA exists and is an
affine space. Then Br′(QA)=0. On the other hand, the quo-
tient stack NA =[Θ A/GA]can have a nontrivial cohomological
Brauer group. More precisely, under the vanishing
H1((ΘA)´et;G m)=0,H 2((ΘA)´et;G m)=0,
one has a natural identification
Br′(NA)H 2(GA;k×),
where GA acts trivially on k×. In particular, the quotient stack
can carry twisting data that is invisible on its coarse quotient.
Proof. Since QA is an affine space over an algebraically closed
field, its cohomological Brauer group is trivial: Br′(QA)=0;
see [35, Chapter 1].
For the action of GA onΘ A, we use the equivariant Cartan–
Leray spectral sequence; see [36]:
E p,q
2 =H p(GA,H q((ΘA)´et,G m))=⇒H p+q(([ΘA/GA])´et,G m).
BecauseΘ A ≃A N
k , the units are H0((ΘA)´et; Gm)= k×, and
the action of GA on these constant units is trivial. The stated
vanishing removes the terms E1,1
2 and E0,2
2 of total degree two.
It also eliminates the only possible incoming differential to E2,0
2 ,
namely the differential from E0,1
2 . No differential can leave E2,0
r
because the target would have negative second index. Hence the
total degree-two group is naturally identified with H2(GA; k×).
SinceG A is finite, this group is torsion, so
Br′([ΘA/GA])=H 2(([ΘA/GA])´et,G m)tors H 2(GA;k×).
This group can be nontrivial and is the familiar source of pro-
jective representations and central extensions. Thus a coarse
quotient may have trivial Brauer group while the quotient stack
still carries nontrivial twisting.
RemarkAppendix D.1.4.This proposition explains why the
Brauer group appears in our framework. A central/projective
obstruction is the finite-computational analogue of a class in
H2(−,G m) on the stack of local model charts. In the experi-
ments, we compute such a class only on a finite nerve. Thus
the finite-complex residual or class is a diagnostic for the cho-
sen comparison data, while Br′(N) is the conceptual geometric
object behind the projective site-level theory.
Example Appendix D.1.5(Permutation and ReLU quotient
stacks).For an MLP with hidden width m, hidden-unit permuta-
tions give an action of S m on a parameter chart. ReLU networks
also have positive scaling symmetries, so the relevant gauge
group is enlarged to a monomial group. Thus one should think
of a local parameter chart as being replaced by a quotient stack
[Θ/Gmono], where Gmono contains permutations and positive di-
agonal rescalings. This explains why raw parameter averaging
is not intrinsic, and why alignment or synchronization is needed
before averaging.
RemarkAppendix D.1.6.The Brauer group records only the cen-
tral/projective part of the obstruction. If the residual transition
data are genuinely nonabelian, then the correct object is not sim-
ply a class in Br′(N). One must also remember the nonabelian
holonomy data and the way local gauge groups are identified
up to inner automorphism. This is why the executed S 3 and D4
construction in this paper is described as a nonabelian holonomy
experiment rather than an ordinary Brauer group computation.
Appendix E. Secondary experiments
These experiments support the taxonomy, audit implementa-
tion boundaries, or provide controlled algebraic checks.
Appendix E.1. Independent-seed MLP merging and exact ReLU
gauges
We first consider independently trained MLPs. This is the
regime in which a common base chart is absent and hidden-unit
alignment is part of the problem.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mean test accuracy
Weight averaging
Git Re-Basin-style pairwise alignment
C 2M 3-style synchronization
Raw monomial scaling
TwistedMerge selector
Greedy soup
0.7186
0.8460
0.8480
0.8521
0.8690
0.8714
Figure E.8: Small independent-seed MLP benchmark on the full accuracy scale
[0, 1]. Exact values are printed at the bar ends; TwistedMerge remains close to
greedy soup and above the internalC 2M3-style baseline.
Appendix E.1.1. Small benchmark
The initial benchmark uses four fixed settings, obtained from
N∈{ 3, 4} local models and hidden width in{32, 64}, with five
seeds per setting. Table E.17 and Figure E.8 reproduce the com-
pact comparison. Uniform weight averaging performs poorly,
while pairwise and synchronized gauge methods recover much
of the lost accuracy. The TwistedMerge selector reaches 0.8690,
compared with 0.8480 for internal C2M3-style synchronization
and 0.8714 for greedy soup.
Appendix E.1.2. Expanded exact-gauge ladder
The repository also contains a larger confirmatory exact-
gauge ladder. It uses MNIST, one-hidden-layer ReLU MLPs,
N∈{ 3, 4}, widths 16, 32, 64, and twenty seeds per fixed set-
ting, giving 120 paired runs. The candidate family includes
raw, shrinkage, global, and optimized positive monomial gauges,
gauge-aware soups, and validation selectors.
The paired mean difference between the improved selector and
internal C2M3-style synchronization is+0.0438, with reported
95% paired bootstrap confidence interval [0.0372, 0.0508] and
win/tie/loss count 117/0/3. Against greedy soup, the difference
is−0.0015, with reported 95% paired bootstrap confidence in-
terval [−0.0023,− 0.0008] and count 20/49/51. Shrinkage and
global scaling improve raw monomial scaling by+0.0070 and
+0.0071, respectively. These results support the exact-gauge
mechanism from Theorem 2.3.16 only in the sense of function-
preserving ReLU reparameterization; the empirical gain comes
from the candidate construction and validation procedure, not
from a central obstruction certificate.
Appendix E.1.3. Official-core audit and selector attribution
A later audit connects adapter-assisted official matching cores
to exact checkpoint families. Table E.20 reports the successful
rows. All entries are same-capacity single models with one
inference path. The official C2M3 core improves over its match-
ing internal implementation by+0 .0128, and the official Git
Re-Basin core improves over its internal pairwise implementa-
tion by+0.0086. Official TIES agrees exactly with the internal
TIES-style merge on the three audited same-base rows.
On the twenty independent-initialization settings, official
C2M3 exceeds the pure TwistedMerge monomial-gauge can-
didate by+0 .0087, with reported 95% paired bootstrap confi-
dence interval [0.0050, 0.0123]. The existing validation selector
exceeds official C2M3 by+0.0081, with reported 95% paired
bootstrap confidence interval [0.0030, 0.0136], and official Git
Re-Basin by+0.0143, with reported 95% paired bootstrap confi-
dence interval [0.0074, 0.0221]. Because that selector chooses
from an enlarged candidate pool, these comparisons do not iso-
late a TwistedMerge-specific algorithmic contribution.
The budget-matched attribution experiment addresses this is-
sue on forty exact settings grouped into ten independent training
seeds. We use the repository’s notation: A0 is the ordinary
greedy baseline; A1 is the official-synchronization pool; A2 is
gauge-only augmentation; A3 is gauge-plus-soup augmentation;
A4 is diagnostic-only augmentation; A5 is the full TwistedMerge
selector; B0 is an ordinary soup control matched to A5 in can-
didate count and selector validation evaluations; and A6 is a
nondeployable test-oracle upper bound. A5 contains no lift.
Candidate-generation kernels and total generation compute are
recorded but are not identical between A5 and B0.
The full selector A5 has mean test accuracy 0.8707, whereas
B0 has mean test accuracy 0.8726. Their group-bootstrap paired
difference is−0.0019, with reported 95% group-bootstrap con-
fidence interval [−0.0026,− 0.0012]. The primary attribution
gate fails. Figure E.9 gives a publication-scale summary re-
generated from the exact values in the repository report. The
supported conclusion is enriched-pool validation selection, not a
TwistedMerge-specific selector gain.
Appendix E.2. Same-base fixed-chart merging and empirical
descent
Task Arithmetic, TIES, DARE, and SLERP require a com-
mon base chart. The repository therefore evaluates them in a
separate same-base benchmark rather than placing them in the
independent-seed leaderboard. One base checkpoint using the
repository architecture labelled mlp2 is trained, task-specific
copies are fine-tuned from that base, and all candidate hyper-
parameters are chosen on validation data. Git Re-Basin and
C2M3 are recorded as not-run secondary diagnostics because
the construction does not intentionally introduce an independent
permutation mismatch.
On MNIST digit subsets with width 64, Task Arithmetic im-
proves over the original greedy soup by+0.0439, with reported
95% paired bootstrap confidence interval [0.0407, 0.0474]. At
width 128, the corresponding gain is+0 .0494, with reported
95% paired bootstrap confidence interval [0 .0469, 0.0521].
On Fashion-MNIST width 64, DARE improves by+0 .0109,
with reported 95% paired bootstrap confidence interval
[0.0048, 0.0161]. These are exact-setting same-base results, not
evidence about independently trained models.
The descent-envelope experiment enlarges the generated
candidate family to include weight averages, base and fine-
tuned models, SLERP, Task Arithmetic, TIES, DARE, and the
original greedy soup. Greedy soup over this enriched gener-
ated family improves over the checkpoint-only greedy soup by
+0.0227, with reported 95% paired bootstrap confidence inter-
val [0.0189, 0.0267]. This is a direct empirical illustration of
Corollary Appendix B.0.3: the improvement comes from en-
larging the finite family of candidate predictors while retaining
validation-only selection.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
Table E.17: Small independent-seed MLP benchmark. The Git Re-Basin-style andC 2M3-style rows are in-repository baselines.
Method Mean test acc.∆vsC 2M3 ∆vs greedy
Weight averaging 0.7186−0.1294−0.1528
Git Re-Basin-style pairwise alignment 0.8460−0.0021−0.0254
C2M3-style synchronization 0.8480 0.0000−0.0233
Raw monomial scaling 0.8521+0.0040−0.0193
TwistedMerge selector 0.8690+0.0209−0.0024
Model Soups/greedy soup 0.8714+0.0233 0.0000
Table E.18: Greedy soup versus the TwistedMerge selector on the small benchmark. Each fixed setting uses five seeds; the overall row aggregates twenty runs.
Nwidth runs greedy TwistedMerge∆reported 95% CI W/T/L
3 32 5 0.8622 0.8623+0.0000 [0.0000,0.0001] 1/4/0
3 64 5 0.8803 0.8756−0.0047 [−0.0076,−0.0012] 1/0/4
4 32 5 0.8621 0.8604−0.0017 [−0.0051,0.0002] 1/2/2
4 64 5 0.8809 0.8775−0.0034 [−0.0080,0.0006] 1/1/3
overall all 20 0.8714 0.8690−0.0024 [−0.0042,−0.0009] 4/7/9
Table E.19: Expanded independent-seed exact-gauge ladder over 120 paired runs. Exact positive scaling variants improve the internalC2M3-style baseline, but the
improved selector remains slightly below greedy soup.
Method Mean test accuracy
C2M3-style synchronization 0.8119
Raw monomial scaling 0.8197
Shrinkage monomial scaling 0.8268
Global positive scaling 0.8269
Optimized monomial scaling 0.8206
Improved TwistedMerge selector 0.8557
Greedy soup 0.8572
Table E.20: Adapter-assisted official-core audit. The rows use official matching or merge cores through explicit checkpoint adapters; they are not unmodified
end-to-end executions of the original repositories.
Core Regime settings mean test acc.∆vs matching internal
Official Git Re-Basin independent initialization 20 0.8546+0.0086
OfficialC 2M3 independent initialization 20 0.8608+0.0128
Official TIES same base 3 0.8215 0.0000
Table E.21: Representative same-base task-vector results over twenty seeds per setting. The fine-tuned oracle mean is not a single merged model.
Method MNIST digit subsets, width 64 MNIST digit subsets, width 128 Fashion subsets, width 64
Greedy soup 0.8164 0.8345 0.6828
Sequential SLERP 0.8166 0.8347 0.6832
Task Arithmetic0.8603 0.88390.6932
DARE 0.8556 0.87700.6936
TIES 0.8245 0.8500 0.6462
Fine-tuned oracle mean 0.9267 0.9372 0.7779
Appendix E.2.1. Finite-index and higher period-index thresh-
olds
Proposition 2.3.27 gives the first rank gate. The repository
tests primitive orders d =2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and several nonprimitive
roots. In every case, the smallest successful clock–shift rank
equals the order d, and, among the tested ranks, success occurs
exactly at multiples of d. This experiment is described as a
projective or Morita realization of the relation AB =ζBA, not as
the vanishing of the original scalar 2-cocycle.
The higher finite-Heisenberg benchmark realizes Theo-
rem 2.3.28. Table E.22 shows that the period remainsd while the
projective-representation index grows to dk for k independent
Weyl pairs.
Appendix E.2.2. Known and learned time-frequency charts
Finite signals on Z/dZ give a natural controlled source of the
Weyl relation. If T is the cyclic time shift and M is modulation,
then
MT=ζT M.
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mean test accuracy
Full TwistedMerge selector (A5)
Budget-matched ordinary selector (B0)
0.8707
0.8726
−0.0030 −0.0025 −0.0020 −0.0015 −0.0010 −0.0005 0.0000 0.0005
Paired mean test-accuracy difference
A5 - B0
-0.0019  [-0.0026, -0.0012]
Figure E.9: Primary selector-attribution comparison regenerated from the repository report. A5 is the full TwistedMerge selector and contains no lift; B0 is the
ordinary selector matched to A5 in candidate count and selector validation evaluations. Top: mean test accuracy on the full scale [0 , 1]. Bottom: paired mean
difference A5−B0 with the reported 95% group-bootstrap confidence interval.
Table E.22: Controlled finite-Heisenberg period and projective-representation index. The minimal successful tested rank equalsd k.
Case PerioddPairskind rep([α])=d k
d=2,k=1 2 1 2
d=2,k=2 2 2 4
d=2,k=3 2 3 8
d=3,k=1 3 1 3
d=3,k=2 3 2 9
d=4,k=1 4 1 4
d=4,k=2 4 2 16
MNIST digit subsets
width 64
MNIST digit subsets
width 128
Fashion-MNIST class subsets
width 64
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Mean test accuracy
Greedy soup
Sequential SLERP
Task Arithmetic
DARE
TIES
Figure E.10: Same-base fixed-chart merging on the full accuracy scale [0 , 1].
Task Arithmetic and DARE improve over the original greedy-soup pool in the
stated settings because the common base already supplies the chart required by
the task-vector operations.
For k independent pairs, the expected threshold is dk. The
known-operator benchmark recovers this threshold: ( d,k )=
(2, 2), (2, 3), (3, 2), (4, 1) have minimal certified ranks 4, 8, 9, 4,
respectively. The corresponding controlled orbit-invariant classi-
fier accuracies at the admissible rank are 0.9155, 0.9734, 1.0000,
and 0.9557.
The learned-chart experiment estimates the transition oper-
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Order or representation rank
d = 2, k = 1
d = 2, k = 2
d = 2, k = 3
d = 3, k = 1
d = 3, k = 2
d = 4, k = 1
d = 4, k = 2
2
2
2
3
3
4
4
2
4
8
3
9
4
16
Period d Projective-representation index d k
Figure E.11: Controlled period-index thresholds. Here d is the commutator-
phase order and k is the number of independent Weyl pairs. Period divisibility
alone is insufficient when several independent pairs are present.
ators from paired observations. Clean least-squares and full-
dimensional linear-autoencoder estimates recover the expected
phase order and projective-representation rank threshold with
certification rate 1 and operator errors near numerical precision.
Raw estimates at noise levels 0.01 and 0.05 are rejected. For
the d =3,k =2 case, candidate ranks 3 and 6 remain rejected
and rank 9 is selected only when the learned structural relations
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
0 2 4 6 8 10
Order or representation rank
d = 2, k = 2
d = 2, k = 3
d = 3, k = 2
d = 4, k = 1
2
2
3
4
4
8
9
4
Commutator-phase order d Minimal certified projective-representation rank
Figure E.12: Finite time-frequency chart thresholds. Heredis the commutator-
phase order and k is the number of independent time-frequency pairs. The phase
order and the minimal certified projective-representation rank differ when k> 1.
pass. A subsequent denoising experiment shows that nearest-
unitary projection can raise the d =2,k =2, rank-4, noise-10−4
certification rate from 0.5 to 0.9. Finite-Heisenberg projection
extends the range further, but only when the learned-to-projected
residual also passes. This projection residual is the empirical
reason for includingE proj in Definition Appendix C.1.1.
Appendix E.3. Executed two-loop noncommuting holonomy
The central experiments use abelian coefficient data. We now
consider a genuinely nonabelian residual, where the relevant
object is a holonomy subgroup rather than an ordinary H2 class.
The executed construction uses the groupsS 3 and
D4 =⟨r,s|r 4 =s 2 =1,srs=r −1⟩.
The comparison complex is a wedge of two length-three cycles,
0–1–2–0 and 0–3–4–0. The first loop carries a planted transpo-
sition or reflection s, and the second carries a planted 3-cycle
or rotationr. Five local checkpoints are exact hidden-unit repa-
rameterizations of the same executed one-hidden-layer ReLU
MLP. The duplicated regular hidden orbit supplies exact au-
tomorphisms carrying the two transitions, while the remaining
hidden units are generic. The run grid uses widths 32 and 64,
with seeds 0,...,49, giving 100 executed instances per group.
Table E.23 records the structural certificates. The pre-lift,
commutator, and post-lift entries are the normalized operator
residuals defined by the executed benchmark; they are report-
specific diagnostics rather than universal group invariants. The
positive commutator residual verifies that the two recovered
generators do not commute. The local functional-equivalence
residual is at numerical precision, the regular-action multiplica-
tion residual is zero, and both invariant-pooling residuals van-
ish. Thus the experiment verifies the hypotheses of Proposi-
tion 2.3.34 for two noncommuting generators.
The executed accuracy results impose an equally important
negative boundary. Table E.24 averages the two widths. Or-
dinary unaligned weight averaging is substantially worse, but
every evaluated aligned, synchronized, soup, and branch method
reaches accuracy 1. The random same-branch-count and wrong-
action controls also reach accuracy 1. Consequently, the paired
accuracy difference between the branch regular lift and Git
Re-Basin-style alignment, C2M3-style synchronization, greedy
soup, or any of the recorded branch controls is exactly zero, with
100 ties per group.
Pre-lift residual Commutator residual Post-lift residual Max. invariant-pooling residual
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Normalized operator residual
0.523 0.523
0.000 0.000
0.604 0.604
0.000 0.000
S3
D4
Figure E.13: Executed two-loop structural residuals. The displayed quantities
are the normalized operator residuals used by the benchmark. The maximum
invariant-pooling residual is the maximum of the two generator-wise pooling
residuals. The pre-lift and commutator residuals are positive for both groups,
whereas the post-lift and pooling residuals vanish.
Accordingly, this experiment supports only a structural non-
abelian claim: the executed models carry two noncommuting
holonomies, and invariant pooling makes both generators invis-
ible at the readout. It does not support an accuracy advantage
for the branch lift. The distinction is essential, because the
structural certificate remains meaningful even when ordinary
alignment and the negative controls already solve the particular
classification task.
Appendix E.3.1. Observed branch and rank lifts
Representative MNIST and Fashion-MNIST branch rows are
shown in Table E.25. Greedy soup remains a strong boundary.
The small rank and branch candidates sometimes improve over
synchronized or averaged baselines, but they do not reliably
exceed greedy soup and do not carry a certified natural finite-
index class.
Appendix E.3.2. Exact channel gauges and vision boundaries
The exact positive-gauge experiment extends to a small
no-BatchNorm Fashion-MNIST convolutional neural network
(CNN). Across fifteen settings, internal C2M3-style channel syn-
chronization reaches 0.7716, optimized exact channel scaling
reaches 0.7809, and greedy soup reaches 0.8442. The optimized
channel scale improves overC 2M3 by+0.00933, with reported
95% paired bootstrap confidence interval [0 .00479, 0.01456],
but remains 0.06323 below greedy soup. The residuals are
noncentral under the tested diagnostics, so no CNN Brauer or
period-index claim is made.
A separate ResNet-18 identity audit examines BatchNorm
rather than merge accuracy. Compatible graph-wide channel
permutations preserve predictions in evaluation and training
modes within the preregistered floating-point tolerance. Positive
scaling is evaluation-exact only for the explicit frozen-statistic
affine or epsilon-aware running-affine parameterizations tested
there; scaling the stored running moments alone fails when
ε> 0, and static positive scaling is not train-mode exact. This
audit limits the scope of Theorem 2.3.16; it does not provide an
independent-initialization ResNet merging result.
Rotated- and colored-MNIST bridge datasets show the same
boundary pattern. Across seventeen settings, greedy soup im-
proves over C2M3-style channel synchronization by+0 .0847,
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Table E.23: Executed two-loop noncommuting holonomy certificates. The post-lift and pooling residuals vanish, while the positive commutator residual certifies
noncommutation.
Group pre-lift residual commutator residual post-lift residual poolγ 1 poolγ 2 action multiplication local equivalence
S 3 0.522693 0.522693 0 0 0 0 5.40×10 −16
D4 0.603553 0.603553 0 0 0 0 5.61×10 −16
Table E.24: Executed two-loop accuracy boundary, averaged over widths 32 and 64. The branch model has additional inference paths. The equality of the aligned and
lifted rows is retained as a negative empirical result.
MethodS 3 acc.D 4 acc. inference multiplier output type
Ordinary weight average 0.5667 0.5768 1 single model
Git Re-Basin-style pairwise alignment 1.0000 1.0000 1 single model
C2M3-style synchronization 1.0000 1.0000 1 single model
Greedy soup 1.0000 1.0000 1 soup
Naive regular representation, no pooling 1.0000 1.0000 6/8 branch model
Branch regular lift with invariant pooling 1.0000 1.0000 6/8 branch model
Random same-branch-count control 1.0000 1.0000 6/8 branch model
Wrong generator, order, and group-action controls 1.0000 1.0000 6/8 branch models
Table E.25: Representative observed MNIST/Fashion-MNIST branch boundary. In the last column, the first value is the rank-lift accuracy and the second is the
validation-selected branch accuracy. These outputs may have additional inference capacity.
DatasetNwidth setting greedy soup rank lift/validation branch
Fashion-MNIST 3 64 input noise, activation 0.8154 0.7982/0.8095
Fashion-MNIST 3 64 input noise, weight 0.8154 0.8023/0.8095
Fashion-MNIST 3 64 none, activation 0.8242 0.8180/0.8247
Fashion-MNIST 4 128 none, weight 0.8328 0.8265/0.8332
MNIST 3 64 input noise, activation 0.9016 0.8963/0.8995
MNIST 3 64 input noise, weight 0.9016 0.8955/0.8995
while the validation-safe selector ties greedy soup. These are
MNIST-derived bridge datasets and do not imply CIFAR or
broad vision performance.
The bounded no-BatchNorm CIFAR rescue clears the base-
accuracy gate, with mean per-run best individual-model accu-
racy 0.6506. Nevertheless, optimized channel scaling is only
+0.00054 versus C2M3, with reported 95% paired bootstrap con-
fidence interval [−0.00088, 0.00274], while greedy soup reaches
0.6480 and internal C2M3 reaches 0.4644. The union candi-
date soup is only+0 .00044 over greedy soup, with a reported
95% paired bootstrap confidence interval that contains zero. We
therefore retain this no-BatchNorm CIFAR study as a descrip-
tive appendix boundary rather than as evidence for the main
method. A later torchvision-style CIFAR-10 ResNet-18 pipeline
is test-isolated, checkpoint-resumable, and smoke-tested, but its
base-quality pilot and confirmatory merge study remain gated
and unrun at the recorded commit; it supplies no positive or
negative model-merging result.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1
BatchNorm constant ε
10−6
10−5
10−4
Maximum absolute logit error
Graph-compatible channel permutation
Evaluation mode
Training mode
Training-mode tolerance
10−5 10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1
BatchNorm constant ε
10−7
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Maximum absolute logit error
Evaluation-mode positive channel scaling
Permutation reference
Running moments only
Affine only with frozen statistics
Epsilon-aware running-affine
No-BatchNorm control
Evaluation tolerance 5 × 10−5
Figure E.14: ResNet-18 BatchNorm identity audit regenerated from the exact repository summary values. Top: graph-compatible channel permutations in evaluation
and training modes; the dashed line is the preregistered training-mode tolerance. Bottom: evaluation-mode scaling strategies. “Affine only with frozen statistics”
leaves the stored moments fixed, while “epsilon-aware running-affine” transforms the moments and applies the correspondingε-aware affine correction. The dashed
line is the evaluation-mode tolerance. Both vertical axes report maximum absolute logit error. These are functional-identity tests, not merge-accuracy results.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Mean test accuracy
C 2M 3-style channel synchronization
Optimized exact channel scaling
Greedy soup
0.7716
0.7809
0.8442
Figure E.15: Fashion-MNIST no-BatchNorm CNN boundary on the full ac-
curacy scale [0, 1]. Exact channel scaling gives a limited improvement over
internal strict synchronization but remains below greedy soup.
Report on AI Usage
In preparing this paper, we used ChatGPT 5.6 Pro to improve
the language and organization of the manuscript. We also used
Codex to assist with coding and running the experiments. All
mathematical arguments, experimental designs, results, and con-
clusions were reviewed and verified by the authors, who take
full responsibility for the content of the paper.
Acknowledgements
The first author thanks the UW Math AI Lab for supporting
this project and his advisor, Max Lieblich, for his guidance.
Besides, the first author thanks the hospitality of the Beijing In-
ternational Center for Mathematical Research (BICMR), where
part of this work was carried out. The first author also thanks
Soham Ghosh and Michael Ruofan Zeng for discussion. The
second author thanks his mentor Zhiyu Tian for his support
and guidance and BICMR for providing an excellent working
environment.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
References
[1] S. K. Ainsworth, J. Hayase, S. Srinivasa, Git re-basin:
Merging models modulo permutation symmetries (2022).
arXiv:2209.04836.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2209.04836
[2] D. Crisostomi, et al., c2m3: Cycle-consistent multi-model
merging, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2024.arXiv:2405.17897.
[3] G. Ilharco, et al., Editing models with task arithmetic,
in: International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[4] P. Yadav, et al., Ties-merging: Resolving interference when
merging models, in: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, V ol. 36, 2023, pp. 7093–7115.
[5] L. Yu, et al., Language models are super mario: Absorb-
ing abilities from homologous models as a free lunch, in:
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[6] K. Shoemake, Animating rotation with quaternion curves,
ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 19 (3) (1985) 245–
254.
[7] E. Yang, L. Shen, G. Guo, X. Wang, X. Cao, J. Zhang,
D. Tao, Model merging in LLMs, MLLMs, and beyond:
Methods, theories, applications and opportunities, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.07666Revised December 2025 (2024).
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2408.07666.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07666
[8] O. K. Hitit, L. Girrbach, Z. Akata, A systematic study
of in-the-wild model merging for large language models,
Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2026). arXi
v:2511.21437.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21437
[9] D. Zheng, C. Allen-Blanchette, Beyond pairwise: Diagnos-
ing higher-order merge failures via hodge decomposition,
in: ICML 2026 Workshop on Weight-Space Symmetries,
2026.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5IsDyR
zKks
[10] S. Karuturi, K. S. Bukkapatnam, L. Patel, T. A. Shastry,
The GL(r) gauge symmetry of LoRA: Principal bundle
structure, loss landscape geometry, and implications for
adapter merging, in: ICML 2026 Workshop on Weight-
Space Symmetries, 2026.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=YMsbYX
Dtqw
[11] H. Javidnia, A gauge theory of superposition: Toward a
sheaf-theoretic atlas of neural representations (2026).arXi
v:2603.00824,doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.00824.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2603.00824
[12] T. Gong, Twistedmerge: Twisted sheaves, descent the-
ory, and learning theory, GitHub repository, commit
7a0620bb19dffba97012350b6ffd20684bcbe220 (2026).
URL https://github.com/tinggong9/TwistedMe
rge
[13] J. Giraud, Cohomologie non abélienne, Springer, 1971.
[14] M. Lieblich, Moduli of twisted sheaves, Duke Mathemati-
cal Journal 138 (1) (2007) 23–118.
[15] J. Dodziuk, Finite-difference approach to the hodge the-
ory of harmonic forms, American Journal of Mathematics
98 (1) (1976) 79–104.
[16] D. Horak, J. Jost, Spectra of combinatorial laplace oper-
ators on simplicial complexes, Advances in Mathematics
244 (2013) 303–336.
[17] H. H. Bauschke, P. L. Combettes, Convex Analysis and
Monotone Operator Theory in Hilbert Spaces, 2nd Edition,
Springer, 2017.
[18] R. A. Horn, C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis, 2nd Edition,
Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[19] P. Gille, T. Szamuely, Central Simple Algebras and Galois
Cohomology, Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[20] M. Lieblich, Twisted sheaves and the period–index prob-
lem, Compositio Mathematica 144 (1) (2008) 1–31.
[21] T. Gong, Moduli of vector bundles onµn-gerbes over genus
2 curves and the period–index problem (2025). arXiv:
2512.03417.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2512.03417
[22] A. J. de Jong, The period–index problem for the brauer
group of an algebraic surface, Duke Mathematical Journal
123 (1) (2004) 71–94.
[23] J. Hotchkiss, A. Perry, The period–index conjecture for
abelian threefolds and donaldson–thomas theory (2024).
arXiv:2405.03315.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2405.03315
[24] D. Huybrechts, The period–index problem for hyperkähler
manifolds (2024).arXiv:2411.17604.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17604
[25] E. J. Hu, Y . Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y . Li, S. Wang,
L. Wang, W. Chen, Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large
language models (2021).arXiv:2106.09685.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685
[26] M. Wortsman, et al., Model soups: Averaging weights
of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without
increasing inference time, in: International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2022.arXiv:2203.05482.
[27] V . N. Vapnik, Statistical Learning Theory, Wiley-
Interscience, 1998.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
[28] S. Shalev-Shwartz, S. Ben-David, Understanding Machine
Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2014.
[29] G. L. Marchetti, et al., Algebra unveils deep learning: An
invitation to neuroalgebraic geometry, in: International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. arXiv:2501.1
8915.
[30] J. Kileel, M. Trager, J. Bruna, On the expressive power of
deep polynomial neural networks (2019). arXiv:1905.1
2207.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1905.12207
[31] L. Zhang, G. Naitzat, L.-H. Lim, Tropical geometry of
deep neural networks (2018).arXiv:1805.07091.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1805.07091
[32] M.-C. Brandenburg, G. Loho, G. Montúfar, The real
tropical geometry of neural networks (2024). arXiv:
2403.11871.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2403.11871
[33] A. Grothendieck, Le groupe de Brauer. I, II, III, North-
Holland, 1968.
[34] D. Edidin, B. Hassett, A. Kresch, A. Vistoli, Brauer groups
and quotient stacks, American Journal of Mathematics
123 (4) (2001) 761–777.
[35] J.-L. Colliot-Thélène, A. N. Skorobogatov, The Brauer–
Grothendieck Group, Springer, 2021.
[36] The Stacks Project Authors, Stacks project (2026).
URLhttps://stacks.math.columbia.edu
34
