===== PAGE 1 =====
Can AI find physics beyond the standard
model?
Story by Matthew Hutson• • 20 min read
IEEE Spectrum 1.6K
Follow
Followers
7mo
In 1930, a young physicist named Carl D. Anderson was tasked by his mentor
with measuring the energies of cosmic rays—particles arriving at high speed from
outer space. Anderson built an improved version of a cloud chamber, a device
that visually records the trajectories of particles. In 1932, he saw evidence that
confusingly combined the properties of protons and electrons. “A situation began
to develop that had its awkward aspects,” he wrote many years after winning a
Nobel Prize at the age of 31. Anderson had accidentally discovered antimatter.
Four years after his first discovery, he codiscovered another elementary particle,
the muon. This one prompted one physicist to ask, “Who ordered that?”
Sponsored
Ro
$39 Wegovy® program cost
Start today with Ro’s GLP-1 program—trusted
by Charles Barkley & Serena Williams.
Disclaimer info
Learn more
Feedback

===== PAGE 2 =====
Carl Anderson [top] sits beside the magnet cloud chamber he used to discover the positron. His
cloud-chamber photograph [bottom] from 1932 shows the curved track of a positron, the first
known antimatter particle. Caltech Archives & Special Collections
Over the decades since then, particle physicists have built increasingly
sophisticated instruments of exploration. At the apex of these physics-finding
machines sits the Large Hadron Collider, which in 2022 started its third
operational run. This underground ring, 27 kilometers in circumference and
straddling the border between France and Switzerland, was built to slam
subatomic particles together at near light speed and test deep theories of the
universe. Physicists from around the world turn to the LHC, hoping to find
something new. They’re not sure what, but they hope to find it.
It’s the latest manifestation of a rich tradition. Throughout the history of science,
new instruments have prompted hunts for the unexpected. Galileo Galilei built
telescopes and found Jupiter’s moons. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek built
microscopes and noticed “animalcules, very prettily a-moving.” And still today,
people peer through lenses and pore through data in search of patterns they
hadn’t hypothesized. Nature’s secrets don’t always come with spoilers, and so we
gaze into the unknown, ready for anything.
But novel, fundamental aspects of the universe are growing less forthcoming. In a
sense, we’ve plucked the lowest-hanging fruit. We know to a good approximation
what the building blocks of matter are. The Standard Model of particle physics,
which describes the currently known elementary particles, has been in place since
the 1970s. Nature can still surprise us, but it typically requires larger or finer
a photo shows a man in a suit sitting beside a large laboratory apparatus.
a circular black-and-white image shows curved particle tracks.
This PC Game Is Worth
Installing
RAID: Shadow Legends·Sponsored

===== PAGE 3 =====
instruments, more detailed or expansive data, and faster or more flexible analysis
tools.
Those analysis tools include a form of artificial intelligence (AI) called machine
learning. Researchers train complex statistical models to find patterns in their
data, patterns too subtle for human eyes to see, or too rare for a single human to
encounter. At the LHC, which smashes together protons to create immense bursts
of energy that decay into other short-lived particles of matter, a theorist might
predict some new particle or interaction and describe what its signature would
look like in the LHC data, often using a simulation to create synthetic data.
Experimentalists would then collect petabytes of measurements and run a
machine learning algorithm that compares them with the simulated data, looking
for a match. Usually, they come up empty. But maybe new algorithms can peer
into corners they haven’t considered.
“You’ve heard probably that there’s a crisis in particle physics,” says Tilman Plehn,
a theoretical physicist at Heidelberg University, in Germany. At the LHC and other
high-energy physics facilities around the world, the experimental results have
failed to yield insights on new physics. “We have a lot of unhappy theorists who
thought that their model would have been discovered, and it wasn’t,” Plehn says.
A New Path for Particle Physics
Related video:The incredible physics behind quantum computing(Big Think)

===== PAGE 4 =====
Tilman Plehn
“We have a lot of unhappy theorists who thought that their model would have
been discovered, and it wasn’t.”
Gregor Kasieczka, a physicist at the University of Hamburg, in Germany, recalls
the field’s enthusiasm when the LHC began running in 2008. Back then, he was a
young graduate student and expected to see signs of supersymmetry, a theory
predicting heavier versions of the known matter particles. The presumption was
that “we turn on the LHC, and supersymmetry will jump in your face, and we’ll
discover it in the first year or so,” he tells me. Eighteen years later, supersymmetry
remains in the theoretical realm. “I think this level of exuberant optimism has
somewhat gone.”
The result, Plehn says, is that models for all kinds of things have fallen in the face
of data. “And I think we’re going on a different path now.”
That path involves a kind of machine learning called unsupervised learning. In
unsupervised learning, you don’t teach the AI to recognize your specific
prediction—signs of a particle with this mass and this charge. Instead, you might
teach it to find anything out of the ordinary, anything interesting—which could
indicate brand new physics. It’s the equivalent of looking with fresh eyes at a
Person wearing a patterned shirt against a pale blue background.
VEVOR Weighted Digital
Piano 88 Keys Fully…
VEVOR·Sponsored

===== PAGE 5 =====
starry sky or a slide of pond scum. The problem is, how do you automate the
search for something “interesting”?
The Standard Model leaves many questions unanswered. Why do matter particles
have the masses they do? Why do neutrinos have mass at all? Where is the
particle for transmitting gravity, to match those for the other forces? Why do we
see more matter than antimatter? Are there extra dimensions? What is dark
matter—the invisible stuff that makes up most of the universe’s matter and that
we assume to exist because of its gravitational effect on galaxies? Answering any
of these questions could open the door to new physics, or fundamental
discoveries beyond the Standard Model.
CERN
The Large Hadron Collider at CERN accelerates protons to near light speed
before smashing them together in hopes of discovering “new physics.”
“Personally, I’m excited for portal models of dark sectors,” Kasieczka says, as if
reading from a Marvel film script. He asks me to imagine a mirror copy of the
Standard Model out there somewhere, sharing only one “portal” particle with the
Standard Model we know and love. It’s as if this portal particle has a second
secret family.
Kasieczka says that in the LHC’s third run, scientists are splitting their efforts
roughly evenly between measuring more precisely what they know to exist and
looking for what they don’t know to exist. In some cases, the former could enable
the latter. The Standard Model predicts certain particle properties and the
relationships between them. For example, it correctly predicted a property of the
electron called the magnetic moment to about one part in a trillion. And precise
measurements could turn up internal inconsistencies. “Then theorists can say,
Going Beyond the Standard Model
A long blue accelerator tube marked \u201cLHC\u201d runs through an underground tunnel.
The Top-Rated Fantasy
Game of the Year!
Try Mmorpg·Sponsored

===== PAGE 6 =====
‘Oh, if I introduce this new particle, it fixes this specific problem that you guys
found. And this is how you look for this particle,’” Kasieczka says.
CERN
An image from a single collision at the LHC shows an unusually complex spray of
particles, flagged as anomalous by machine learning algorithms.
What’s more, the Standard Model has occasionally shown signs of cracks. Certain
particles containing bottom quarks, for example, seem to decay into other
particles in unexpected ratios. Plehn finds the bottom-quark incongruities
intriguing. “Year after year, I feel they should go away, and they don’t. And
nobody has a good explanation,” he says. “I wouldn’t even know who I would
shout at”—the theorists or the experimentalists—“like, ‘Sort it out!’”
Exasperation isn’t exactly the right word for Plehn’s feelings, however. Physicists
feel gratified when measurements reasonably agree with expectations, he says.
“But I think deep down inside, we always hope that it looks unreasonable.
Everybody always looks for the anomalous stuff. Everybody wants to see the
standard explanation fail. First, it’s fame”—a chance for a Nobel—“but it’s also an
intellectual challenge, right? You get excited when things don’t work in science.”
Now imagine you had a machine to find all the times things don’t work in
science, to uncover all the anomalous stuff. That’s how researchers are using
unsupervised learning. One day over ice cream, Plehn and a friend who works at
the software company SAP began discussing autoencoders, one type of
unsupervised learning algorithm. “He tells me that autoencoders are what they
use in industry to see if a network was hacked,” Plehn remembers. “You have, say,
a hundred computers, and they have network traffic. If the network traffic [to one
computer] changes all of a sudden, the computer has been hacked, and they take
it offline.”
A colorful visualization shows many particle tracks radiating outward from a collision point.
How Unsupervised AI Can Probe for New
Physics

===== PAGE 7 =====
a person wearing a hard hat walks down an aisle.

===== PAGE 8 =====
Fermilab/CERN
In the LHC’s central data-acquisition room [top], incoming detector data flows
through racks of electronics and field-programmable gate array (FPGA) cards
[bottom] that decide which collision events to keep.
Autoencoders are neural networks that start with an input—it could be an image
of a cat, or the record of a computer’s network traffic—and compress it, like
making a tiny JPEG or MP3 file, and then decompress it. Engineers train them to
compress and decompress data so that the output matches the input as closely
as possible. Eventually a network becomes very good at that task. But if the data
includes some items that are relatively rare—such as white tigers, or hacked
computers’ traffic—the network performs worse on these, because it has less
practice with them. The difference between an input and its reconstruction
therefore signals how anomalous that input is.
“This friend of mine said, ‘You can use exactly our software, right?’” Plehn
remembers. “‘It’s exactly the same question. Replace computers with particles.’”
The two imagined feeding the autoencoder signatures of particles from a collider
and asking: Are any of these particles not like the others? Plehn continues: “And
then we wrote up a joint grant proposal.”
Photo show rows of electronic racks filled with cables and equipment inside a data-acquisition room.

===== PAGE 9 =====
It’s not a given that AI will find new physics. Even learning what counts as
interesting is a daunting hurdle. Beginning in the 1800s, men in lab coats
delegated data processing to women, whom they saw as diligent and detail
oriented. Women annotated photos of stars, and they acted as “computers.” In
the 1950s, women were trained to scan bubble chambers, which recorded particle
trajectories as lines of tiny bubbles in fluid. Physicists didn’t explain to them the
theory behind the events, only what to look for based on lists of rules.
But, as the Harvard science historian Peter Galison writes in Image and Logic: A
Material Culture of Physics, his influential account of how physicists’ tools shape
their discoveries, the task was “subtle, difficult, and anything but routinized,”
requiring “three-dimensional visual intuition.” He goes on: “Even within a single
experiment, judgment was required—this was not an algorithmic activity, an
assembly line procedure in which action could be specified fully by rules.”
Gregor Kasieczka
“We are not looking for flying elephants but instead a few extra elephants than
usual at the local watering hole.”
Over the last decade, though, one thing we’ve learned is that AI systems can, in
fact, perform tasks once thought to require human intuition, such as mastering
the ancient board game Go. So researchers have been testing AI’s intuition in
physics. In 2019, Kasieczka and his collaborators announced the LHC Olympics
2020, a contest in which participants submitted algorithms to find anomalous
events in three sets of (simulated) LHC data. Some teams correctly found the
anomalous signal in one dataset, but some falsely reported one in the second set,
and they all missed it in the third. In 2020, a research collective called Dark
Machines announced a similar competition, which drew more than 1,000
Person in a suit with dark hair against a blue background.

===== PAGE 10 =====
submissions of machine learning models. Decisions about how to score them led
to different rankings, showing that there’s no best way to explore the unknown.
Another way to test unsupervised learning is to play revisionist history. In 1995, a
particle dubbed the top quark turned up at the Tevatron, a particle accelerator at
the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab), in Illinois. But what if it
actually hadn’t? Researchers applied unsupervised learning to LHC data collected
in 2012, pretending they knew almost nothing about the top quark. Sure enough,
the AI revealed a set of anomalous events that were clustered together.
Combined with a bit of human intuition, they pointed toward something like the
top quark.
Georgia Karagiorgi
“An algorithm that can recognize any kind of disturbance would be a win.”
That exercise underlines the fact that unsupervised learning can’t replace
physicists just yet. “If your anomaly detector detects some kind of feature, how
do you get from that statement to something like a physics interpretation?”
Kasieczka says. “The anomaly search is more a scouting-like strategy to get you
to look into the right corner.” Georgia Karagiorgi, a physicist at Columbia
University, agrees. “Once you find something unexpected, you can’t just call it
quits and be like, ‘Oh, I discovered something,’” she says. “You have to come up
with a model and then test it.”
Kyle Cranmer, a physicist and data scientist at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison who played a key role in the discovery of the Higgs boson particle in
2012, also says that human expertise can’t be dismissed. “There’s an infinite
number of ways the data can look different from what you expected,” he says,
“and most of them aren’t interesting.” Physicists might be able to recognize
Person with long hair wearing a sweater and light-colored top against a blue background.

===== PAGE 11 =====
whether a deviation suggests some plausible new physical phenomenon, rather
than just noise. “But how you try to codify that and make it explicit in some
algorithm is much less straightforward,” Cranmer says. Ideally, the guidelines
would be general enough to exclude the unimaginable without eliminating the
merely unimagined. “That’s gonna be your Goldilocks situation.”
In his 1987 book How Experiments End, Harvard’s Galison writes that scientific
instruments can “import assumptions built into the apparatus itself.” He tells me
about a 1973 experiment that looked for a phenomenon called neutral currents,
signaled by an absence of a so-called heavy electron (later renamed the muon).
One team initially used a trigger left over from previous experiments, which
recorded events only if they produced those heavy electrons—even though
neutral currents, by definition, produce none. As a result, for some time the
researchers missed the phenomenon and wrongly concluded that it didn’t exist.
Galison says that the physicists’ design choice “allowed the discovery of [only]
one thing, and it blinded the next generation of people to this new discovery.
And that is always a risk when you’re being selective.”
I ask Galison if by automating the search for interesting events, we’re letting the
AI take over the science. He rephrases the question: “Have we handed over the
keys to the car of science to the machines?” One way to alleviate such concerns,
he tells me, is to generate test data to see if an algorithm behaves as expected—
as in the LHC Olympics. “Before you take a camera out and photograph the Loch
Ness Monster, you want to make sure that it can reproduce a wide variety of
colors” and patterns accurately, he says, so you can rely on it to capture whatever
comes.
Galison, who is also a physicist, works on the Event Horizon Telescope, which
images black holes. For that project, he remembers putting up utterly unexpected
test images like Frosty the Snowman so that scientists could probe the system’s
general ability to catch something new. “The danger is that you’ve missed out on
some crucial test,” he says, “and that the object you’re going to be
photographing is so different from your test patterns that you’re unprepared.”
The algorithms that physicists are using to seek new physics are certainly
vulnerable to this danger. It helps that unsupervised learning is already being
used in many applications. In industry, it’s surfacing anomalous credit-card
transactions and hacked networks. In science, it’s identifying earthquake
precursors, genome locations where proteins bind, and merging galaxies.
But one difference with particle-physics data is that the anomalies may not be
stand-alone objects or events. You’re looking not just for a needle in a haystack;
you’re also looking for subtle irregularities in the haystack itself. Maybe a stack
contains a few more short stems than you’d expect. Or a pattern reveals itself
only when you simultaneously look at the size, shape, color, and texture of stems.
Such a pattern might suggest an unacknowledged substance in the soil. In
accelerator data, subtle patterns might suggest a hidden force. As Kasieczka and
his colleagues write in one paper, “We are not looking for flying elephants, but
instead a few extra elephants than usual at the local watering hole.”
Even algorithms that weigh many factors can miss signals—and they can also see
spurious ones. The stakes of mistakenly claiming discovery are high. Going back
to the hacking scenario, Plehn says, a company might ultimately determine that
its network wasn’t hacked; it was just a new employee. The algorithm’s false
positive causes little damage. “Whereas if you stand there and get the Nobel
How AI Could Miss—or Fake—New Physics

===== PAGE 12 =====
Prize, and a year later people say, ‘Well, it was a fluke,’ people would make fun of
you for the rest of your life,” he says. In particle physics, he adds, you run the risk
of spotting patterns purely by chance in big data, or as a result of malfunctioning
equipment.
False alarms have happened before. In 1976, a group at Fermilab led by Leon
Lederman, who later won a Nobel for other work, announced the discovery of a
particle they tentatively called the Upsilon. The researchers calculated the
probability of the signal’s happening by chance as 1 in 50. After further data
collection, though, they walked back the discovery, calling the pseudo-particle
the Oops-Leon. (Today, particle physicists wait until the chance that a finding is a
fluke drops below 1 in 3.5 million, the so-called five-sigma criterion.) And in 2011,
researchers at the Oscillation Project with Emulsion-tRacking Apparatus (OPERA)
experiment, in Italy, announced evidence for faster-than-light travel of neutrinos.
Then, a few months later, they reported that the result was due to a faulty
connection in their timing system.
Those cautionary tales linger in the minds of physicists. And yet, even while
researchers are wary of false positives from AI, they also see it as a safeguard
against them. So far, unsupervised learning has discovered no new physics,
despite its use on data from multiple experiments at Fermilab and CERN. But
anomaly detection may have prevented embarrassments like the one at OPERA.
“So instead of telling you there’s a new physics particle,” Kasieczka says, “it’s
telling you, this sensor is behaving weird today. You should restart it.”
Particle physicists are pushing the limits of not only their computing software but
also their computing hardware. The challenge is unparalleled. The LHC produces
40 million particle collisions per second, each of which can produce a megabyte
of data. That’s much too much information to store, even if you could save it to
disk that quickly. So the two largest detectors each use two-level data filtering.
The first layer, called the Level-1 Trigger, or L1T, harvests 100,000 events per
second, and the second layer, called the High-Level Trigger, or HLT, plucks 1,000
of those events to save for later analysis. So only one in 40,000 events is ever
potentially seen by human eyes.
Hardware for AI-Assisted Particle Physics

===== PAGE 13 =====
Katya Govorkova
“That’s when I thought, we need something like [AlphaGo] in physics. We need a
genius that can look at the world differently.”
HLTs use central processing units (CPUs) like the ones in your desktop computer,
running complex machine learning algorithms that analyze collisions based on
the number, type, energy, momentum, and angles of the new particles produced.
L1Ts, as a first line of defense, must be fast. So the L1Ts rely on integrated circuits
called field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), which users can reprogram for
specialized calculations.
The trade-off is that the programming must be relatively simple. The FPGAs can’t
easily store and run fancy neural networks; instead they follow scripted rules
about, say, what features of a particle collision make it important. In terms of
complexity level, it’s the instructions given to the women who scanned bubble
chambers, not the women’s brains.
Ekaterina (Katya) Govorkova, a particle physicist at MIT, saw a path toward
improving the LHC’s filters, inspired by a board game. Around 2020, she was
looking for new physics by comparing precise measurements at the LHC with
predictions, using little or no machine learning. Then she watched a documentary
about AlphaGo, the program that used machine learning to beat a human Go
champion. “For me the moment of realization was when AlphaGo would use
some absolutely new type of strategy that humans, who played this game for
centuries, hadn’t thought about before,” she says. “So that’s when I thought, we
need something like that in physics. We need a genius that can look at the world
differently.” New physics may be something we’d never imagine.
Person with long blonde hair in a white shirt against a solid blue background.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Govorkova and her collaborators found a way to compress autoencoders to put
them on FPGAs, where they process an event every 80 nanoseconds (less than
10-millionth of a second). (Compression involved pruning some network
connections and reducing the precision of some calculations.) They published
their methods in Nature Machine Intelligence in 2022, and researchers are now
using them during the LHC’s third run. The new trigger tech is installed in one of
the detectors around the LHC’s giant ring, and it has found many anomalous
events that would otherwise have gone unflagged.
Researchers are currently setting up analysis workflows to decipher why the
events were deemed anomalous. Jennifer Ngadiuba, a particle physicist at
Fermilab who is also one of the coordinators of the trigger system (and one of
Govorkova’s coauthors), says that one feature stands out already: Flagged events
have lots of jets of new particles shooting out of the collisions. But the scientists
still need to explore other factors, like the new particles’ energies and their
distributions in space. “It’s a high-dimensional problem,” she says.
Eventually they will share the data openly, allowing others to eyeball the results
or to apply new unsupervised learning algorithms in the hunt for patterns. Javier
Duarte, a physicist at the University of California, San Diego, and also a coauthor
on the 2022 paper, says, “It’s kind of exciting to think about providing this to the
community of particle physicists and saying, like, ‘Shrug, we don’t know what this
is. You can take a look.’” Duarte and Ngadiuba note that high-energy physics has
traditionally followed a top-down approach to discovery, testing data against
well-defined theories. Adding in this new bottom-up search for the unexpected
marks a new paradigm. “And also a return of sorts to before the Standard Model
was so well established,” Duarte adds.
Yet it could be years before we know why AI marked those collisions as
anomalous. What conclusions could they support? “In the worst case, it could be
some detector noise that we didn’t know about,” which would still be useful
information, Ngadiuba says. “The best scenario could be a new particle. And then
a new particle implies a new force.”

===== PAGE 15 =====
Jennifer Ngadiuba
“The best scenario could be a new particle. And then a new particle implies a new
force.”
Duarte says he expects their work with FPGAs to have wider applications. “The
data rates and the constraints in high-energy physics are so extreme that people
in industry aren’t necessarily working on this,” he says. “In self-driving cars,
usually millisecond latencies are sufficient reaction times. But we’re developing
algorithms that need to respond in microseconds or less. We’re at this
technological frontier, and to see how much that can proliferate back to industry
will be cool.”
Plehn is also working to put neural networks on FPGAs for triggers, in
collaboration with experimentalists, electrical engineers, and other theorists.
Encoding the nuances of abstract theories into material hardware is a puzzle. “In
this grant proposal, the person I talked to most is the electrical engineer,” he
says, “because I have to ask the engineer, which of my algorithms fits on your
bloody FPGA?”
Hardware is hard, says Ryan Kastner, an electrical engineer and computer
scientist at UC San Diego who works with Duarte on programming FPGAs. What
allows the chips to run algorithms so quickly is their flexibility. Instead of
programming them in an abstract coding language like Python, engineers
configure the underlying circuitry. They map logic gates, route data paths, and
synchronize operations by hand. That low-level control also makes the effort
“painfully difficult,” Kastner says. “It’s kind of like you have a lot of rope, and it’s
very easy to hang yourself.”
Person with braided updo in checkered suit jacket and chambray shirt, light blue background.

===== PAGE 16 =====
The next piece of new physics may not pop up at a particle accelerator. It may
appear at a detector for neutrinos, particles that are part of the Standard Model
but remain deeply mysterious. Neutrinos are tiny, electrically neutral, and so light
that no one has yet measured their mass. (The latest attempt, in April, set an
upper limit of about a millionth the mass of an electron.) Of all known particles
with mass, neutrinos are the universe’s most abundant, but also among the most
ghostly, rarely deigning to acknowledge the matter around them. Tens of trillions
pass through your body every second.
If we listen very closely, though, we may just hear the secrets they have to tell.
Karagiorgi, of Columbia, has chosen this path to discovery. Being a physicist is
“kind of like playing detective, but where you create your own mysteries,” she
tells me during my visit to Columbia’s Nevis Laboratories, located on a large
estate about 20 km north of Manhattan. Physics research began at the site after
World War II; one hallway features papers going back to 1951.
CERN
A researcher stands inside a prototype for the Deep Underground Neutrino
Experiment, which is designed to detect rare neutrino interactions.
Karagiorgi is eagerly awaiting a massive neutrino detector that’s currently under
construction. Starting in 2028, Fermilab will send neutrinos west through 1,300
km of rock to South Dakota, where they’ll occasionally make their existence
known in the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE). Why so far away?
When neutrinos travel long distances, they have an odd habit of oscillating,
transforming from one kind or “flavor” to another. Observing the oscillations of
both the neutrinos and their mirror-image antiparticles, antineutrinos, could tell
researchers something about the universe’s matter-antimatter asymmetry—which
the Standard Model doesn’t explain—and thus, according to the Nevis website,
“why we exist.”
“DUNE is the thing that’s been pushing me to develop these real-time AI
methods,” Karagiorgi says, “for sifting through the data very, very, very quickly
and trying to look for rare signatures of interest within them.” When neutrinos
Seeking New Physics Among the Neutrinos
A person stands inside a room that has gold-colored grids covering the floor, walls, and ceiling.

===== PAGE 17 =====
interact with the detector’s 70,000 tonnes of liquid argon, they’ll generate a
shower of other particles, creating visual tracks that look like a photo of fireworks.
The Standard Model catalogs the known fundamental particles of matter and the
forces that govern them, but leaves major mysteries unresolved.
Even when not bombarding DUNE with neutrinos, researchers will keep collecting
data in the off chance that it captures neutrinos from a distant supernova. “This is
a massive detector spewing out 5 terabytes of data per second,” Karagiorgi says,
“and it’s going to run constantly for a decade.” They will need unsupervised
learning to notice signatures that no one was looking for, because there are “lots
of different models of how supernova explosions happen, and for all we know,
none of them could be the right model for neutrinos,” she says. “To train your
algorithm on such uncertain grounds is less than ideal. So an algorithm that can
recognize any kind of disturbance would be a win.”
Deciding in real time which 1 percent of 1 percent of data to keep will require
FPGAs. Karagiorgi’s team is preparing to use them for DUNE, and she walks me to
a computer lab where they program the circuits. In the FPGA lab, we look at
nondescript circuit boards sitting on a table. “So what we’re proposing is a
scheme where you can have something like a hundred of these boards for DUNE
deep underground that receive the image data frame by frame,” she says. This
system could tell researchers whether a given frame resembled TV static,
fireworks, or something in between.
Neutrino experiments, like many particle-physics studies, are very visual. When
Karagiorgi was a postdoc, automated image processing at neutrino detectors was
still in its infancy, so she and collaborators would often resort to visual scanning
(bubble-chamber style) to measure particle tracks. She still asks undergrads to
hand-scan as an educational exercise. “I think it’s wrong to just send them to
write a machine learning algorithm. Unless you can actually visualize the data,
you don’t really gain a sense of what you’re looking for,” she says. “I think it also
A simplified chart of the Standard Model of physics shows matter particles (quarks and leptons), force-
carrying particles, and the Higgs, which conveys mass.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Sponsored Content
More for You
helps with creativity to be able to visualize the different types of interactions that
are happening, and see what’s normal and what’s not normal.”
Back in Karagiorgi’s office, a bulletin board displays images from The Cognitive
Art of Feynman Diagrams, an exhibit for which the designer Edward Tufte created
wire sculptures of the physicist Richard Feynman’s schematics of particle
interactions. “It’s funny, you know,” she says. “They look like they’re just scribbles,
right? But actually, they encode quantitatively predictive behavior in nature.”
Later, Karagiorgi and I spend a good 10 minutes discussing whether a computer
or a human could find Waldo without knowing what Waldo looked like. We also
touch on the 1964 Supreme Court case in which Justice Potter Stewart famously
declined to define obscenity, saying “I know it when I see it.” I ask whether it
seems weird to hand over to a machine the task of deciding what’s visually
interesting. “There are a lot of trust issues,” she says with a laugh.
On the drive back to Manhattan, we discuss the history of scientific discovery. “I
think it’s part of human nature to try to make sense of an orderly world around
you,” Karagiorgi says. “And then you just automatically pick out the oddities.
Some people obsess about the oddities more than others, and then try to
understand them.”
Reflecting on the Standard Model, she called it “beautiful and elegant,” with
“amazing predictive power.” Yet she finds it both limited and limiting, blinding us
to colors we don’t yet see. “Sometimes it’s both a blessing and a curse that we’ve
managed to develop such a successful theory.”
Ro
$39 Wegovy® program
cost
Sponsored Disclaimer info
Gaming Spectra
The Game Everyone Is
Calling “The Most Realistic
of 2025
Sponsored
Live Science·3d
Physicists put Einstein's 'happiest thought' to the
test, uniting relativity and quantum mechanics
101
Intelligencer
Hans Moravec was right
about AI. Is he right about
the fate of humanity?
35
Freaktography·18h
Inside the aband
Westinghouse fa
49

===== PAGE 19 =====
Sponsored Content
Snopes
Did Miami Heat post link
to LeBron James press
conference video?
Moon
They called him crazy for
20 years - then the FBI
files were released
543
GuidetoSchools.com
5 Best Schools for AI -
Artificial Intelligence
Degree - Degrees in AI
Sponsored
Loot Horizon
This Stunning Sc
Shooter Is 100% 
Sponsored
Art of the Problem·4d
How Shannon entropy
became our filter for
detecting intelligence in…
2
Interesting Engineering·2w
US scientists observe
quantum heat waves at
room temperature in a…
28
ScienceAlert·1w
In a major breakthrough,
physicists directly image
the quantum fluctuation…
76
INSIDER·1d
I left my 3-year-
home for a week
cruise with my p
10
14 air fryer hacks you need to know
Allrecipes 386.3K
Follow
Followers
2w
Discover 14 clever air fryer hacks from Nicole McLaughlin to prove this
appliance can do more than just crispy fries and chicken wings.
2k
32

===== PAGE 20 =====
More for You
