===== PAGE 1 =====
Start
Elementary Einstein
Special relativity
General relativity
Gravitational waves
Black Holes & Co.
Cosmology
Relativity and the Quantum
Spotlights on relativity
Special relativity
General relativity
Gravitational waves
Black Holes & Co.
Cosmology
Relativity and the Quantum
Complete Spotlights
About Einstein Online
The concept of EO
About Albert Einstein
About Us
Contributing Institutions
FAQ
Copyright policy
Contact
Essentials
Links
Glossary
Further reading
Hunting for extra dimensions
Ways of detecting extra dimensions – and why the fact that our
earth orbits the sun is a relevant data point

===== PAGE 2 =====
An article by Stefan Theisen
It is impossible to picture how a world with more than three space dimensions
would look like. There would be additional spatial directions, complementing the
well-known threesome of up-down, left-right, forward-backward. But when it
comes to picturing these directions, we are faced with insurmountable difficultires,
dwellers in three dimensions as we are. It is simpler to address another questions:
how would the laws of physics in such a higher-dimensional world – and how
would they differ from the three-dimensional laws we are used to?
The dimensions of Coulomb’s law
A simple example is Coulomb’s law, which describes the strength of the
electrostatic force with which a particle carrying the electric charge Q attracts other
charged particles – or repels them. The strength of the force by which a charge Q
acts on a charge q if the distance between them is r is given by
Coulomb’s force decreases as the distance between the charges increases – in
exactly the same way as the gravitational force in Newtonian gravity.
For this dependence on distance, there is a simple picture that is intimately
connected with the number of spatial dimensions. One can imagine that, from Q,
“field lines” run in all directions. In a two-dimensional world, this would lead to the
following picture:

===== PAGE 3 =====
The number of field lines is a measure for the size of the charge Q; their density
(how many field lines in a given volume of space?) a measure for the strength of the
force. Now, look at two test particles, where the distance of the second test particle
from the charge is twice as large as for the first (corresponding to the two little red
circles on the left):

===== PAGE 4 =====
As was already mentioned, the strength of the force at the location of each of the
test particles is given by the “density of the field lines” – the number of field lines
traversing a small segment of the circumference in the direct vicinity of the test
particle in question. This density is directly proportional to the inverse of the
distance: The total number of field lines originating at Q is constant, and this
number is spread out around the whole circle of possible test particle locations at a
certain distance from Q. Two such circles are given in the figure above,
corresponding to the location of the first and the second test particle. The
circumference of the circle is directly proportional to the radius r, and the density of
the field lines, defined as their number divided by the circumference over which
they are spread, is thus proportional to one over r. Consequently, the strength of the
force also varies with distance as one over r.
Three and more dimensions
In three dimensions, one can argue in exactly the same way: Again, a constant
number of field lines originates at Q. However, at the distance r, those field lines are
spread out not over the circumference of a circle – we are in three dimensions, and
all points at distance r correspond to the surface of a sphere with Q as the centre
point. Again, the field line density, in this case: the number of field lines crossing a
tiny section of the surface is a measure for the strength of the force. However, in
three dimensions the surface area of a sphere increases with the square of the
radius. If the area over which the field lines are spread increases with the square of
the distancen, then the field line density is proportional to one over the square of the

===== PAGE 5 =====
distance. This density is a measure for the strength of the force, and so this force,
too, decreases as one over the square of the distance – corresponding to the factor
one over r2 in the formula given in the beginning.
The argument is readily generalized to D dimensions – with field lines, higher-
dimensional analogues of circle and spherical surface, and with the general result:
The strength of the Coulomb force is proportional to one over r(D-1).
Arguments like this are not new – they go back at least to the 18th century, when
the philosopher Immanuel Kant, in his first publication, “Thoughts about the true
estimation of the living forces” (1749) pointed out how Newton’s law of gravity
reflects the fact that our universe is three-dimensional. In modern times, the
dimension-dependence of forces is of interest in the context of models such as those
of string theory, in which space has indeed more than three space dimensions.
Coulomb’s law has been subject to rigorous experimental tests, and so far, no
deviations from the inverse square law have been found. If there are extra space
dimensions, they must be well hidden. There are basically two ways to hide
dimensions. Either, the additional dimensions are “rolled up” – details about what
this means can be found in the spotlight topic Extra dimensions – and how to hide
them. It can be shown that, for rolled-up extra dimensions, Coulomb’s law is the
same as in ordinary, three-dimensional space, except at very, very small distances –
distances much smaller than can be probed experimentally in the foreseeable future.
The other possibility is that our world is embedded in higher dimensions, analogous
to a piece of paper, a two-dimensional region, being embedded in three-dimensional
space. More information about this can be found in the spotlight topic The
embedded universe.
 
Further Information
The relativistic background of this spotlight topic is explained in Elementary
Einstein, especially on the page Superstrings and universal harmony in the chapter
Relativity and the quantum.
For more information about extra dimensions, check out the spotlight topics Extra
dimensions – and how to hide them, The embedded universe and Simplicity in
higher dimensions. Related spotlight topics can be found in the section Relativity
and the quantum.
Colophon
Stefan Theisen
is a research group leader at Albert Einstein Institute with a research focus on string
theory.
Citation
Cite this article as:
Stefan Theisen, “Hunting for extra dimensions” in: Einstein Online Band 04
(2010), 01-1027

===== PAGE 6 =====
Further Articles
Tag Cloud
Basics  Basics  black holes  Black Holes & Co.  Cosmological
applications  Cosmology  Cosmology and quantum gravity  Detecting
gravitational waves  Energy and mass  gauge theory  General
relativity  General theory of relativity  Gravitational wave
Gravitational wave sources  Gravitational waves
Gravitationswellenastronomie  How to track compact objects
Interferometer  Interview  Light in general relativity  Loop quantum gravity
Mass and other sources of gravity  Miscellaneous  neutron stars  Nobel Price
Numerical relativity  Other approaches to the problem of quantum gravity
Physics in the background  Physics in the background of quantum theory
Relativity and the Quantum  Singularities  Special
relativity  Special relativity and time  String theory  The basics of
general relativity  The cosmic background radiation  The first chemical
elements  The mathematics behind general relativity  The physics of black
holes
What is Einstein Online?
Einstein Online is a web portal with comprehensible information on Einstein's
theories of relativity and their most exciting applications from the smallest particles
to cosmology.
Einstein Online is provided by the
Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics
(Albert-Einstein-Institut)
About Einstein Online
Extra dimensions – and
how to hide them
Simplicity in higher
dimensions
Relativity and the
Quantum / Elementary
Tour part 5: Superstrings
and universal harmony
The embedded universe

===== PAGE 7 =====
Includes information on our authors and contributing Institutions, and a brief
history of the website.
Glossary
More than 400 entries from "absolute zero" to "XMM Newton" - whenever you see
this type of link on an Einstein Online page, it'll take you to an entry in our
relativistic dictionary.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
Links & Literatur
Our recommendations for books and websites on relativity and its history.
© Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics, Potsdam
Legal notice | Privacy policy
