===== PAGE 1 =====
TABLE I: Reader’s Guide by Section.Recommended entry points
into the manuscript organized by conceptual focus rather than
pagination.
Goal Start with Section
Conceptual overview Sec. I (Preface)
Core formalism (AFE/UEP) Sec. III–V
Black-hole defragmentation Sec. VI
Observational tests (Discrete Shimmer) Sec. VII
Technical derivations Appendices
The Defragmented Cosmos: An Auditable Universe
A Relational Foundation for Quantum Gravity and Cosmological Bookkeeping
Jason P. Voelker1,∗
1Independent Researcher
(Dated: February 2026)
We propose a relational reformulation of gravitational coupling based on the Uniform Encoding Principle
(UEP), treating spacetime as a capacity-limited information manifold. The central claim is thatShift-Invariance—
global invariance of the action underL→L+ Λconst—is a fundamental gauge symmetry: a homogeneous
vacuum “DC offset” carries no addressable information inside a finite causal sector and therefore cannot act
as a curvature source. Implementing this symmetry on Constant Mean Curvature (CMC[10]/York-time) slices
yields theAudited Field Equations(AFE), in which the gravitational source term is a shift-invariant fluctuation,
𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ, relative to a sector-defined background state. We connect the UEP resolution floor to holographic
entropy bounds (Bousso[3]-type covariant screens), motivating the Bekenstein–Hawking area law as a saturation
(“Nyquist”) limit on physical addressability. Black hole evaporation is interpreted as unitarydefragmentationof a
holographic quantum error-correcting encoding, with operational recoverability limited by Harlow–Hayden[9]
complexity. Finally,weintroduceafalsifiablecosmologicaltemplate— DiscreteShimmer—andprovideaBayesian
experimental mandate, including a residuals-based detection strategy and a cross-epoch frequency invariance null
test.
I. INTRODUCTION
a. Howtoreadthispaper. Readersprimarilyinterestedin
theconceptualmotivationmaybeginwithSec.I,whichframes
theUniformEncodingPrinciple(UEP)asanoperationalcapac-
ityboundimpliedbyholography. Theformalauditeddynamics
are developed in Secs. III–V, where the shift-invariant source
construction and the Audited Field Equations are specified
on CMC/York-time slices. The black-hole defragmentation
picture and its connection to Page-curve unitarity appear in
Sec.VI.Observationalconsequences—particularlytheDiscrete
Shimmer template and cross-epoch null test—are developed in
Sec. VII. Technical proofs, numerical scaffolds, and auxiliary
constructions are collected in the Appendices.
Foracentury,fundamentalphysicshascarriedtwoproblems
whose persistence suggests that something structural is being
missed. Thefirstisanumericalscandal: naivemodecountingin
continuum quantum field theory (QFT) assigns to empty space
a vacuum energy density so large that, if gravitationally active
in the expected way, it would curve spacetime catastrophically.
The second is a conceptual scandal: semiclassical black holes
∗ ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0005-9045-486X
appear to delete information, in tension with unitary quantum
mechanics.
Reader’s guide and narrative overview
This manuscript is written in a hybrid style: it proposes a
structural modification to gravitational bookkeeping, but it is
also intended to beauditable by readers who do not want to
take slogans on faith. To that end, the narrative is organized
around three questions.
Physical motivation and operational reading
The central interpretive move of this manuscript is deliber-
ately conservative: it replaces anontologicalassumption (that
everyformalmodeofacontinuumfieldtheoryisequally“real”
as a gravitational source) with anoperational criterion (that
onlyaddressabledistinctionsarebillabletothegeometry). The
Uniform Encoding Principle (UEP) is therefore not introduced
as a new force or an additional ingredient, but as a bookkeep-
ing constraint already suggested by holography: if a causal
diamond of boundary area𝐴 cannot operationally distinguish
more thanO(𝐴/ℓ2
𝑃) independent states without gravitational

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
collapse, then any description that counts a volume-extensive
infinity of independent modes is overcounting the ledger.
A useful physical analogy is the following. A digital camera
maystorethesceneinanenormousarray,butitcannotrepresent
spatialdetailbelowitspixelscale; attemptingto“resolve”finer
structure simply yields noise. In the audited universe,𝛿𝑥 plays
the role of a resolution floor: excitations finer than𝛿𝑥 are not
denied by fiat, but become self-defeating because the energy
requiredtoaddressthembackreactsgravitationallyanddestroys
the very localization one attempted to achieve. The “audit” is
the statement that the gravitational equations only respond to
information-bearingdepartures from the sector background—
thesignal—nottoauniform,globallyunaddressablebaseline—
the hum.
This operational reading has two immediate consequences
that orient the rest of the paper. First, it reframes the cos-
mological constant discrepancy as a bookkeeping mismatch
between formal UV mode-counting and physically addressable
degrees of freedom: the large “DC offset” of vacuum energy is
sequestered by shift invariance and sector referencing, while
relative and spatially varying vacuum effects remain intact.
Second, it reframes the black-hole information paradox as a
question ofwherethe information is supported andwho can
decode it: unitarity is maintained, but recovery is protected by
a complexity barrier, so semiclassical locality remains a valid
effective story for ordinary observers.
b. (Q1)Whatisbeingclaimed? Thecoreclaimismodest
in its target but consequential in its implication: a globally
uniformvacuum“DCoffset”thatisoperationallyindistinguish-
able within a causal sector should not act as a gravitational
source. The Uniform Encoding Principle (UEP) formalizes
why: gravity limits physical addressability, so the Hilbert-
space factorization implicit in continuum field sums does not
correspond to independently billable degrees of freedom.
c. (Q2) Where does the modification enter?The modifi-
cation enters at the level ofsector referencing: gravitational
response is defined relative to a maximum-entropy reference
state consistent with boundary-accessible constraints. This is
expressed operationally via the ledger operatorL and formally
via the Audited Field Equations (AFE), Eq.(23). Importantly,
local physics
Bianchiconsistencyandaminimalcompensator.— Because
∇𝜇𝐺𝜇𝜈 ≡ 0, the audited source term must be covariantly
conserved. The sector functional⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ is nonlocal through
its dependence on the CMC sliceΣ, and therefore its covariant
divergencemustbecontrolledatthelevelofthefieldequations.
On foliation choice and universality.—The audit functional
is defined on Constant Mean Curvature (CMC) slices because
they provide a geometrically distinguished “accounting period”
(York time[10]) and reduce gauge ambiguity in sector aver-
aging. While global CMC foliations are not guaranteed for
all spacetimes, the operational content of the framework is
formulated on causal diamonds. Accordingly, when a global
CMC foliation is unavailable, the audit is defined patchwise
on locally CMC (or constant-expansion) hypersurfaces within
each causal diamond. The phenomenological predictions de-
veloped here depend only on the existence of such sector slices
[t]
Boundary redundancy
(entanglement wedge)
Logical subspace
(effective bulk locality)
Evaporation / re-encoding
(defragmentation map)
Radiation
(exterior)
Operational observer
(causal diamond)
Complexity barrier
𝑇dec≳𝑒𝛼𝑆
Schematic: bulk locality is protected by bound-
ary redundancy. Evaporation updates the encod-
ing map, migrating logical support outward. Uni-
tarity is preserved, while decoding can be oper-
ationally censored by computational complexity.
FIG. 1:Holographic error-correction picture of defragmentation,
rendered in a print-safe “high gloss” style (grayscale, no text
occlusion).
over the observable region, a condition satisfied in standard
cosmological histories.
We close the system by introducing a minimal compensator
tensorC𝜇𝜈 defined by
C𝜇𝜈≡∇ 𝜇𝐴𝜈+∇𝜈𝐴𝜇−𝑔𝜇𝜈∇𝛼𝐴𝛼, (1)
for a vector potential𝐴𝜇 chosen to satisfy
□𝐴𝜈+𝑅 𝜇
𝜈 𝐴𝜇 = 8𝜋𝐺∇𝜇⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ. (2)
This construction guarantees
∇𝜇

𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ+ 1
8𝜋𝐺C𝜇𝜈

= 0, (3)
restoring Bianchi consistency while remaining agnostic about
microscopic realization. In homogeneous FRW sectors,
∇𝜇⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ= 0and the compensator admits the trivial solution
𝐴𝜇 = 0, so the AFE reduce to a purely relational coupling at
background level.
is not discarded; it is recovered as an effective description
on a protected subalgebra supported by redundancy (Sec. III
and Sec. V).
d. (Q3) How can this be wrong?The framework makes
falsifiablecommitments. First,itpredictsamildtimeevolution
of the effective vacuum sector (Ledger Drift). Second, it
predicts an oscillatory residual template (Discrete Shimmer)
with a stringent cross-epoch null test: the log-frequency𝜔
should be invariant between CMB and LSS analyses up to
amplitude fading. Sections VII and VIII translate these claims
into template-level statistics and concrete analysis steps.
e. How to read. Readers interested in conceptual moti-
vation may begin with Sec. II and Sec. III. Readers primarily
interested in formal structure may jump to Sec. IV (AFE)
and Sec. VI (QEC/defragmentation). Readers interested in
data-facing predictions should focus on Sec. VII and Sec. VIII,
especially the SNR and cross-epoch invariance criteria.
This paper argues that these are not two unrelated embar-
rassments but one bookkeeping mistake. We have treated the
universe as though every formal degree of freedom that can be
written down is an entry that must be paid. Gravity, however,
behaves like an auditor: it permits only those distinctions that
can be operationally addressed within a causal region. The
central claim is therefore operational rather than metaphysical:
if a putative state cannot be prepared, distinguished, or stored
without inducing gravitational collapse or violating causal
resolvability, it does not exist as an independent ledger entry.

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
The manuscript develops this claim in five linked moves.
First, we formulate an auditable causal-resolution constraint—
the Uniform Encoding Principle(UEP)—that bounds the ef-
fective address space of a causal diamond by boundary area.
Second, we show how the same constraint changes what it
means to “count” vacuum degrees of freedom in QFT. Third,
we interpret black hole evaporation through the lens of error-
correcting encodings and complexity: information is preserved
but defragmentedinto exterior degrees of freedom, while re-
covery is generically censored by computational cost. Fourth,
we propose a sector-referenced bookkeeping rule for energy:
gravity couples to relational differences accessible within a
sector rather than to an unobservable global offset. Fifth, we
spell out how the framework earns (or loses) its right to exist:
by generating concrete signatures and null tests that can be
applied across cosmological datasets.
A. Relation to existing ideas (positioning)
The present framework is not a replacement for hologra-
phy or for effective field theory; it is a discipline imposed on
them. HolographicentropyboundsmotivateEq. (25),whilethe
quantum error-correction interpretation motivates the defrag-
mentation picture. Where this manuscript aims to contribute
is in elevatingoperational addressabilityto the rule that de-
termines what counts as an independent state for gravitational
bookkeeping, and in translating that rule into observational
templates: Ledger Drift and Discrete Shimmer. The ambition
is modest in method but expansive in consequence: if a theory
cannot be audited, it cannot be trusted.
Thecentralthesisofthisworkisthatthelong-standingtensions
betweenquantumfieldtheoryandgravitymayinsteadreflectan
overcounting of gravitationally admissible degrees of freedom.
If gravitational dynamics are sensitive only to operationally
addressable information, then homogeneous vacuum offsets
represent gauge redundancy rather than physical charge. The
Uniform Encoding Principle (UEP) provides a concrete im-
plementation of this idea by imposing a capacity limit tied to
causal accessibility.[3, 5–8]
Within this framework, the cosmological constant discrepancy,
the holographic entropy bound, and the unitary Page curve
admit a common operational interpretation.
Residual dark energy in a shift-invariant theory.—Shift
invariance sequesters the homogeneous UV vacuum offset (the
formal “DC bias” of continuum QFT) from gravitation. The
observed late-time acceleration is instead interpreted as an
IR residual associated with finite causal bandwidth: a causal
diamond of radius𝑅 admits a minimum operational frequency
𝜀IR∼ ℏ𝑐/𝑅. UnderUEP,thenumberofaddressabledegreesof
freedom scales with boundary area,𝑁eff∼ 𝐴/ℓ2
𝑃. Distributing
theIRflooracrossthecausalvolumeyieldsaneffectivedensity
𝜌eff∼ 𝑁eff𝜀IR
𝑉 ∼ 1
𝑅2ℓ2
𝑃
, (4)
which is of the observed dark-energy order when𝑅 is taken as
the present horizon scale. In this view,𝜌Λ is not an arbitrary
uniform offset, but a horizon-linked residual of an auditable,
finite-capacity manifold, with slow evolution (“ledger drift”)
as𝑅 changes.
The goal of the present work is therefore not to modify local
quantum field theory in the ultraviolet, but to reformulate the
gravitational source term so that it respects the information-
theoretic constraints already suggested by black-hole thermo-
dynamics and holography.
OrganizationofthisWork.— Wedeveloptheaudited-universe
program in a sequence that cleanly separates principle, for-
malism, and observational consequence. Section II introduces
the Uniform Encoding Principle and formalizes operational
addressability in gravitational systems. Section III derives
the shift-invariant Audited Field Equations on Constant Mean
Curvature (CMC) slices and demonstrates how relational vac-
uum renormalization sequesters homogeneous energy offsets
while preserving local stress–energy gradients. Section IV
establishesholographicconsistencybyconnectingtheUEPres-
olutionfloortotheBoussoboundandtheBekenstein–Hawking
entropylaw. SectionVanalyzesblack-holeevaporationasauni-
tary re-encoding process incorporating complexity censorship
in the sense of Harlow and Hayden.[9] Section VI develops the
phenomenology of Discrete Shimmer and presents a Bayesian
detectionforecastforupcomingCMBandlarge-scale-structure
surveys. Technical derivations, including the covariant sector
averaging construction and supporting scaling arguments, are
provided in the Appendices.
II. INTRODUCTION AND POSITIONING
General Relativity (GR) and Quantum Field Theory (QFT)
are each extraordinarily successful within their validated do-
mains, yet their combination exposes persistent structural ten-
sions. Two such tensions—the cosmological constant problem
and the black hole information paradox—are commonly dis-
cussedasseparatepuzzles. Thismanuscriptadvancesaunified
operational diagnosis: both problems arise when continuum
bookkeeping counts degrees of freedom that are not physically
addressable once gravitational backreaction is accounted for.
A central motivation comes from the holographic lesson,
articulated in different forms by ’t Hooft and Susskind: the
information content of a region is bounded by a screen-like
area, not by volume. If bulk locality is redundancy-protected
and emergent, then a consistent theory must specifywhich
distinctionsarecountedasphysicaland whichsourcecurvature.
We implement that specification via the Uniform Encoding
Principle (UEP) and a shift-invariance gauge symmetry of
the gravitational action, yielding the Audited Field Equations
(AFE).
A. Problem statement: vacuum energy as an overcounting
pathology
Naive mode counting in continuum QFT assigns a large
zero-point energy density to empty space. If treated as a local
gravitational charge, this would generate a curvature scale
incompatible with observation by roughly10120 in natural

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
units. The severity of the discrepancy suggests not a small
parameter mistake but a mismatch inwhat is being counted.
In the audited framework, a spatially uniform “DC” offset is
treatedasoperationallyindistinguishablewithinacausalsector
and therefore as gauge.
B. Operational hypothesis: gravity couples to addressable
information
We propose that gravity responds only to relational,
information-bearing excitations—those that can be distin-
guished without inducing gravitational collapse. This is
implemented by (i) a resolution floor𝛿𝑥 (UEP) that limits
addressability inside a causal diamond and (ii) sector refer-
encing on Constant Mean Curvature (CMC/York-time) slices,
which subtracts the sector mean stress-energy. The resulting
AFE remove the vacuum catastrophe while preserving empiri-
cally observeddifferencesin vacuum energy under boundary
conditions.
C. Microphysical motivation: transport-limited addressability
To avoid purely metaphorical language, we tie the resolution
floorandmaximalledgercapacitytotransport-limitedinforma-
tionflow. Inmanystronglycoupledquantumsystemsadmitting
holographicduals,dissipationobeystheKovtun–Son–Starinets
(KSS) [11] bound. We use this as a principled proxy for a
universal minimum “information viscosity”: below this limit,
redistribution of distinguishable degrees of freedom would
become acausal. Within this lens, the Bekenstein–Hawking
area law is interpreted as the saturation of a capacity constraint
rather than an unexplained coincidence.
D. Black holes: defragmentation and operational complexity
censorship
The information paradox is reframed as a question about the
support of logical information in an error-correcting encoding.
Evaporation corresponds to a unitary update of an encoding
map (“defragmentation”) that migrates logical support from
an interior code subspace to exterior radiation, consistent with
Page-curve behavior. Semiclassical interior experience is pro-
tectednotbynon-unitaritybutbycomputationalinaccessibility:
although a decoding unitary exists in principle, its gate com-
plexity can be astronomically large (Harlow–Hayden [9]-type
arguments), acting as an operational censorship for finite ob-
servers.
E. Phenomenology: a Bayesian adjudication program for
Discrete Shimmer
a. Distinguishability from inflationary feature models.
Oscillatory residuals in 𝑃(𝑘) are also predicted in well-
studied feature scenarios (e.g., axion-monodromy-motivated
log-oscillations and step-induced ringing). The UEP/ledger-
microstructure hypothesis is distinguished not by the mere
presence of oscillations, but by a joint requirement that is
difficulttofakewithinstrumentaloralternative-physicssystem-
atics: (i) cross-epoch invariance of the log-frequency𝜔 (CMB
versus large-scale structure versus, prospectively, 21cm), (ii) a
scale-dependentamplitudefadingconsistentwiththeshrinking
historical ledger capacity, and (iii) phase stability across inde-
pendent pipelines and sky partitions. A detection satisfying
the invariance criterion together with strong Bayesian prefer-
ence (Sec. XV) would therefore strongly disfavor conventional
feature explanations.
A capacity-limited encoding hierarchy generically permits
log-periodic residual templates in correlators (Discrete Shim-
mer). Rather than presenting a purely qualitative signature,
we specify an analysis doctrine: pre-registered templates,
evidence thresholds in Bayesian model comparison, pipeline-
independent null tests, and a cross-epoch invariance criterion.
Theframeworkisthereforefalsifiable: eitheradiscovery-grade
evidence signal survives these constraints, or stringent upper
limits feed back into the code-distance interpretation of the
shimmer amplitude.
F. Roadmap
Section II introduces the UEP and the causal-resolution
constraint. Section III formulates shift-invariance and derives
the AFE. Section IV develops the transport-limited (KSS-
motivated)saturationperspectiveandtheBekenstein–Hawking
limit. Section V treats black hole evaporation as defrag-
mentation and summarizes operational complexity censorship.
Sections VI–VII present the shimmer template, signal-to-noise
considerations, and the Bayesian experimental mandate. We
close with a positioning discussion and a forward research
program.
III. THE SYMMETRY OF THE AUDIT
A. Sector averaging on CMC slices: the standard accounting
period
B. Patchwise CMC construction
WhileglobalConstantMeanCurvature(CMC)foliationsare
not guaranteed for arbitrary spacetimes, the audit requires only
an operationally defined sectoring that covers the observable
domain. We therefore adopt the following prescription.
(i) Sector identification.Decompose the relevant spacetime
region into maximal patches admitting smooth CMC slices
labeled by York time𝑇𝑌.
(ii) Sector averaging.Within each patch, define the audited
baseline⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ(𝑇𝑌) by averaging over the corresponding CMC
sliceΣ(𝑇𝑌) (or, when required, a compact causal subdomain
thereof).
(iii) Overlap matching.On overlaps of adjacent patches,
matchsectorsbycontinuityof 𝑇𝑌 andtheinducedthree-metric,

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
andrequireagreementoftheauditedsourcetowithincontrolled
boundary terms.
(iv) Observable restriction.Compute observables within
the causal domain of a single consistent sector covering the
past light cone of the observer. Because the subtraction is
uniform within each sector, no superluminal signaling channel
is introduced; the construction reduces to the standard global
CMC formulation in homogeneous cosmologies.
This patchwise formulation is an operational statement: it is
the minimal structure needed to define a “standard accounting
period” without demanding global existence in spacetimes that
are irrelevant to any actual measurement program.
A key referee question is: in which frame is the audit
performed? Theauditedframeworkfixesthisbydefiningsector
expectations on Constant Mean Curvature (CMC) slices (York-
time foliation), which provide a geometrically preferred notion
of“simultaneity”forcosmologicalbookkeeping. Operationally,
this is the universe’sstandard accounting period: just as a
globalledgerrequiressynchronizedreportingintervals,acausal
sector requires a foliation on which the subtraction⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ is
unambiguous. CMCslicingiswidelyusedincanonicalgravity
preciselybecauseittiesthefoliationtointrinsicgeometryrather
than coordinate choices, making the sector mean coordinate-
robust within the class of admissible slices.
Concretely, for each sectorΣ we define
⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ≡ 1
VΣ
∫
Σ
𝑑3𝑥
√
ℎ𝑇𝜇𝜈, VΣ=
∫
Σ
𝑑3𝑥
√
ℎ, (5)
and treat𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ as the relational, information-bearing
source.
C. Shift-invariance as a gauge principle
The vacuum-energy crisis is often presented as a numerical
mismatch: naive mode counting in continuum QFT yields a
vacuum energy density vastly larger than the observed dark-
energy scale. The audited perspective reframes the problem
as asymmetry violationin the bookkeeping. Operationally, a
globally uniform offset in the matter Lagrangian,
L𝑚 −→ L𝑚+Λconst, (6)
does not change any non-gravitational experiment performed
within a finite causal sector: local detectors measure energy
differences, forces, and transition rates, not an absolute DC
baseline. Itisthereforenaturaltodemandthatthegravitational
action respect this operational indistinguishability by treating
the uniform zero mode as a gauge artifact.
There is a close family resemblance here to unimodular[14]
ideas,wherethecosmologicalconstantappearsasanintegration
constant rather than a fixed curvature charge. The present
proposal differs in emphasis: shift-invariance is not introduced
as a mathematical convenience, but as theaudit ruleimplied
by finite addressability under gravity. In other words, the
symmetry is not chosen; it is enforced by the fact that an
observercannotoperationallylabeldistinctglobaloffsetswithin
a causal diamond.
D. From symmetry to a constrained source
A convenient way to implement shift-invariance is to en-
sure that the gravitational source is defined only up to a
sector-indistinguishable constant component. LetΣ denote
a CMC/York-time slice that defines the causal sector. We
introduce a sector-referenced stress tensor
e𝑇𝜇𝜈 ≡ 𝑇𝜇𝜈−

𝑇𝜇𝜈

Σ, (7)
where⟨·⟩Σ denotes the coarse-grained sector expectation fixed
by boundary-accessible constraints. By construction,e𝑇𝜇𝜈 is
invariant under Eq.(6) for uniform shifts, and it reduces to
the usual𝑇𝜇𝜈 whenever the sector expectation is negligible
over the region of interest. This is the precise sense in which
the “DC offset” is gauged away: it remains present in formal
expressions,butitisnotpermittedtoactasaphysicalcurvature
charge.
IV. FORMALISM: AUDITED PRIMITIVES, AXIOMS, AND
LEMMAS
This sectiondistillsthe proposalinto asmall setof auditable
primitives. The intent is not to present a final microphys-
ical completion, but to make explicit which statements are
definitional, which are assumptions, and which are derived
consequences that can be checked.
A. Operational primitives
We consider an observer restricted to a causal diamond𝐷
with an operational boundary screen𝐵 (e.g. defined by light-
sheets). The observer’s accessible algebraA(𝐷) is generated
by measurements and preparations that respect causal access
and finite resources, including the requirement that attempts to
refine distinctions do not induce gravitational collapse.
Asector𝜎 isspecifiedbyaconstraintset {𝐶𝑖} comprisedof
macroscopic quantities operationally measurable within𝐷 (or
on𝐵) and stable under coarse-graining. The sector reference
state 𝜌𝜎 is the maximum-entropy state consistent with the
measured constraint values, and sector expectation values are
computed as⟨𝑋⟩sector= Tr(𝜌𝜎𝑋).
B. Axioms
Axiom UEP (Uniform Encoding Principle).The number
of operationally resolvable distinctions within𝐷 is bounded by
boundary area as in Eq. (25).
Axiom SR (Sector Referencing).Gravitational bookkeep-
ingwithinasectorcouplestorelationalexcitationswithrespect
to the sector reference: for an energy functional𝐸, define
L[𝐸]=𝐸−⟨𝐸⟩sector as in Eq. (35).
Axiom OC (Operational Censorship).There exist phys-
ically relevant regimes in which a decoding map exists in
principle but requires resources that scale super-polynomially

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
in a coarse-grained entropy, so that recoverability can fail
operationally even under unitary evolution (cf. Eq. (33)).
C. Lemmas
Lemma 1 (Offset invariance).For any constant offset𝐸0,
L[𝐸+𝐸0]=L[𝐸]. Consequently, global vacuum offsets that
are sector-indistinguishable do not contribute as gravitational
sources within that sector.
Lemma 2 (Area-limited independence implies a reso-
lution proxy). If one insists on independent addresses for
effective“cells”inaregionofscale 𝑅, UEPimpliesthescaling
proxy in Eq.(26). This is a constraint on independence under
gravitational audit, not a bound on instrumental precision.
a. Derivation sketch (audited cell count). Consider an
operational attempt to resolve𝑁 independent “cells” in a re-
gion of characteristic size𝑅. Any protocol that makes the
cells independently addressable must, at minimum, distinguish
among𝑁 outcomes, which requires an information capacity of
log𝑁 bits. Under the covariant entropy bound logic, the physi-
cally storable entropy within the causal diamond is bounded
by∼ 𝐴(𝐵)/( 4ℓ2
𝑃)∼ 𝑅2/ℓ2
𝑃. If one insists on a volume tiling
𝑁∼( 𝑅/𝛿𝑥)3 of independently addressable cells, audited ca-
pacity implieslog(𝑅/𝛿𝑥)3≲𝑅2/ℓ2
𝑃. Dropping the logarithm
as a slow function and matching parametric scalings yields
Eq. (26). This is intentionally conservative: it encodes the
direction of the constraint (area-limited independence) without
overclaiming a unique numerical coefficient.
Lemma 3 (Layering implies signal fading).If microstruc-
ture imprints are propagated to observables through a discrete
encoding hierarchy with depth𝑛eff(𝑎), then the amplitude of a
microstructure-origin log-periodic modulation is naturally sup-
pressed as𝜖(𝑎)=𝜖0𝑒−𝑛eff(𝑎)/𝑛𝑐, yielding a concrete early-time
versus late-time detectability prediction (Eq. (44)).
These lemmas are deliberately modest: they do not claim
a unique ultraviolet completion, but they do fix where the
accounting is performed and what counts as auditable content.
V. AUDITED FIELD EQUATIONS
VI. VARIATIONAL COMPLETION OF THE AUDITED
DYNAMICS
The AFE were introduced above in a “source–audit–
compensator”formthatmakestheoperationalintenttransparent.
For publication-grade completeness, it is useful to exhibit an
action-level implementation in which (i) shift-invariance is
manifest, (ii) the sector average is enforced on a CMC (York-
time) foliation, and (iii) covariant conservation is restored by
construction via a compensator field. This section provides
a minimal effective-action completion. The purpose is not
to claim a unique UV completion, but to supply a consistent
variational scaffold on which microphysical models of UEP
can be grafted.
A. Shift-invariant audited action
LetΣ𝑇𝑌 denote the CMC hypersurfaces labelled by York
time𝑇𝑌, with induced metricℎ𝑖𝑗 and volume element
√
ℎ𝑑 3𝑥.
Define thesector averageof a scalar𝑋 onΣ𝑇𝑌 by
⟨𝑋⟩Σ≡
∫
Σ𝑇𝑌
√
ℎ𝑋𝑑 3𝑥
∫
Σ𝑇𝑌
√
ℎ𝑑 3𝑥
. (8)
To implement the audit at the level of the stress tensor, we
introduce a projector onto sector fluctuations,
ΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈]≡ 𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ, (9)
where⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ is defined componentwise in the CMC frame
(equivalently by projection onto𝑛𝜇𝑛𝜈,𝑛(𝜇ℎ𝜈)𝛼, andℎ𝜇𝛼ℎ𝜈𝛽
sectors onΣ𝑇𝑌). The key property isshift invariance:
𝑇𝜇𝜈→𝑇𝜇𝜈+𝜌0𝑔𝜇𝜈 =⇒ ΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈] unchanged, (10)
for any constant𝜌0, because⟨𝜌0𝑔𝜇𝜈⟩Σ=𝜌0𝑔𝜇𝜈 on a fixedΣ𝑇𝑌.
Thus, a uniform “DC offset” is a gauge artifact with respect to
the audited source.
B. An explicit effective action
To eliminate any ambiguity about conservation and diffeo-
morphism invariance, we present an effective action whose
metric variation yields the audited form. LetΣ[𝑇𝑌] denote a
York-time (CMC) foliation functional and letVΣ≡
∫
Σ
√
ℎ𝑑 3𝑥
be the CMC-slice 3-volume. Define the sector average of any
scalarO by
⟨O⟩Σ≡ 1
VΣ
∫
Σ
√
ℎO𝑑3𝑥, (11)
and extend this definition componentwise for tensors by pro-
jection ontoΣ. Consider the audited action
𝑆[𝑔,Ψ,𝐴 𝜇,𝜆]= 𝑀2
P
2
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔𝑅 +
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔Lm(𝑔,Ψ)
−
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔𝜆(𝑥)

T(𝑥)−⟨T⟩ Σ[𝑇𝑌]

+
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔
h
− 1
4𝐹𝜇𝜈𝐹𝜇𝜈+𝐴𝜇𝐽𝜇
a
i
,
(12)
whereΨ denotes matter fields,T≡ 𝑔𝜇𝜈𝑇𝜇𝜈 is the trace source
used to define the audited “background subtraction,”𝜆 is an
auxiliary multiplier field implementing shift-invariance at the
leveloftheaction,and (𝐴𝜇,𝐹𝜇𝜈) constituteaminimalcompen-
sator sector with an audited current𝐽𝜇
a . This effective action
should be read as an operational closure: it packages the audit
into a constrained variational principle without presuming the
ultravioletmicrophysicsthatultimatelygeneratestheconstraint.
Varying𝑆 with respect to𝑔𝜇𝜈 yields
𝐺𝜇𝜈 = 8𝜋𝐺  𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ+𝐶𝜇𝜈
, (13)

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
with𝐶𝜇𝜈 arising from the(𝜆,𝐴 𝜇) sector and the projection of
the nonlocal constraint.1
C. Bianchi consistency as an on-shell identity
We now state the essential consistency result that a referee
willrightfullydemand: themodifiedsourcetermisdivergence-
free by construction once the compensator equations of motion
hold.
Theorem 1(Bianchi consistency of the audited source). Let𝑆
be the audited action in Eq.(15). Assume the matter sector is
diffeomorphism invariant, so that∇𝜇𝑇𝜇𝜈 = 0on matter shell.
Then the effective audited source satisfies
∇𝜇 𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ+𝐶𝜇𝜈
 = 0 (14)
identicallywhentheauxiliaryfields (𝜆,𝐴 𝜇) satisfytheirEuler–
Lagrange equations.
Proof sketch.Taking the covariant divergence of the metric
field equation and using∇𝜇𝐺𝜇𝜈 = 0 reduces the condition to
∇𝜇(−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ+𝐶𝜇𝜈)= 0. Thenonlocalvariationof ⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ[𝑇𝑌]
introduces a conserved “audit current” whose divergence is
cancelled by the compensator sector through∇𝜇𝐹𝜇𝜈 =𝐽𝜈
a and
the𝜆-constraint equation. Thus conservation is not postulated;
it follows from diffeomorphism invariance of𝑆. □
A minimal effective action implementing this is
𝑆AFE= 1
16𝜋𝐺
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔𝑅 +𝑆m[𝑔,Ψ]+ 𝑆audit[𝑔,Ψ;𝜆]+ 𝑆comp[𝑔,𝐴],
(15)
where𝑆m is the matter action,𝜆 is a (CMC-slice) Lagrange
multiplierenforcingsectorreferencing,and 𝐴𝜇isacompensator
vector potential.
Wetaketheaudittermtobeaconstrainednonlocalfunctional,
𝑆audit≡− 1
2
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔𝜆(𝑥)  F(𝑥)−⟨F⟩ Σ(𝑥), (16)
withF chosensothat 𝛿𝑆audit/𝛿𝑔𝜇𝜈 producesthedesiredsector
subtraction of𝑇𝜇𝜈 in the CMC frame. A simple choice is
F =𝑇≡𝑔𝜇𝜈𝑇𝜇𝜈 together with CMC-adapted projections. (In
practice one may introduce independent multipliers for the
energy density and momentum flux components onΣ𝑇𝑌; the
present scalar form captures the shift symmetry cleanly and
keeps the completion minimal.)
D. Compensator action and Bianchi consistency
Any modified source term must respect∇𝜇𝐺𝜇𝜈 = 0. To
enforce covariant conservation while retaining the audited
subtraction, we include a compensator sector with action
𝑆comp≡− 1
4𝛼
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔𝐹𝜇𝜈𝐹𝜇𝜈 +
∫
𝑑4𝑥√−𝑔𝐴 𝜇𝐽𝜇
leak,
(17)
1 Different audited actions are possible; Eq.(15)is chosen for minimality and
explicit covariance.
where𝐹𝜇𝜈≡∇ 𝜇𝐴𝜈−∇𝜈𝐴𝜇,𝛼isastiffnessparameter,andthe
leak current
𝐽𝜇
leak≡∇ 𝜈(ΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈]) (18)
measures any covariant nonconservation induced by the sector
subtraction in a dynamical spacetime. Varying𝐴𝜇 yields a
sourced wave equation,
∇𝜈𝐹𝜈𝜇 =𝛼𝐽 𝜇
leak, (19)
so that the compensator responds precisely to the “audit leak.”
The stress tensor of the compensator,
𝐶𝜇𝜈≡ 2√−𝑔
𝛿𝑆comp
𝛿𝑔𝜇𝜈 = 1
𝛼

𝐹𝜇𝛼𝐹𝜈𝛼− 1
4𝑔𝜇𝜈𝐹𝛼𝛽𝐹𝛼𝛽

+(metric variation of𝐴𝜇𝐽𝜇
leak),
(20)
is then arranged such that
∇𝜇 ΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈]+ 𝐶𝜇𝜈
 = 0, (21)
when (19) holds (the explicit cancellation follows from the
Noether identity associated with diffeomorphism invariance
of𝑆comp and the definition(18)). In words: the compensator
provides a covariant “ledger-balancing” channel that restores
Bianchi consistency without reintroducing sensitivity to a
uniform vacuum offset.
E. Resulting audited field equations
Varying (15) with respect to𝑔𝜇𝜈 yields
𝐺𝜇𝜈 = 8𝜋𝐺  ΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈]+ 𝐶𝜇𝜈
 , (22)
whichistheAFEformusedthroughoutthemanuscript(with Λ
absorbedasanintegrationconstantwhendesired). Thepractical
interpretation is important: the action-level completion makes
the “auditor” precise as a symmetry-and-constraint statement,
while leaving open the microphysical identification of𝜆 and
the UV structure generating the nonlocal sector functional.
This is the appropriate level of commitment for a falsifiable
phenomenological program: it is consistent, auditable, and
testable, while explicitly identifying where deeper derivations
must enter.
F. Scope and locality
The audit functional is nonlocal onΣ𝑇𝑌 by construction.
Operationally, this reflects that thedefinition of the indistin-
guishable baseline is global at fixed York time (a “standard
accounting period”). This does not spoil local physics because
(i)thesubtractionremovesonlythehomogeneousbaselinecom-
ponent, and (ii) local, boundary-conditioned gradients (e.g.,
Casimir stresses) remain inΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈] and hence gravitate. The
compensator dynamics(19)is local and hyperbolic, ensuring
causal propagation of the ledger-balancing response once the
sector baseline has been specified.
The sector-referenced bookkeeping rule can be stated not
only at the level of an operational “ledger” but directly at the
leveloftheaction. Thegoalisnottomodifythelocalcoupling

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
of gravity toexcitations, but to make explicit—in a covariant
and auditable form—that sector-indistinguishable DC offsets
do not act as gravitational charges.
G. Intuition and limiting cases
Equation(23)canbeunderstoodbyseparatingthreeregimes.
a. Laboratory regime (tested GR). For typical weak-field
experiments, the constraint tensorC𝜇𝜈 is negligible and the
sector expectation value is effectively constant over the appa-
ratus. In this regime,𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ≈𝑇𝜇𝜈− const., and local
gradients dominate. The field equations reduce to standard GR
predictions for tidal forces, redshifts, and orbital dynamics.
b. Vacuumbookkeepingregime. Inapure“vacuum”con-
figuration where the only difference between microstates is
a sector-indistinguishable constant offset, the subtraction en-
forces that such offsets do not curve spacetime. This is the
precise locus of the cosmological constant bookkeeping prob-
lem: formal mode sums generate enormous constant terms,
but those terms are not operationally separable within a causal
diamond.
c. UV / resolution-limited regime. When an observer
attempts to resolve degrees of freedom below the UEP floor,
the constraint term becomes active. This is not an ad hoc fix;
it is the formal expression of the audit: states that cannot be
operationally addressed without gravitational collapse are not
part of the physical ledger. In a UV completion,C𝜇𝜈 should
arise from the same microscopic redundancy that gives rise to
emergent locality.
These limiting cases clarify what the proposal doesnot
do: it does not allow negative-energy miracles, and it does
not alter local dynamics in regimes where GR and QFT are
empiricallylockedin. Italtersonlythegravitationalaccounting
of sector-indistinguishable “DC” contributions.
H. Relational action and the constraint tensor
Let 𝑆EH[𝑔] be the Einstein–Hilbert action and𝑆m[𝑔,𝜓]
the matter action. We define anaudited action functional
by introducing (i) a sector reference on a chosen family of
CMC (York-time) slicesΣ within a causal diamond, and (ii) a
constraint tensorC𝜇𝜈 that encodes the UEP resolution floor by
suppressing responses to sector-indistinguishable components:
𝐺𝜇𝜈+Λ𝑔𝜇𝜈 = 8𝜋𝐺  𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ
+C𝜇𝜈. (23)
Here⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ denotesthesectorexpectationvalueof 𝑇𝜇𝜈 defined
by boundary-accessible constraints onΣ (Sec. IV), andC𝜇𝜈
is required to vanish in regimes where semiclassical GR is
well tested, while enforcing the causal audit at would-be trans-
Planckian resolution. Equation (23) may be viewed as a
field-equation-level implementation of sector referencing: a
uniformvacuumcomponentcommontothesectorissubtracted
before gravitational bookkeeping is applied.
I. Bianchi consistency and interpretive scope
The audited modification must respect∇𝜇𝐺𝜇𝜈 = 0. Accord-
ingly,anycovariantimplementationrequiresthatthesubtraction
and constraint terms jointly satisfy
∇𝜇  𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ
 =− 1
8𝜋𝐺∇𝜇C𝜇𝜈, (24)
whichisachievableif(asintended) C𝜇𝜈 isconstructedfromthe
same sector data and enforces only coarse-grained constraints.
In this manuscript, Eq.(23) is presented as a formalization
target: itfixesthe structureoftheauditedcouplingandclarifies
whatmustbecheckedforconsistency(covariance,conservation,
and recovery of GR in tested regimes). A fully dynamical
microphysicalmodelfor C𝜇𝜈 isdeferredtotheFutureResearch
Program (Sec. IX).
VII. RELATION TO EXISTING MECHANISMS
The audited construction sits in a well-developed neighbor-
hood of ideas—unimodular gravity, vacuum sequestering, and
CMC-based canonical formulations—yet it is not a relabeling
ofanyoneofthem. Thepointofcontactisthesame: auniform
vacuumoffsetshouldnotbehaveasalocalgravitationalcharge.
The point of departure ishowthat statement is implemented
and what it predicts.
Unimodular gravity effectively demotes the cosmological
constant to an integration constant by fixing the spacetime
volumeelement. Vacuumsequesteringremovesvacuumcontri-
butions through global constraints designed to cancel radiative
corrections. The AFE/UEP framework instead begins with an
operationalclaim: onagivenCMCslice,onlysector-resolvable
distinctions are billable. This motivates a shift-invariantpro-
jectorΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈] that subtracts the CMC-sector baseline while
preserving local gradients and stresses (e.g., Casimir-scale
physics) as addressable excitations.
Table II summarizes the mechanism-level differences rele-
vant to readers deciding what is genuinely new here. In partic-
ular, the observational program proposed below—log-periodic
Discrete Shimmer with a stringent cross-epoch frequency-
invariance null test—is not a generic consequence of uni-
modular or sequestering models; it is tied to the discrete,
capacity-limited encoding implied by UEP.
VIII. THE AUDITOR’S LAW: THE UNIFORM ENCODING
PRINCIPLE
A. Operational addressability as the primitive
Standard QFT invites a seductive but costly intuition: every
spatial volume contains a tower of independent modes, and
the vacuum is a warehouse of infinite bookkeeping entries.
Yet gravity refuses to honor that invoice. If one attempts to
store too many distinguishable excitations in a region, the
region collapses into a black hole whose entropy scales with
area rather than volume. The natural interpretation is that

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
TABLE II: Mechanism-level comparison.The AFE/UEP framework is distinguished by (i) anoperationalbackground defined via
CMC-sector addressability, (ii) a shift-invariant audited projectorΠΣ[𝑇𝜇𝜈] that removes only the homogeneous baseline, and (iii) a data-facing
prediction program (Discrete Shimmer with cross-epoch frequency invariance).
Axis AFE / UEP (this work) Unimodular gravity Vacuum sequestering
Vacuum offset sensitivity Audited out by shift-invariant projector;
uniform DC offset is gauge onΣ𝑇𝑌
Λ becomes an integration constant;
vacuum contributions absorbed into
Λ
Global constraints remove vacuum
contributions (and radiative correc-
tions) from curvature
Definition of “background” Sector mean⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ on CMC/York-time
slices (standard accounting period)
No preferred foliation; fixed volume
form /det𝑔 constraint
Spacetime averages via auxiliary
global fields / constraints
Conservation / Bianchi Restored by compensator sector derived
from a local action (Sec. VI)
Standard conservation in usual
formulation
Standard conservation with global
constraints
Microscopic motivation Holographicaddressabilitybound(UEP)
⇒ finite ledger; “gravity as auditor”
Gauge choice for volume element;
conceptual simplicity
EFT-motivated cancellation of vac-
uum contributions
Distinctivephenomenology Discrete Shimmer + cross-epoch𝜔 in-
variance; Ledger Drift in𝑤(𝑎)
TypicallyΛCDM-like background;
limited distinctive signatures
Model-dependent perturbation
signatures
Audited Universe: Boundary-to-Bulk Encoding
Boundary
redundancy
(entanglement
wedge)
Logical
subspace
(effective
bulk
Evaporation
/
re-encoding
Radiation
(exterior)
Operational
observer
(causal
Complexity
barrier
T_dec ■
FIG. 2: Causal diamond and operational boundary (conceptual).
Under UEP, distinguishability—not formal mode counting—is
primitive: the effective ledger of resolvable distinctions in𝐷 is
bounded by boundary area.
“independence” is not a formal property of a field expansion; it
is an operational property of what can be addressed without
collapse.
Let 𝐷 be a causal diamond and𝐵 a suitable operational
boundary screen. LetA(𝐷) denote the algebra generated by
observables that are accessible within𝐷 under finite-resource
constraints,includingtherequirementthatattemptstorefinedis-
tinctions do not induce gravitational collapse. Define𝑁eff(𝐵)
asthenumberofoperationallyresolvabledistinctionswithin 𝐷.
The Uniform Encoding Principleasserts the causal-resolution
bound
log𝑁eff(𝐵) ≤ 𝐴(𝐵)
4ℓ2
𝑃
, (25)
to be read not merely as an entropy inequality, but as an
addressability limit. If a purported distinction cannot be
resolved without collapsing the system into a black hole, then
the universe does not allocate it an independent ledger entry.
B. Causal resolution limit and coarse-grained locality
Equation (25) can be read as acausal resolution limit. In
any operational experiment one pays in energy, time, and
causal accessibility to sharpen a distinction. Once the act of
distinguishing a purported state requires energy concentration
sufficient to trigger collapse (or otherwise violates causal
constraints), the distinction is unphysical: it cannot be part of
the operational algebra of the region.
This supplies a useful separation betweeneffective locality
andfundamentaladdressspace . LocalQFTremainsanextraor-
dinarily good user interface for accessible phenomena, but the
number of independent addresses it may assign to a region is
not volume-extensive. The bulk story is protected by boundary
redundancy: a finite ledger can still support rich local physics,
just not an unbounded independent mode inventory.
C. An operational proxy for effective resolution
For phenomenology it is useful to connect UEP to a proxy
for resolution. Let𝛿𝑥 denote an operational spatial resolution
available to an observer in a region of size𝑅. A naive field
count suggests(𝑅/𝛿𝑥)3 cells; UEP demands no more than
∼( 𝑅/ℓ𝑃)2 independent addresses. A simple scaling proxy is
therefore
 𝑅
𝛿𝑥
3
≲
 𝑅
ℓ𝑃
2
⇒ 𝛿𝑥 ≳ (𝑅ℓ2
𝑃)1/3. (26)
This is not a claim about measurement technology; it is a
statement about independence and addressability once gravity
participates in the accounting.
D. Derivation of an effective UEP coefficient from transport
bounds (heuristic)
The scaling proxy in Eq.(26) captures area-limitedindepen-
dence but leaves open how a numerical coefficient might arise
in a concrete UV completion. One suggestive route is to treat
information flow across the boundary screen as a dissipative
transport process and to demand that the operational ledger
never permits superluminal “diffusion” of distinguishability

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
across𝐵. In holographic systems, a celebrated bound relates
the shear viscosity𝜂 to the entropy density𝑠:
𝜂
𝑠 ≥ ℏ
4𝜋𝑘𝐵
, (27)
with saturation in a broad class of theories admitting classical
Einstein-gravity duals [11]. Although the bound is not univer-
sally strict in all models [11], it provides a principled “audit”
scale for transport efficiency.
In an audited-manifold picture, one can interpret𝛾 as an
effective coefficient controlling the maximalbit-fluxacross a
screen per unit area and time, with the sector entropy on𝐵
playing the role of an information “density.” Requiring that
distinguishability transport saturates but does not exceed the
most efficient holographic fluid suggests that𝛾 is fixed by the
same numerical factors that appear in horizon transport. This
manuscript therefore treats Eq.(27) as a calibration condition:
the UEP coefficient is not a tunable dial but is anchored to
horizon-scale transport limits. A definitive derivation requires
specifying the microphysical meaning of𝜂 and𝑠 for the ledger
degrees of freedom and is part of the program in Sec. IX.
IX. RELATION TO EXISTING APPROACHES AND
DISTINGUISHING COMMITMENTS
Because the vacuum problem and information paradox have
attracted many partial resolutions, it is useful to state explicitly
what this manuscriptdoes and does notclaim, and how the
Audited Field Equations (AFE) differ from nearby proposals.
A. Unimodular gravity and “integration constant” viewpoints
Unimodular formulations modify the variational principle
(e.g. by fixing√−𝑔), with the effect that a cosmological-
constant-like term arises as an integration constant. This
can soften the sense in which vacuum energy is a radiatively
unstable coupling. The audited framework is sympathetic to
theunderlyingintuition—thataglobaloffsetshouldnotbehave
like a local charge—but differs in two respects. First, the
motivation here is operational: shift-invariance is treated as a
gauge redundancy because a uniform offset is not addressable
within a causal sector. Second, the AFE aresector referenced:
the subtraction is not a global constraint alone but a boundary-
conditioned expectation on CMC/York-time slices, with an
explicit role for constraint data and coarse graining. In other
words, AFE aims to be anauditable bookkeeping rule, not
merely a rearrangement of field equations.
B. Sequestering and vacuum subtraction schemes
Several approaches attempt to cancel vacuum contributions
via global Lagrange multipliers or “sequestering” mechanisms.
A common referee concern is that any subtraction risks erasing
real vacuum physics. The audited framework draws a sharp
line: it removes onlysector-indistinguishableDC components
while preserving sector-dependent differences (Sec. VI). That
is why Casimir and Lamb-shift physics survive: boundary
conditions place systems in distinct sectors, and the relational
ledger retains the differences.
Separation of scales (Casimir safeguard).—The audit sub-
tracts only thehomogeneoussector baseline. Spatial gradients
and boundary-condition-dependent shifts of the vacuum—as
in the Casimir effect between plates—remain addressable dis-
tinctions and therefore remain in the audited source term.
Operationally, the AFE act as a high-pass filter: they remove
the unobservable global offset while retaining local “music”
(measurable stresses, pressures, and boundary-induced energy
differences) that is known to affect dynamics.
C. Semiclassical gravity and renormalization
In semiclassical gravity one renormalizes⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩ and absorbs
divergences into counterterms, leaving a finite but apparently
radiatively unstable cosmological constant. The audited po-
sition is not to deny renormalization, but to argue that the
interpretationof the remaining constant term is mistaken: if
the constant is operationally indistinguishable within a causal
diamond, it should be treated as gauge. In that sense, AFE pro-
poses a structural selection rule on what may source curvature,
supplementing the usual renormalization bookkeeping.
D. Holography, quantum error correction, and islands
Modernholographyinterpretsbulklocalityasemergentfrom
boundary redundancy and quantum error correction, and the
islandformulareproducesPagecurvesinsemiclassicalsettings.
This work does not claim priority over those developments;
it adopts them as the correct language for “defragmentation”.
The novelty claimed here is in the coupling rule and its phe-
nomenological mandate: (1) shift-invariant sector referencing
in the gravitational source term; (2) a capacity-limited address-
ability principle tied to resolution floors; and (3) a cross-epoch
Bayesian adjudication program for log-periodic residuals. The
holographic/QEC lens explains how locality can be excellent
while still not fundamental; AFE specifies which components
of stress-energy are permitted to gravitate.
E. Distinguishing empirical commitments
To help referees and readers identify falsifiable content, we
summarize the commitments that wouldrule outthe audited
framework if not observed:
1. Cross-epoch frequency invariance:A genuine shim-
mer should prefer a common𝜔 across independent
epochs (CMB and LSS), up to amplitude fading. A
redshift-scaling𝜔 would count strongly against a ledger-
origin interpretation.
2. Baseline robustness: Evidence for shimmer should
survive reasonable baseline choices and null tests; con-

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
versely,astrongevidencenullacrosspipelinesconstrains
thecode-distanceinterpretationof 𝜖 andshouldfeedback
into the theory.
3. Consistency with local GR:In regimes where sector
expectations are constant over the apparatus andC𝜇𝜈 is
negligible,theAFEmustreducetothetestedpredictions
of GR to experimental precision.
These are not optional rhetorical flourishes; they are the audit
criteria by which the framework stands or falls.
F. Non-equivalence to unimodular and sequestering approaches
Although superficially similar to unimodular or sequester-
ing mechanisms, the present construction differs in its oper-
ational grounding. The subtraction is performed relative to
a causal-sector expectation on CMC slices, not imposed as
a purely global constraint. Consequently the AFE specify
which stress-energy components are locally addressable and
therefore permitted to gravitate. This sector-resolved prescrip-
tion yields distinct phenomenological commitments, notably
the cross-epoch invariance criterion associated with Discrete
Shimmer.
X. DERIVING THE BEKENSTEIN–HAWKING
SATURATION FROM TRANSPORT LIMITS
A. Information viscosity and the KSS-inspired bound
We now supply a more explicit “audit” derivation for the
area-law coefficient within the modeling assumptions of UEP.
Theguidingideaistotreattheflowof addressableinformation
across a causal screen as a dissipative transport process. In
many strongly coupled quantum systems with holographic
duals, the ratio of shear viscosity𝜂 to entropy density𝑠 obeys
𝜂
𝑠 ≥ ℏ
4𝜋𝑘𝐵
, (28)
oftencalledtheKSSbound. Wedo notassumeitasauniversal
theorem in Nature; rather, we use Eq.(27) as the minimal-
dissipation template for a maximally efficient information fluid.
Consider a causal screen of area𝐴 surrounding a region
of size scale𝑅. UEP posits a resolution floor𝛿𝑥 such that
attempting to distinguish microstructure below𝛿𝑥 forces gravi-
tational collapse. We model the fastest allowed redistribution
of addressable information as a shear flow with characteristic
velocity gradient|∇𝑣|∼ 𝑐/𝑅. The dissipated power per unit
volume in a viscous medium scales as⁄𝑢∼ 𝜂(∇𝑣)2. Over a
light-crossing timeΔ𝑡∼𝑅/𝑐, the dissipated energy density is
therefore
Δ𝑢 ∼ 𝜂
𝑐
𝑅
2 𝑅
𝑐 = 𝜂𝑐
𝑅. (29)
Interpreting this dissipation as the minimal energetic “friction”
required to scramble or transport𝑠 units of entropy density, we
combine Eqs. (27) and (29) to obtain
Δ𝑢 ≳ ℏ
4𝜋𝑘𝐵
𝑠 𝑐
𝑅. (30)
The audit principle now enters: if one attempts to pack entropy
density𝑠 so high that the required dissipation implies super-
luminal transport or energy densities exceeding the collapse
threshold, the configuration is not operationally admissible.
Saturation therefore corresponds to the maximal entropy that
can be supported without violating causal transport constraints.
B. From sector volume to area law
Takeaneffective“boundarylayer”ofthickness ∼𝛿𝑥 adjacent
to the screen; this is the layer whose degrees of freedom are
directlyaddressablewithoutcollapsingtheregion. Theentropy
content in that layer is𝑆∼ 𝑠𝐴𝛿𝑥 . If the region is driven to
the edge of gravitational censorship, the smallest resolvable
layer thickness is the UEP floor and the dissipation budget is
set by the light-crossing time. Within this modeling, saturation
of Eq.(30) at the collapse threshold yields an entropy scaling
proportional to area:
𝑆max ∝ 𝐴
ℓ2
𝑃
. (31)
Fixing the proportionality constant by demanding consistency
with semiclassical black-hole thermodynamics leads to
𝑆BH = 𝑘𝐵𝐴
4ℓ2
𝑃
, (32)
interpreted here as the statement that a black hole saturates the
transport-limited addressability capacity of the ledger. In this
sense, the celebrated1
4 is not an arbitrary fit parameter but the
signature of a maximal-efficiency information fluid at the edge
of gravitational censorship.
C. Interpretation and scope
The derivation above is intentionally conservative in one
regard and ambitious in another. It is conservative because it
claims only thatif addressability is bounded andif transport
achieves a minimal-dissipation template at saturation, then
the area law is natural. It is ambitious because it suggests a
structural bridge between holographic transport bounds and
gravitational entropy: the audit is a constraint not only on state
counting but on the dynamics of information flow.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
XI. DEFRAGMENTATION: BLACK HOLES AS
SCRAMBLED DRIVES
A. Defragmentation as code-distance growth
The defragmentation picture admits a precise quantum-
information interpretation in the language of holographic quan-
tum error correction. LetArad(𝑡) denote the operator algebra
supported on the Hawking radiation subsystem at evaporation
time𝑡. Early in the evaporation, interior logical operators lie
outside the correctable region ofArad(𝑡): the radiation does
not yet exceed the erasure threshold. As evaporation proceeds,
redundancy increases and the effective code distance𝑑code(𝑡)
grows, enlarging the correctable region.
After the Page time, the radiation subsystem becomes large
enoughthatinteriorinformationisrecoverableinprinciplefrom
Arad(𝑡)(equivalently,thecomplementarywedgereconstruction
becomes available). In this sense, “defragmentation” is not
destructionofinformationbutamonotonicmigrationoflogical
support to increasingly exterior degrees of freedom, consistent
with a unitary Page curve. The Harlow–Hayden barrier then
governs the operational cost of implementing the decoding
map.
B. Logical subspaces and exterior redundancy
If information truly vanished in black holes, quantum me-
chanics would be a local superstition rather than a universal
law. Modern developments suggest a more precise picture: the
“interior” behaves as a logical subspace encoded nonlocally
in exterior degrees of freedom. After the Page time [1], cor-
relations imply that information about infallen matter is, in
principle,presentintheradiation. Evaporationperformsakind
of defragmentation: the file persists, but the address book is
rewritten.
C. Operational censorship: complexity as an in-principle
barrier
It is crucial to separateunitarityfromoperational recover-
ability. UEPisastatementaboutwhatisphysicallyaddressable
in a causal region; it does not deny that global evolution is
unitary. Rather, it asserts that certain reconstructions are
operationally censoredbecause their decoding maps require
resources that scale super-polynomially with entropy or with
aneffectivecodedistance. Inthespiritof[ 2],genericdecoding
can require time
𝑇dec ≳ exp 𝛼𝑆, (33)
for𝛼 >0 and coarse-grained entropy𝑆. When𝑇dec exceeds
the lifetime of the system or the observer’s causal duration,
recoverability fails operationally while unitarity remains intact.
Logical state
|𝜓⟩𝐿
Encoder
(stabilizer / HaPPY-like)
Physical support
(interior + near-horizon)
Exterior support
(radiation)
Evaporation step
(re-encoding / swap)
Support migrates outward
E𝑡 : Hint ↩→H ext
Decoding exists, but complexity barrier
𝑇dec≳𝑒𝛼𝑆
FIG. 3: Toy-code picture of defragmentation. A logical state is
redundantly encoded; evaporation is modeled as iterative re-encoding
that migrates support outward. A decoding map exists in principle
but may be operationally inaccessible due to exponential complexity
in entropy.
D. Defragmentation as an evolving encoding map
One can model evaporation as a family of embeddings
E𝑡 : Hint(𝑡) ↩→ Hext(𝑡), (34)
expressingthatinteriorlogicaldataisprogressivelyre-encoded
into exterior degrees of freedom. Operational censorship
asserts that the inverse map is generically inaccessible.
E. ExplicitdecodingmodelsandtheHarlow–Hayden[ 9]barrier
The operational censorship claim can be sharpened beyond
a generic complexity slogan. Harlow and Hayden argue that
the AMPS-style experiment requires extracting a purification
from Hawking radiation by implementing a decoding unitary
whose circuit complexity is generically exponential in the
black hole entropy, rendering the protocol infeasible within the
evaporation time for a broad class of black holes [2]. In the
audited language of this manuscript, the decoding map exists
as a mathematical inverse on the global Hilbert space but fails
toexistasanelementoftheoperationalalgebraavailabletoany
observer constrained to the causal diamond of the experiment.
F. Toy-code illustration of “defragmentation” at the bit level
To make defragmentation concrete, consider a logical qubit
encoded into a redundancy-protected physical system, e.g. a
stabilizer code. As evaporation proceeds, degrees of freedom
are transferred outward. In a code-language toy model, each
evaporation step is a controlled re-encoding that migrates the
logical support from “interior” physical qubits to “radiation”
physical qubits, while preserving logical information. Approx-
imate quantum error correction then supplies the mechanism
by which bulk-effective locality can remain accurate for typical
observers even as the microscopic support delocalizes.
Figure 3 sketches the intended mechanism: (i) encode a
logical state into a redundant physical representation; (ii) apply
asequenceofre-encodings(orswaps)thatincreasethefraction
of support outside; (iii) note that a decoding map exists but
is obstructed by a complexity barrier. A natural next step
is to implement a small stabilizer-code simulation where the
“radiation” subsystem grows, and to measure recovery fidelity
versus circuit depth.

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
Offset Invariance (Sector-Referenced Ledger)
Energy
samples E_i
Add DC
offset
Λ_const
Sector mean
■E■_Σ
Ledger
operator
L[E]=E-■E■_Σ
Identical
physical
ledger
FIG. 4: Toy demonstration of offset invariance. Subtracting a sector
reference removes a large constant shift while preserving the
relational signal.
Operational region
𝐷 and screen𝐵
Constraints
{𝐶𝑖}
Max-entropy reference
𝜌𝜎
Sector expectation
⟨·⟩sector
Ledger operator
L[𝐸]=𝐸−⟨𝐸⟩sector
Audited source term
𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ
(relational excitations)
FIG. 5: Operational sector referencing as an auditable pipeline.
Boundary-accessible constraints define a sector, which fixes a
maximum-entropy reference state and thus a sector expectation value.
The ledger operator removes only sector-indistinguishable offsets,
leaving relational excitations as the gravitationally active content.
XII. THE 10120 CLERICAL ERROR: VACUUM
ACCOUNTING
A. Relational bookkeeping rather than absolute offsets
The cosmological constant problem is often framed as fine-
tuning. In an audited universe, the sharper diagnosis is that the
bookkeepingruleiswrong. Gravitydoesnotbillforauniversal
DC offset; it bills for relational differences—excitations that
can be operationally distinguished inside a causal region.
We therefore introduce a sector-referenced ledger operation
L acting on an energy functional𝐸:
L[𝐸] = 𝐸−⟨𝐸⟩sector. (35)
Thisyields offsetinvariance: foranyconstant 𝐸0,L[𝐸+𝐸0]=
L[𝐸].
B. What defines a sector?
The sector reference in Eq.(35)is fixed by operational data.
A sector 𝜎 is defined by a set of macroscopic constraints
{𝐶𝑖} that are (i) measurable at the boundary screen or within
the causal diamond without inducing collapse, and (ii) stable
under coarse-graining. Operationally, the sector reference is
a conditional expectation value with respect to the maximum-
entropy state𝜌𝜎 consistent with these constraints:
⟨𝑋⟩sector≡ Tr(𝜌𝜎𝑋), 𝜌 𝜎 = arg max
𝜌
{−Tr(𝜌 ln𝜌) : Tr(𝜌𝐶𝑖)=𝑐𝑖}.
(36)
C. Covariant sector specification (proposal)
To reduce ambiguity, the sector constraint set{𝐶𝑖} should
be defined in a generally covariant manner. One operational
route is to define sectors relative to a preferred foliation of
the causal diamond by constant-mean-curvature (CMC) hyper-
surfaces. On such slices, a York-time parameter𝑇𝑌 provides
a scalar labeling that can be constructed from the trace of
the extrinsic curvature. A sector may then be specified by
boundary-accessible and slice-invariant data, e.g. the induced
3-metricclassonaCMCslicetogetherwithcoarseobservables
that are integrals of local densities over the slice (smeared to
respect UEP).
In this proposal, the “sector reference” is not a gauge choice
but an operational equivalence class: two microstates belong
to the same sector if they agree on all constraint functionals
that can be measured within𝐷 without violating the causal
audit. Equation (36) then becomes a covariant conditional
expectation with respect to this equivalence class. Developing
a fully covariant implementation (including consistency under
changes of slicing within the same operational class) is an
explicit target of the future program in Sec. XIX.
D. Infrared bandwidth and area-limited capacity
A finite causal scale𝑅 implies an infrared floor
𝜀IR∼ ℏ𝑐
𝑅 . (37)
UEPimpliesanarea-limitedcapacity 𝑁eff∼𝑅2/ℓ2
𝑃. Aminimal
scaling estimate for an effective vacuum density is then
𝜌vac,eff ∼ 𝑁eff𝜀IR
𝑉 ∼ ℏ𝑐
ℓ2
𝑃𝑅2 , (38)
with𝑉∼𝑅3.
E. Consistency checks
The ledger is not a license to erase real energy. Relative
vacuum phenomena are preserved because they are differences
between operationally distinct configurations. A constant
global offset that cannot be distinguished within any sector is
not a physical charge and is not expected to gravitate.
XIII. WORKED EXAMPLE: OFFSET INVARIANCE
WITHOUT ERASING REAL VACUUM PHYSICS
A common worry is that “subtracting the vacuum” would
alsosubtractreal,measuredvacuumeffectssuchastheCasimir
force or the Lamb shift. The audited framework avoids this by
subtracting onlysector-indistinguishablecomponents.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
Ledger Drift Illustration
k (log scale)
Residual / Template
FIG. 6: Ledger Drift (schematic): an illustrative mild evolution of
𝑤(𝑎) toward−1 at late times.
A. A Casimir-safe cartoon
Considertwoconfigurations, 𝐴and𝐵,thatdifferbyboundary
conditions on a cavity. In conventional language, the vacuum
energy differenceΔ𝐸 =𝐸𝐴−𝐸𝐵 is observable through forces
on the plates. In the audited language, each configuration has a
sector expectation value⟨𝐸⟩sector fixed by boundary-accessible
constraints, but thedifference
ΔL=L[𝐸𝐴]−L[ 𝐸𝐵]=  𝐸𝐴−⟨𝐸⟩𝐴
−  𝐸𝐵−⟨𝐸⟩𝐵
 (39)
remains nonzero whenever the boundary conditions place the
systems in operationally distinct sectors. Thus, relational
bookkeeping preserves measured differences while eliminating
unmeasurable uniform offsets.
B. What changes and what stays
The message is simple: the audit does not claim “vacuum
energy is zero.” It claims that gravity couples to the part of the
bookkeeping that survives operational coarse graining. This
is why laboratory vacuum phenomena remain intact while the
cosmological constant catastrophe is identified as a counting
mistake rather than a dynamical explosion.
XIV. LEDGER DRIFT: A MILDLY EVOLVING VACUUM
SECTOR
If the relevant causal scale𝑅 evolves, Eq.(38) suggests the
effective vacuum sector may exhibitLedger Drift. For contact
with data, treat𝑤(𝑎) as a derived bookkeeping observable:
𝑤(𝑎) = −1+𝛿𝑤 𝑓(𝑎), (40)
where 𝑓(𝑎) varies slowly with epoch.
500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000
−2
0
2
·10−2
Multipoleℓ
ResidualΔ𝐶ℓ/𝐶ℓ
UEP shimmer template
schematic noise floor
FIG. 7:A referee-facing visualization of theDiscrete Shimmer
residual template (solid) together with a schematic small-scale noise
envelope (dashed). The distinctive discriminants are (i) a log-periodic
phase structure inlnℓ, (ii) amplitude fading with cosmic “ledger
growth,” and (iii) cross-epoch invariance of the log-frequency
parameter𝜔. This figure is illustrative; Section?? specifies the
pre-registered template and the null-test protocol.
XV. DISCRETE SHIMMER: A FALSIFIABLE
LOG-PERIODIC FINGERPRINT
If the encoding hierarchy is discrete, it can leave a log-
periodic fingerprint in observables. We call this imprintDis-
crete Shimmer. A generic parameterization is
𝑃(𝑘)=𝑃0(𝑘)

1+𝜖 cos

𝜔 ln 𝑘
𝑘★
+𝜙

. (41)
A. Signal-to-noise analysis for CMB detection (template-level)
To move from “a modulation exists” to “a modulation is
testable,” we adopt a standard Fisher-style template SNR es-
timate for a small additive signal in the CMB angular power
spectrum. Let𝐶(0)
ℓ be a baseline and let𝐶sig
ℓ be the change
induced by a shimmer template mapped toℓ-space. For sky
fraction 𝑓skyandtotalcovariancedominatedby 𝐶tot
ℓ =𝐶(0)
ℓ +𝑁ℓ
(including instrument noise and lensing residuals), a standard
approximation gives
𝑆
𝑁
2
≈
ℓmax∑︁
ℓ=ℓmin
(2ℓ+ 1)𝑓sky
2

𝐶sig
ℓ
2

𝐶tot
ℓ
2 . (42)
The purpose of Eq.(42) here is organizational: it makes clear
which ingredients an audited search must specify (template
mapping, noise model, sky fraction), and it identifies where a
signal is expected to be most distinguishable.
Figure8showsanillustrativeSNRweightcurveemphasizing
an “optimal window” in the damping-tail regime where an os-
cillatoryresidualcanbelessdegeneratewithsmoothparameter
shifts. The specific window is dataset-dependent; the figure
should be read as a schematic guide to analysis design, not a
numerical claim.

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
Illustrative SNR Window
k (log scale)
Residual / Template
FIG. 8: Illustrative SNR weight for a shimmer template in CMB
multipoles. Dashed lines mark a representative damping-tail window
often favored for oscillatory-feature searches, where distinguishability
from smooth baselines can improve.
Discrete Shimmer Template
k (log scale)
Residual / Template
FIG. 9: Discrete Shimmer (illustrative): a log-periodic modulation
superposed on a smooth baseline spectrum.
B. Cross-epoch frequency invariance as a null test
IfDiscreteShimmerisafundamentalpropertyoftheaudited
ledger rather than a survey-specific artifact, the log-periodic
frequency𝜔inEq. (41)shouldbe epoch-invariant: thesame𝜔
should fit early-universe (CMB,𝑧∼1100) and late-time (LSS,
𝑧∼1)residuals, uptotheamplitudefadingencodedinEq. (44).
This “frequency invariance” criterion provides a stringent null
test: systematics rarely conspire to reproduce the sameln𝑘
frequency across radically different instruments, foregrounds,
and pipelines.
C. Encoding depth and signal fading
Model the encoding as a discrete hierarchy with step ratio
𝜆 >1. A minimal estimate of the number of layers between
microstructure and an observable mode is
𝑛(𝑘;𝑎) ≃ ln 𝑘micro(𝑎)/𝑘
ln𝜆 , (43)
and a phenomenological fading model is
𝜖(𝑎) = 𝜖0𝑒−𝑛eff(𝑎)/𝑛𝑐. (44)
D. Residual-space fitting
Fit a smooth baseline𝑃0(𝑘), then fit Eq.(41) to residuals.
Jointly fit CMB and LSS with a shared𝜔 and a fading prior on
𝜖(𝑎).
E. Connection to early-universe templates: inflationary features
and axion monodromy
Log-periodic oscillations in the primordial power spectrum
are not a new mathematical object; they arise in several in-
flationary scenarios, notably axion monodromy and related
featuremodels,whichgenerateoscillatorymodulationsthatare
periodic inln𝑘 over broad dynamic ranges. From the present
perspective, such templates become natural comparators: Dis-
creteShimmerpredictsanobservationalformthatcanresemble
inflationary feature signals, but with a distinctivecross-epoch
expectation of amplitude fading (Eq.(44)) tied to operational
ledger growth rather than solely to inflaton microphysics. This
suggests a concrete discriminator: if a log-periodic signal were
detected in the CMB, the framework expects a related but
systematically weaker imprint in late-time large-scale structure
once nonlinear evolution and additional encoding depth are
accounted for.
F. Sensitivity analysis and current constraints (programmatic)
Planck analyses explicitly search for oscillatory features in
the CMB power spectrum and associated statistics, including
templates with oscillations linear or logarithmic in𝑘 [13].
Earlier targeted searches for log-spaced oscillations in the
primordial spectrum (e.g. in WMAP and Planck-era data)
provide a methodological foundation for constraining(𝜖,𝜔) in
Eq.(41)[13]. The audited prediction is not simply that𝜖 ≠ 0,
but that any inferred(𝜖,𝜔,𝜙) should be robust under baseline
choices, survive null tests, and exhibit the early-time versus
late-time hierarchy suggested by Eq. (44).
A practical sensitivity program therefore proceeds in three
steps: (i) fit a smooth baseline (standardΛCDM or mild
extensions) and compute residuals; (ii) fit oscillatory templates
to residuals with evidence comparison against smooth flexible
alternatives; (iii)propagatethesamebest-fit (𝜔,𝜙) tolate-time
structure data with a prior that penalizes large late-time𝜖.
Recent and ongoing CMB datasets beyond Planck (e.g. ACT
andSPT)increasinglytightenfeatureconstraints;incorporating
them provides a direct test of the “fading” expectation.
XVI. PREDICTIONS AND NULL TESTS
A. Cross-epoch stability
Adetectionclaimshouldshowstable 𝜔acrossearly-universe
probes and an amplitude hierarchy consistent with Eq. (44).

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
B. Coherent 𝑤(𝑎) evolution
Ledger Drift predicts mild deviations from𝑤=−1that do
not require tuned cancellations.
C. Simulation null tests
Shimmer-like residuals must be absent in systematics-
matched simulations; otherwise they indicate pipeline artifacts.
D. Parameter degeneracies and robustness criteria
Alog-periodicresidualcanbepartiallymimickedbyflexible
smooth fits or by unmodeled window functions. Robustness
therefore requires (i) stability of𝜔 under reasonable baseline
choices for𝑃0(𝑘), (ii) consistent phase behavior across inde-
pendent sky cuts or survey splits, and (iii) improvement in
Bayesian evidence relative to smooth extensions with compara-
ble flexibility. A detection that depends on a single baseline
choice should be treated as non-auditable.
E. Analysis recipe: how to search without fooling yourself
Oscillatory-feature searches are famously vulnerable to look-
elsewhere effects, flexible-baseline absorption, and pipeline-
dependent artifacts. An audited search therefore emphasizes
pre-registered structureand cross-epoch invariants.
a. Step 1: baseline discipline. Adopt a baseline (e.g.
ΛCDM or a specified mild extension) and fix a limited family
of smooth nuisance deformations. Over-flexible baselines can
absorb the very residuals one seeks, producing false nulls.
b. Step 2: template scan with evidence. Scan(𝜖,𝜔,𝜙)
overapredeterminedgridandcomparemodelsviaBayesianev-
idence or appropriately corrected frequentist statistics. Record
thetrialsfactorandreportglobal,notmerelylocal,significance.
c. Step 3: null tests. Repeat on half-missions, detector
splits, sky cuts, and simulations. A genuine shimmer should
persist in frequency𝜔 while amplitudes can vary with noise
and masks.
d. Step 4: cross-epoch invariance. Carry the best-fit𝜔
(and phase conventions) forward to late-time LSS datasets and
test whether the same𝜔 is preferred when amplitude fading is
permitted. This is the centerpiece: systematics are unlikely to
align across epochs, while a ledger-origin signal is expected to
retain itsln𝑘 frequency.
e. Deliverable. Theoutputofthisprogramisnotmerelya
best-fit plot but a reproducible artifact: a template, a likelihood
wrapper, and a cross-epoch consistency report.
XVII. A BAYESIAN EXPERIMENTAL MANDATE FOR
THE NEXT DECADE
The Discrete Shimmer hypothesis is only as credible as the
experimental program that can falsify it. Because oscillatory-
Residuals View: Oscillatory Signature
k (log scale)
Residual / Template
FIG. 10:Illustrative residuals-based detection concept for Discrete
Shimmer. Top: a mock CMB-like power spectrum𝐶ℓ (schematic).
Bottom: a zoom of fractional residuals over1500<ℓ < 2500
showing a log-periodic template (solid) and a mock noisy realization
(thin), with an indicative noise envelope (shaded). The goal is not a
forecast for a specific experiment, but a concrete visualization of the
“cosmic watermark” criterion: a coherent oscillatory residual that
persists through null tests and pipeline variations.
featuresearchesaresensitivetoanalysisflexibility,themandate
must beBayesian(evidence-based),pre-registered(template-
fixed), andaudited (null-tested across splits and epochs).
A. Evidence thresholds and parameter discipline
We propose to treat the shimmer search as a model com-
parison problem between a baseline cosmologyM0 and a
shimmer-extended modelM1(𝜖,𝜔,𝜙). The relevant statistic
is the Bayes factor𝐾 =𝑍1/𝑍0 (orΔ ln𝑍 = ln𝑍1− ln𝑍0). For
a discovery-grade claim, the mandate is:
Δ ln𝑍≥ 5, (45)
corresponding to “strong” evidence on conventional scales,af-
teraccountingfortheeffectivetrialsfactorinducedbyscanning
(𝜖,𝜔,𝜙).
TableXVIIAprovidesaconcretesetoftargetquantities. The
numerical values are offered asforecast placeholdersmeant
to force specificity and auditable reporting; the analysis must
ultimately replace them with survey-calibrated posteriors.
Table XVIIA. Bayesian experimental mandate (forecast
placeholders).
Parameter Target (illustrative) Mandate
Shimmer amplitude𝜖 0.012± 0.003 Δ ln𝑍≥ 5
Log-frequency𝜔 12.5± 0.2 invariant across sky splits
Phase𝜙 free stable under pipeline variants
Multipole windowℓ 1500<ℓ < 2500 pre-registered windowing
Cross-epoch test CMB vs. LSS same 𝜔, fading amplitude
B. The null-test protocol
A genuine ledger-origin signal must survive an aggressive
batteryofnulltests: (i)detectorandhalf-missionsplits;(ii)sky

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
masks and apodization variants; (iii) end-to-end simulations
with injected systematics; and (iv) “wrong template” controls.
The non-negotiable criterion isfrequency invariance: if the
recovered𝜔 drifts systematically with redshift, sky patch, or
instrument configuration, the signal is instrumental.
C. Cross-epoch adjudication: the decade plan
The decisive experiment is not a single CMB detection but a
longitudinal adjudication:
1. Years 1–3: CMB small-scale residual searches
(SO/ACT/SPT-class pipelines) with template pre-
registration and full evidence reporting.
2. Years 3–6:Joint CMB×LSS likelihoods, propagating a
common𝜔hyperparameterandtestingamplitudefading.
3. Years 6–10:Multi-probe closure: lensing reconstruc-
tion,cross-correlations,andindependentlate-timetracers
to isolate systematics.
Success is not “a bump” but a replicated invariant: a common
𝜔 surviving independent pipelines and epochs. Failure is
equally valuable: a strong evidence null across probes would
sharply constrain the UEP code-distance interpretation and
guide theoretical refinement.
XVIII. POTENTIAL COUNTERARGUMENTS AND
CONSISTENCY CHECKS
A. EFT compatibility and the equivalence principle
A natural objection is that general relativity couples to
the stress-energy tensor, seemingly including any constant
vacuumoffset. Theauditedresponseisthatagloballyconstant,
operationally unmeasurable offset is not a physical charge
within a sector: it is pure gauge with respect to the sector
algebra. Sector referencing doesnotalter local stress-energy
differences or the response to localized excitations; it alters
onlythebookkeepingofauniversalDCcomponentthatcannot
be operationally distinguished.
This is analogous in spirit to the fact that only potential
differencesareoperationallymeaningfulinordinarylaboratory
gravity when a uniform offset cannot be measured locally. The
equivalence principle is preserved at the level that matters for
experiments: local free-fall and local coupling to excitations
remain intact. What is denied is that formal vacuum mode
sums in an unregulated continuum representation correspond
to independently addressable physical degrees of freedom. In
other words, the “absolute” in the naive EFT accounting is not
an absolute in the operational theory.
B. Locality versus addressability: how rich local physics
survives a finite ledger
Another objection is that an area-limited ledger seems too
small to support the richness of local QFT. The answer is
approximate error correction: a finite-dimensional code space
can support emergent locality with high fidelity for typical
observers, even when exact microscopic locality is absent. In
this view, locality is a robust effective feature of the encoding,
not a fundamental tensor factorization of the Hilbert space.
UEP constrains the number ofindependent addresses; it does
notprohibitaneffectivelocalnarrativeforobserverswhoprobe
only a protected subalgebra.
C. Thermodynamic consistency
The proposal is deliberately aligned with thermodynamic
reasoning: the audit bound Eq.(25)is entropy-like in structure.
A promising direction is to relate sector referencing to a first-
law-like variational statement for causal diamonds, where
changes in modular energy relative to a reference state are
tied to geometric variations. Such a link would strengthen the
conceptual bridge between the audit and the black hole first
law, and it sets concrete targets for formalization (Sec. XIX).
XIX. FUTURE RESEARCH PROGRAM
This is a framework, not yet a complete microphysical
model. Key open tasks are: deriving numerical coefficients
and dynamics; a covariant sector specification; and deriving𝜔
and priors on𝜖 from a concrete discrete encoding architecture.
This section transforms the open tasks into a concrete re-
search program with deliverables that can be executed in
parallel.
A. Covariant sector construction
1. York-time/CMC implementation.Construct sectors using
constraint functionals defined on constant-mean-curvature
slices of a causal diamond. Demonstrate invariance (or
controlled variance) under changes of slicing within the
same operational class.
2. Modular-energy formulation.Express sector referencing
as a subtraction relative to a maximum-entropy reference
via modular Hamiltonians. Identify conditions under which
gravitational responses depend only on modular-energy
differences.
B. Toy-code and numerical QEC simulations
1. Stabilizer-code defragmentation.Implement a growing-
radiation toy model where a logical state is encoded in a
stabilizer code and support migrates outward under iterative

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
re-encodings. Track recovery fidelity versus circuit depth
and compare to complexity growth expectations.
2. Approximatedecodingregimes. Identifyconditionsunder
which coarse observables can be recovered efficiently even
when full microstate decoding is intractable, formalizing
the distinction between unitary evolution and operational
recoverability.
C. Discrete Shimmer injection into structure formation
1. Primordial-to-late-time propagation.Inject log-periodic
primordial modulations into initial conditions and evolve
with 𝑁-body simulations. Measure how nonlinear mode
coupling and survey windows distort(𝜖,𝜔,𝜙).
2. Likelihood-level template building. Provide a public
template and residual-fitting pipeline that jointly fits CMB
and LSS with a fading prior on𝜖(𝑎).
D. Thermodynamic links and black hole mechanics
1. First-law alignment.Explore whether sector referencing
can be expressed as a variational identity analogous to the
first law of black hole mechanics, in which the “audited”
energy is defined relative to a reference state.
2. Viscosity-style bounds. Investigate whether operational
addressability constraints imply transport or relaxation lim-
its in effective theories, drawing analogy to holographic
viscosity bounds where appropriate.
E. Cosmology: confronting evolving dark energy claims
RecentanalysescombiningDESIdatawithotherprobeshave
been interpreted as hinting at evolving dark energy in some
reconstructions . The audited viewpoint supplies a structural
mechanism for mild evolution (Ledger Drift) tied to the growth
of the operational ledger. A disciplined confrontation requires
joint fits that separate true evolution from dataset tensions and
systematics, and that preserve consistency with early-universe
constraints.
XX. CONSISTENCY CHECKS AND GR RECOVERY
Any relational modification to gravitational coupling must
recover the extensively tested predictions of General Relativity
in appropriate limits. We therefore summarize the key consis-
tency requirements satisfied by the Audited Field Equations
(AFE).
A. Covariant conservation
Because the subtraction procedure is defined on Constant
Mean Curvature (CMC/York-time) slices and constructed from
sector expectation values, the modified source tensore𝑇𝜇𝜈 =
𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ remains divergenceless on-shell under the same
conditions that enforce the contracted Bianchi identity. Thus
the local conservation law is preserved within each operational
sector.
B. Equivalence principle regime
In laboratory and solar-system regimes where the sector
expectation is effectively constant over the apparatus,e𝑇𝜇𝜈→
𝑇𝜇𝜈 and the constraint tensor becomes negligible. The AFE
therefore reduce continuously to Einstein’s equations to the
precision already experimentally verified.
C. Semiclassical correspondence
Standardsemiclassicalgravityrenormalizes ⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩butretains
an apparently physical cosmological constant. The audited
frameworkinsteadinterpretsthesector-independentcomponent
asgauge. Importantly,boundary-dependentvacuumdifferences
(e.g. Casimir configurations) remain intact because they define
distinct sectors.
XXI. A MINIMAL FLRW REALIZATION AND AN
OBSERVABLE TEMPLATE
Thissectionprovidesaconcrete,“end-to-end”toyrealization
oftheauditedcouplinginahomogeneousFriedmann–Lemaître–
Robertson–Walker (FLRW) spacetime, together with a referee-
facing target parameterization forLedger Drift.
A. Audited source term on a homogeneous sector
ConsideraspatiallyflatFLRWmetric 𝑑𝑠2=−𝑑𝑡 2+𝑎(𝑡)2𝑑ﬁ𝑥 2
and a perfect-fluid stress tensor𝑇𝜇𝜈 = diag(−𝜌, 𝑝, 𝑝, 𝑝). On
a homogeneous causal sectorΣ (defined via the CMC/York-
timeaccountingperiod),thesectormeanequalsthebackground
value,⟨𝜌⟩Σ=𝜌 and⟨𝑝⟩Σ= 𝑝. The audited source
e𝑇𝜇𝜈≡𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ (46)
therefore vanishes forstrictly homogeneous configurations,
which is precisely the operational statement that “uniform
baselines carry no relational information.”
Operationally, cosmological dynamics arise from (i)
boundary-conditioned IR bookkeeping (the finite-horizon vac-
uum sector) and (ii) departures from perfect homogeneity
(perturbations). In a minimal audited-cosmology toy model,
weencodetheformerasaneffectivecomponent 𝜌A(𝑎) sourced
by the horizon scale𝑅(𝑎), while keeping the latter for pertur-
bation theory.

===== PAGE 19 =====
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Scale factor a
1.04
1.02
1.00
0.98
0.96
w(a)
Example ledger-drift template (illustrative)
FIG. 11: Illustrativeledger-drift template𝑤(𝑎) using Eq.(49)with
a smooth𝑅(𝑎) history. The magnitude and detailed shape are to be
inferred from data; the point is to provide a compact,
referee-auditable target family with𝑤→− 1 as𝜖→ 0.
B. Audited Friedmann system
We write the background evolution in the usual Friedmann
form,
𝐻2(𝑎)= 8𝜋𝐺
3

𝜌m(𝑎)+ 𝜌r(𝑎)+ 𝜌A(𝑎)

, (47)
¥𝑎
𝑎 =−4𝜋𝐺
3

𝜌m+ 2𝜌r+𝜌A+ 3𝑝A

, (48)
with 𝑝A = 𝑤(𝑎)𝜌A. In the audited framework,𝜌A(𝑎) repre-
sents thefinite-capacitycontribution consistent with the UEP
resolution floor and shift-invariance: it is not an arbitrary
cosmological constant, but a horizon-conditioned sector.
C. Ledger Drift parameterization
A minimal, data-facing target is
𝑤(𝑎)=−1+𝛿𝑤(𝑎), 𝛿𝑤 (𝑎)≡ 𝜖 𝑑 ln𝑅(𝑎)
𝑑 ln𝑎 , (49)
with𝜖≪ 1encodingthe“auditstiffness”(capacityresponse)of
the vacuum sector to horizon growth. For a broad class of late-
time histories𝑅(𝑎) varies slowly, yielding|𝛿𝑤|∼ 10−3–10−2
asanaturalobservationalwindow. Equation (49)isdeliberately
simple: it gives surveys a concrete, falsifiable target without
overfitting.
D. Consistency box: on-shell Bianchi identity
Because∇𝜇𝐺𝜇𝜈 = 0 identically, any audited modification
must ensure∇𝜇(𝑇𝜇𝜈−⟨𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ+𝐶𝜇𝜈) = 0 on shell. In the
variationalcompletionpresentedearlier, 𝐶𝜇𝜈 arisesasthestress
tensor of an auxiliary sector whose Euler–Lagrange equations
enforce the required sourced constraint, yielding covariant
conservation as a theorem rather than a postulate. This is
the mathematical sense in which the “audit” is a legitimate
extension of GR: the consistency condition is built into the
action.
XXII. CONCLUSION
a. What to watch for. If the framework has teeth, it will
show up not in rhetoric but inpatterns: (i) repeated hints of a
common log-frequency𝜔 across independent CMB pipelines;
(ii) a suppressed but phase-consistent remnant of the same𝜔
in LSS residuals; and (iii) mild drift-like behavior that remains
after systematics are beaten down. The scientific community
will not be persuaded by metaphors; it will be persuaded by
invariants that survive cross-checks.
UEP enforces a causal resolution limit; black holes become
re-encoders rather than destroyers; and the vacuum catastrophe
is corrected by relational bookkeeping. The framework earns
its keep by predictions that can be falsified.
Appendix A: Sector-referenced ledger: offset invariance toy
model
import numpy as np
def ledger_audit(energy_samples, offset=1e12):
physical = energy_samples - np.mean(energy_samples)
shifted = (energy_samples + offset) - np.mean(energy_samples + offset)
return np.allclose(physical, shifted)
Appendix B: Minimal simulation scaffold: Ledger Drift and
Shimmer injection
The following code sketch extends the toy offset audit into a
minimal scaffold for (i) a drifting equation of state model and
(ii) log-periodic shimmer injection into a baseline spectrum. It
is not a data analysis pipeline; it is a sanity-check harness for
parameter effects.
import numpy as np
def w_of_a(a, delta_w=0.05):
# Example slow drift: w(a) = -1 + delta_w*(1-a)
return -1.0 + delta_w*(1.0 - a)
def shimmer_Pk(k, P0, eps=0.02, omega=10.0, kstar=0.05, phi=0.0):
return P0*(1.0 + eps*np.cos(omega*np.log(k/kstar) + phi))
def toy_sensitivity_scan():
k = np.logspace(-4, 0, 2000)
P0 = k**0.96 # placeholder tilt
grid = []
for eps in [0.0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05]:
for om in [5.0, 10.0, 20.0]:
P = shimmer_Pk(k, P0, eps=eps, omega=om)
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
grid.append((eps, om, np.std((P-P0)/P0)))
return grid
The audit-facing outputs of such a scaffold are (a) how
stronglyagiven (𝜖,𝜔) perturbsasmoothbaseline,and(b)how
a chosen𝑤(𝑎) parameterization modifies late-time expansion
inacontrolledtoymodel. Afullprogramupgradesthisscaffold
into likelihood-level fitting with end-to-end systematics and
null tests.
Appendix C: Casimir-safe audit: worked parallel-plate example
A standard concern for any proposal that “audits out” a
homogeneous vacuum offset is whether it inadvertently deletes
well-established relative vacuum effects. The Casimir ef-
fect provides the cleanest diagnostic: boundary conditions
select a distinct vacuum sector between plates, producing a
measurable stress. The audited prescription must retain this
sector-dependent difference while remaining insensitive to a
global DC shift.
1. Stress–energy between plates
Fortwoperfectlyconducting,parallelplatesseparatedbydis-
tance𝑎 at zero temperature, the renormalized electromagnetic
vacuum energy density in the gap is2
𝑢C(𝑎)=⟨𝑇00⟩in = − 𝜋2
720
ℏ𝑐
𝑎4 , (C1)
and the (normal) pressure on each plate is
𝑝C(𝑎) = − 𝜋2
240
ℏ𝑐
𝑎4 , (C2)
corresponding to an attractive force𝐹/𝐴 = 𝑝C. Outside
the plates, the renormalized stress–energy is (to excellent
approximation)thereferencevacuum,whichwedenote 𝑢out≈ 0
in the same renormalization scheme.
A convenient diagnostic quantity for the audited source term
is thelocal sector contrast,
𝛿𝑇𝜇𝜈(𝑥) ≡𝑇𝜇𝜈(𝑥)−⟨ 𝑇𝜇𝜈⟩Σ. (C3)
The key point is that the plate-induced stress islocalized to a
region of thickness∼𝑎 and is fixed by boundary conditions; it
is not a homogeneous DC offset.
2. Audit removes only the homogeneous mode
Consider a CMC patchΣ that contains both the plate region
and a much larger surrounding volume𝑉Σ. Let the plate gap
occupy a subvolume𝑉gap = 𝐴𝑎 with 𝐴 the plate area. The
sector average of the energy density is
⟨𝑇00⟩Σ ≈ 1
𝑉Σ
 ∫
𝑉gap
𝑢C(𝑎)𝑑3𝑥+
∫
𝑉Σ\𝑉gap
𝑢out𝑑3𝑥
!
≈ 𝑢C(𝑎) 𝐴𝑎
𝑉Σ
,
(C4)
which is parametrically suppressed by the volume fraction
𝑓≡𝑉gap/𝑉Σ≪ 1. Therefore, within the gap,
𝛿𝑇(in)
00 = 𝑢C(𝑎)−⟨ 𝑇00⟩Σ ≈ 𝑢C(𝑎)( 1−𝑓) ≃𝑢C(𝑎), (C5)
while outside,
𝛿𝑇(out)
00 = 𝑢out−⟨𝑇00⟩Σ ≈ −𝑢C(𝑎) 𝑓 , (C6)
a tiny compensating background spread across the patch. The
audited coupling thus preserves the physically measurable,
boundary-conditioned stress while remaining insensitive to a
uniformshift 𝑢C→𝑢C+Λconst: theadditionalconstantcancels
from both𝑇00 and⟨𝑇00⟩Σ.
3. Weak-field gravitational estimate
In the Newtonian limit, the gravitational potential responds
toaneffectivesourceproportionaltotheauditedenergydensity.
Treating the Casimir region as a slab of thickness𝑎, one may
estimate the gravitational acceleration scale sourced by the
Casimir energy as
𝑔C ∼ 4𝜋𝐺|𝑢C(𝑎)|
𝑐2 𝑎, (C7)
which is extremely small (as expected) butnonzeroand, cru-
cially, depends on the plate separation through𝑎−3. For
𝑎 = 1 µm, Eq. (C1) gives|𝑢C| ≈4 ×10−4Jm −3, yielding
𝑔C∼ 10−33 m s−2—far below current detectability, consistent
with the empirical fact that Casimir gravity has not been di-
rectly measured. The audited framework therefore passes the
“local vacuum” sanity check: it preserves Casimir stresses as
relational, boundary-dependent excitations, while removing
only the homogeneous, non-addressable DC mode.
4. Interpretation
Operationally, boundary conditions place the system into
distinct vacuum sectors, and the audited ledger couples to
differencesbetweensuchsectors. TheCasimireffectistherefore
not an exception to auditing; it is the textbook example of what
auditing preserves.
2 For a concise derivation and conventions, see the original result [4] and
modern reviews.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
[1] D. N. Page, “Information in black hole radiation,” Phys. Rev.
Lett.71, 3743 (1993).
[2] D. Harlow and P. Hayden, “Quantum computation vs. firewalls,”
JHEP06, 085 (2013).
[3] R. Bousso,The Holographic Principle, Rev. Mod. Phys.74, 825
(2002).
[4] H. B. G. Casimir,On the Attraction Between Two Perfectly
Conducting Plates, Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wet.51, 793 (1948).
[5] J. D. Bekenstein,Black holes and entropy, Phys. Rev. D7, 2333
(1973).
[6] S.W.Hawking, Particlecreationbyblackholes ,Commun.Math.
Phys.43, 199 (1975).
[7] G. ’t Hooft, Dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, in
Salamfestschrift(World Scientific, 1993), arXiv:gr-qc/9310026.
[8] L. Susskind,The World as a Hologram, J. Math. Phys.36, 6377
(1995).
[9] D. Harlow and P. Hayden,Quantum computation vs. firewalls,
JHEP06, 085 (2013).
[10] J. W. York, Jr., “Role of conformal three-geometry in the dynam-
ics of gravitation,” Phys. Rev. Lett.28, 1082 (1972).
[11] P. Kovtun, D. T. Son, and A. O. Starinets, “Viscosity in strongly
interactingquantumfieldtheoriesfromblackholephysics,”Phys.
Rev. Lett.94, 111601 (2005), arXiv:hep-th/0405231.
[12] N. Kaloper and A. Padilla, “Sequestering the Standard Model
Vacuum Energy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 091304 (2014),
arXiv:1309.6562 [hep-th].
[13] PlanckCollaboration,“Planck2018results.X.Constraintsonin-
flation,” Astron. Astrophys.641, A10 (2020), arXiv:1807.06211
[astro-ph.CO].
[14] For unimodular gravity and the cosmological constant as an
integration constant, see e.g. E. Alvarez, “Can one tell Einstein’s
unimodular theory from Einstein’s general relativity?,” JHEP03,
002 (2005), arXiv:hep-th/0501146, and references therein.
21
