===== PAGE 1 =====
D-brane Lagrangian?
 Asked 14 years, 8 months ago  Modified 14 years, 8 months ago  1k timesViewed
15
As I understand it from the threads I read, D-branes are viewed as somewhat secondary to
strings: If I know what all the open strings do, then I know what the D-branes do as well. But if
the D-brane is a "big" and higherdimensional object, then there should also be a part of its
surface, which is not covered by strings ending there.
Why or how is the whole thing still characterized by the strings? Do the moving string ends drag
the D-branes with them? Is there something like a Lagrangian and dynamical rules for the D-
branes alone? Do I only need the D-brane after quantization and/or is there a classical concept of
it? In the former case, does a classical limit of a D-brane and an effective action for it make
sense? What is the precise reason one doesn't write down Lagrangians for non-point
particle/non-string/non-field quantities?
classical-mechanics string-theory
Share Cite Improve this question Follow asked Oct 26, 2011 at 22:52
Nikolaj-K
9,093 8 45 96
1 Answer Sorted by: Highest score (default)
13
Much like in the case of the spacetime itself, you may write low-energy effective quantum field
theories for D-branes. The most popular effective action for a D-brane that one encounters in the
literature is a non-linear generalization of Yang-Mills theory known as the 
 which is also coupled to extra scalars, and so on. It describes essentially everything at long
distances, regardless of the shape of the D-brane, as long as the curvature is low etc.
Dirac-Born-Infeld
action
= − ξSp Tp ∫
Mp+1
dp+1 e−Φ det( + + 2π )Gab Bab α′Fab
− −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
√
Well, this simple action with the induced metric  already depends on the transverse coordinates
as well (and while doing so, it mostly generalizes the Nambu-Goto action) but one should also
add the fermionic superpartners if any.
G
7/10/26, 10:09 PM classical mechanics - D-brane Lagrangian? - Physics Stack Exchange
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/16248/d-brane-lagrangian 1/5

===== PAGE 2 =====
But this action breaks down at short distances or high energies, comparable to the string scale,
because there are other massive excitations living on the D-brane and their interactions which
modify the dynamics. You may try to describe all those things accurately (at least to all orders in
perturbation theory in ) by string field theory in the D-brane world volume but even if you do
so, you're brought to my main point:
gs
D-branes' degrees of freedom are not as fundamental as the strings' degrees of
freedom; they're actually "composed" of strings.
So it is really incorrect to imagine that the degrees of freedom of D-branes are independent from
the stringy degrees of freedom, i.e. that they're independent objects. They're not. D-branes are
topological defects which play the same role as solitons in quantum field theory as long as the
degrees of freedom carried by strings ("string fields") are considered analogous to the normal
fields in a quantum field theory. A TV example of a soliton is the magnetic monopole which may
be represented as a classical configuration – a solution – in which the electromagnetic fields have
certain values (and a topologically nontrivial "charge"). In this sense, the magnetic monopole is
"composed" out of excitations of the electromagnetic field. Such objects, solitons, are usually
much heavier than the "fundamental" objects when the coupling constant is weak; and the same
thing holds for a low  and D-branes (solitons of string theory).gs
In the same way, D-branes are solitons in the closed string fields, including the Ramond-Ramond
-form generalizations of the electromagnetic field. And all their excitations are (paradoxically,
by the open-closed duality which boils down to the fact that the annulus and cylinder shapes are
equivalent) equivalent to open string states.
p
So let me try to convince you that you should adopt a very different philosophical picture of what
the D-branes actually are. First, consider gravity. It is a part of string theory and in perturbative
string theory, gravitons always arise from the massless states of closed strings, right?
In this sense, all the degrees of freedom  in the spacetime fail to be "independent objects" or
"independent fields" or "independent degrees of freedom" from strings. They are literally made
out of closed strings. Any gravitational wave, a classical perturbation of , is equivalent to the
coherent state of closed strings in the graviton mode. All these fields are "built from" closed
string degrees of freedom. Assuming that you choose the name "vacuum" for the appropriate
state in the Hilbert space describing spacetime in string theory, any other state in the Hilbert
space may be obtained as a linear superposition of extra strings' creation operators acting on this
vacuum (and it doesn't have to be "the right" vacuum).
gμν
gμν
The D-brane situation is fully analogous. Imagine a flat D8-brane at . You may change its
shape by making  slightly varied as a function of the remaining 8+1 spacetime coordinates.
Such a wave will propagate by the speed of light. The field  is a scalar field on the brane.
= 0X 9
X 9
X 9
However, this field and its excitations – quanta of the waves – are not independent objects or
independent fields or independent degrees of freedom from fundamental strings. In fact, the
wave of changing  which propagates by the speed of light in the 8+1 world volume dimensionsX 9
7/10/26, 10:09 PM classical mechanics - D-brane Lagrangian? - Physics Stack Exchange
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/16248/d-brane-lagrangian 2/5

===== PAGE 3 =====
of the D8-brane I randomly chose is literally and physically made out of open strings. A coherent
state of open strings is how you make the D-brane classically wiggle. A coherent state of open
strings in another state changes the electromagnetic fields inside the D-brane (or the stack). All
other degrees of freedom living in the D-brane are literally composed of open strings as well! If
you're at the quantum level and you want to consider the most general states of the D-branes in
its Hilbert space, any superposition of open strings created upon the background is allowed and
nothing else about the D-brane exists.
This picture by David Tong suggests that aside from open strings connecting the D-branes, the
D-branes may also independently wiggle. But the D-brane wiggles (and everything else
occurring inside them) are actually made out of the same open strings.
That's why only closed (and open, in the presence of D-branes) strings are fundamental degrees
of freedom in perturbative string theory. Everything else is made out of them: spacetime closed-
string-like fields such as the metric tensor are made out of closed strings; all degrees of freedom
describing the state of the D-branes are made out of open strings. This fact is why in the
perturbative description, strings produce a theory of everything.
This hegemony of fundamental strings is only violated if you try to go beyond the perturbative
expansions. Because of S-dualities, one may be sure that in some sense, all D-branes and other
branes are equally fundamental as strings (e.g. F-strings are exchanged with D1-branes in type
IIB string theory). But there is no known explicit calculation-ready formalism that would make
7/10/26, 10:09 PM classical mechanics - D-brane Lagrangian? - Physics Stack Exchange
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/16248/d-brane-lagrangian 3/5

===== PAGE 4 =====
this "brane democracy" manifest. Instead of this democratic description, we possess various
desciptions such as expansions around various limiting points. The expansion around  is
always dominated by strings and their degrees of freedom and everything else seems to be
composed out of them. (The CFT description of an AdS/CFT system has different, more braney
fundamental degrees of freedom; in this case, the excited stringy states are made out of these
gauge-theoretical, D-brane-like degrees of freedom.)
= 0gs
That's also why D-branes don't bring any ambiguity or uncertainty to the dynamical rules of
string theory: there is only one string theory and it is unique. The addition of a D-brane means
that the background is a non-trivial solution for the closed string degrees of freedom and all the
dynamics around this solution is dictated by stringy diagrams. That's surely a good property of
string theory – and a necessary for one a truly unifying theory.
If you tried to find independent D-brane Lagrangians describing everything that have nothing to
do with strings, something I just told you doesn't exist, you would face another problem: all such
hypothetical world volume theories would suffer from the same short-distance (UV) problems as
quantized gravity without strings. Strings whose world volume is 1+1-dimensional are unique
among all objects you can think of because their dimensionality is high enough so that the shape
of the world sheet may create topologically nontrivial and therefore interacting histories (pants
diagrams etc.); but it is also low enough so that all potential UV problems in the world volume
(namely world sheet of the string) are under control.
That's not true for higher-dimensional objects (whose UV problems are analogous to those of
quantized general relativity) so there can't be any "membrane or higher brane theory" that would
share the same consistency standards with string theory. As we know, other objects of various
dimensions exist in string theory but whenever strings are used as fundamental ones, the others
can't be fundamental at the same moment. The hegemony of strings in the perturbative
description is not only a symptom of the uniqueness of string theory and its being a "theory of
everything" but it is also necessary for the finiteness of the theory. Whatever isn't made out of
strings would create UV problems comparably severe to those in non-stringy quantum gravity.
 may be updated in the future.The web version of this answer
Share Cite Improve this answer
Follow
edited Oct 27, 2011 at 17:37 answered Oct 27, 2011 at 16:53
Luboš Motl
184k 15 422 655
3
  
It is wrong to give strings a preferred role, because any d brane can be turned into an f string by a
combination of t and s dualities. But its good pedagogically in this case. – Ron Maimon Oct 27, 2011 at
17:51
1   Sorry, of course you adressed this by the end +1 – Ron Maimon Oct 27, 2011 at 18:09
Start asking to get answers
7/10/26, 10:09 PM classical mechanics - D-brane Lagrangian? - Physics Stack Exchange
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/16248/d-brane-lagrangian 4/5

===== PAGE 5 =====
Find the answer to your question by asking.
Ask question
Explore related questions
classical-mechanics string-theory
See similar questions with these tags.
7/10/26, 10:09 PM classical mechanics - D-brane Lagrangian? - Physics Stack Exchange
https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/16248/d-brane-lagrangian 5/5
