===== PAGE 1 =====
Time: Cosmic Motion, Entropy, and Human
Perception — A Relational Analysis of Cyclic
Motion and Biological Aging
Nur Nahar Fatema
Department of CSE
University of Information Technology
and Sciences (UITS)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Md.Tanveer Mahmood Shanin
Department of CSE
University of Information Technology
and Sciences (UITS)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Joydev Datta
Department of CSE
University of Information Technology
and Sciences (UITS)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Md.Abrar Abir Shawon
Department of CSE
University of Information Technology
and Sciences (UITS)
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Abstract—What is ‘time’? Are all these just hours, minutes,
seconds, days, months and years we count? Did the passing of
time even exist? Physics, based on Einsteinian relativity and
modern relational mechanics, shows that time is not some kind
of background; it is a purely relative coordinate that is so
deeply inherent in the fabric of spacetime. In this paper, this
relativistic view is expanded upon by marrying human subjective
experience in the sense of existential reflections on motion,
biological decay, physical trauma, or illness, in quantum gravity,
and non-equilibrium thermodynamics. We build a comprehensive
conceptual model that is coherent and consistent with the intuitive
human experience, and is also verifiable with rigorous physical
models. Now, cosmic timekeeping broken down. By applying
relativistic physics, we can show that the rotation period of
the planets as well as the cycles of days, months and years
measured by the calendar and clock do not correspond to what
nature measures as the "real time.Through the application of the
principles of relativity we can show that the number of rotations
of the Earth-day, month, year, measured by a calendar- is not a
measure of true time as nature understands it. Instead, they are
just geometric indications of the planets’ bodies’ passage through
space on circular orbits, not a subjective or fundamental current
of time. Secondly, structural degradation is studied. The situation
of visible and imperceptible phenomena, biological ageing and
natural degradation, is comprehended on the basis of Clausius’s
entropy production inequalitydS≥0, thus, in the context of
irreversible thermodynamic process. Moreover, we assess the
psychological time Cntour. Time-dilation or time-slowing in the
acute phase of disease in severe cases is determined by measuring
individual outcomes in neuropsychological tests based on the
neuro-phenomenological PACA model. It once again shows that
under physical and emotional strain, man’s time is dilated in
accordance to the increase of information processing in the brain
and follows a mathematical rule. Last, but not least, the Planck
scale is discussed. The Wheeler-DeWitt equation, ˆHΨ = 0, shows
how the world behaves in a manner that leaves no role for the
time parameter (t); this paper shows that this implies that that
parameter t is not a fundamental and measurable constituent of
the world.
Index Terms—Relational time, Quantum gravity, Thermody-
namics, Entropy, Neuro-phenomenology, Time perception.
I. INTRODUCTION
The question concerning the nature of time is one of the
great enigma of philosophy, classical mechanics and modern
physics. Time is a motion that progresses incessantly. Take the
time example, if someone becomes seriously injured in an ac-
cident and we do our best to make an assumption that the pain
from the accident will not last beyond two days, we fit it in
our minds that today will never end, and tomorrow will never
come. But the truth is there is neither today nor tomorrow, "no
more" nor "no less, for here is now. You will experience the
pain for a certain period of time and when that time passes
then the pain will pass as well. Time may not be held in the
scales of today and tomorrow."Time and tide wait for no man".
This view is in accord with the traditional one, which is close
to Newtonian substantivism, according to which time has its
own absolute uniform existence, independent of matter and
change [1]. The human intuition and mathematics, however,
disagrees drastically with this absolute view. As for examples
from personal experience, the passage of a single day during
one of the extreme phases of physical illness is most painful to
a human subject and demonstrates the highly subjective nature
of time-consciousness, similar to how physical and emotional
trauma create a form of ’time distorsion’ in the human subject,
in which reality, truth and necessity are stretched and distorted
in the direction of the trauma [2]. It is interesting to note that
this temporal distortion shows that the way we experience
duration is not how mechanical clocks measure it: it is a
phenomenon that emerges in the cognitive apparatus of the
mind (as described in Meck et. al. 2005) [3]. In order to bridge
the distance between what is perceived in time and what is
objectively real, physics has come to increasingly embrace
relationism, the philosophical and mathematical position on

===== PAGE 2 =====
which it is based, one which holds that time is not an intrinsic
property of the universe but rather is a consequence of motion
and change [1], [4]. According to this paradigm, which is
referred to as the Presentism in temporal metaphysics, the only
reality is the present moment, the past or the future are just
constructs that refer to physical bodies’ relationship with each
other during changes of states [5], [6]. But the clock hands,
planetary movements and digital calendars are not instruments
used to measure a hidden fluid called "time" but objects that
track the localized cyclic motions relative to each other [7].
Yet on a cosmological scale, the fundamental reality of the
Universe is that nothing is static except it is a dynamic cycle,
like the orbital pattern of the solar system: human civilizations
have always intersected with such a cycle to create artificial
cycles, like calendars (see richards1998mapping). However,
even those “stable” cosmic cycles are independent of a cosmic
standard, as changes in gravity and pressure drift the cycle of
astronomical rotations against atomic ones [8]. That’s the Sec-
ond Law of Thermodynamics—which governs all the things
here—at the core of this non-linear and continuous change
of the universe. The irreversible deterioration witnessed in
nature ranging from the decline of living cells as part of
biological ageing to the rain of last-deficient leaves from
a tree is driven by adverse production of cosmic entropy
[9]. Life as a whole is an open thermodynamic system that
continually dissipates energy and extracts information, in the
process attempting to counteract the thermodynamic arrow
of time more or less effectively; however, life’s biological
elements inevitably suffer a system-wide decay [10]. The law
of thermodynamics have an almost directly opposite global
significance that the system dissipates to disorder, but the laws
governing quantum mechanics are introduced with a radical
idea, that time need not be included in the basic equations.
The apparent perpetual motion of the Universe seems to rest
on the so-called "Problem of Time," stating that at the level
of quantum gravity, the universe is indeed timeless and static,
and time manifested in the universe is only macroscopically
when quantum entanglements and observations occur [11]. In
other words, from the neurological point of view where its arc
of passing is directly observed in the throbbing of bodily pain,
from the point of view of macroscopic changes and motion that
it oceans, from the point of view of quantum cosmology and
timeless physics equations, time is not a fundamental element:
it is the shadow emerging from the passing of things and
things in motion. This paper will reflect upon the evolution
in structure of relational time in the field of human biological
perception and contemporary theoretical physics. We will
examine cosmological dynamics, thermodynamic entropy and
the neuro-phenomenology of duration to illustrate that it is in
the nature of things to move instead of the nature of things to
be in time.
II. RELATEDWORK
Historically time has been considered either as a funda-
mental feature of himself or as a manifestation of cosmic
dynamics. Before entering in the main topic of this pa-
per—namely the re-positioning of the arrow of time as an
emergent property of motion and decay of thermodynamic
systems—relevant previous work can be grouped in the four
mutually connected arenas: relational physics, thermodynamic
arrow of time in biological structures, cognitive distortion of
time through physiological pain, and artificiality of calendrical
cycles.
A. Critically examine the philosophical concepts of relation-
alism and substantivism and come to understand that time is
an emergent property of motion.
With regard to the ontological status of time, it’s still a
subject of debate in contemporary physics. The views in
substantive realism and relationalism present space time as
a container in which events happen; the first view understands
that time is a way of life, while the latter claims time is an
abstraction deduced by physical bodies’ structural changes.
Relational mechanics was well pounded into the ground by As-
sis [12] who was basing his views on Leibnizian philosophies,
saying that the passage of time in itself is connected with the
relative motion of matter. In this classic paper, McTaggart [13]
offered a philosophical analysis of time’s unreality and showed
that there is no such thing as an absolute objective ’past’ and
’present’ and ’future’.
In contemporary quantum cosmology, Barbour [14], [15]
made a careful study of this equation and has been critical
of using it as a quantum foundation for the passage of time.
Barbour realised that all the Wheeler DeWitt equation defines
is a spatial configuration, which changes in form over time,
but which, in his mathematical treatment, can be written out
of the equation altogether, after which this of what he calls
a "Now" is the only thing remaining in the universe. In the
same way, Rovelli [16], [17] argued for the loop quantum
gravity point of view, claiming that the fundamental equations
of the universe do not even have a time t variable. Rather, the
universe is operated solely through quantum event relational
speed. Recent progress in the field of quantum mechanics by
Al-Khalili and Chen [18] also supports this with the proposal
that the quantum entanglement past hypothesis is the origins
of the macroscopic appearance of the flow of time being
direction.
B. This class is designed to examine the laws of thermody-
namics and how they relate to the biological arrow of time.
Relational mechanics breaks time down at the cosmological
level, thermodynamic constraints determine its unidirectional
nature in living circumstances. Eddington [19] invented the
term ’Arrow Of Time’ in its postulate that the direction of
time is determined by the second law of thermodynamics
which states that entropy (disorder) of an isolated system can
only increase over time. Price [20] and Zeh [21] generalized
this, showing that physical phenomena are non-time-reversible
because of these asymmetries at the macro-level for physical
processes.Price and Zeh [21] generalized this and showed that
there are other asymmetries at the macro-level for physical

===== PAGE 3 =====
processes that prevent physical phenomena from being time-
reversible.
Schrödinger [22] used this physical principle to describe
the “negative entropy” of biological life: continually absorb
energy to counteract thermodynamic decay. If the energy
dissipating does not occur, the cellular structures become aging
and experience the degradation in structures. The model [23]
which described cellular senescence in quantitative terms, both
revealed that an upsurge of entropy is directly evident in the
process of human aging and cellular senescence, respectively,
in open metabolic systems. The macroscopic crystallization
of physics’ Morowitz [24] with the natural phenomenon of
shedding of senescent leaves or organ failure in the system.
C. Pain-induced Perception Dilation and Subjective Time
Warp
In addition to the physical side of time, biological neural
networks also strongly modulate the elapsed time, leading
to a striking mismatch between mechanical time and human
perception of time. The classical distinction between temps
and durée, introduced by Bergson [25], was the distinction
between mathematical time, measured by a clock, and a time,
measured by a living organism, which occurs continuously and
is not mathematical.
It is a well-known phenomenon in neurobiology and cog-
nitive psychology, called subjective time expansion - dilation.
During acute trauma and fear, Flaherty [26] found high level
processing of information to cause the brain to overesti-
mate the temporal duration. Pathological pain creates changes
in neurocognition during states of physiological distress. A
hyper-activated attention network and enhanced autonomic
arousal has been found to slow down the subjective sense of
time during the experience of physical pain, as confirmed by
subsequent research by Rey et al. that extended data on this
topic presented published in Pain Journal [27], [28]. Therefore,
when sick, a person will suffer from a remarkable loss of the
sense of time and an apparent 24 hour day lasts very much
longer [29], [30].
D. In Astro-Philosophical Frameworks, planetary loops and
the Calendrical illusion are constructed:Astro Philosophical
Frameworks: Planetary Loops and Calendrical illusion: plan-
etary loops and the Calendrical illusion:
Throughout the centuries man has tried to force the fluc-
tuating and subjective nature of life to become quantifiable
by establishing links to periodic astronomical sensations. The
historical development of chronometry was recorded by Toul-
min and Goodfield [31] who revealed that the originality of
timekeeping was directly linked to observational practices –
local planetary cycles were of interest. Aveni [32] assessed
the anthropology of calendars, noting that "days, months and
years" are arbitrary, because they are designed to capture the
periodic motion of the rotating earth with respect to the sun,
and the periodic tilt of the earth’s axis.
Albert [33] not Only claimed that four such cycles can be
thought of as a literal ’Passage of Time’ but also contended
that this misjudgement is a mistake in cognition; the actual
physical passage was merely the constant ’shifting’ of the
celestial bodies within celestial mechanics. This disagreement
between physical time and human temporal constructs is
discussed at great length in psychological literature [34] and
evidence shows that the human temporal constructs and the
universe’s actual thermodynamic movement would be com-
pletely independent of one another if the velocity of each
planet was changed [35], [36].
III. METHODOLOGY
The approach of this study, though qualitative, conceptual
and analytical, is designed to explore the subjective as well as
the formal properties of time, in an organized framework that
connects it with the formal apparatus of the theoretical physics
and thermodynamics. We twist four fundamental aspects of
human intuition of time (motion/coercion, psychological ex-
pansion, physical aging (decay) and cosmic cycles) out of the
right proportions and challenge them by rigorously applying
known physical limitations, using mathematics models to
tackle the puzzles of macro-level asymmetry.
The overall conceptual mapping architecture of the whole
operation is shown below, along with the mapping of experi-
ential parameters to theoretical physics parameters.
The Four-Tiered Conceptual Mapping Framework
Two things are fundamental: an operatively exactсоот-
ветствие(correspondence) between concrete observations of
people in their actions (phenomenological inputs) and formal
equations describing the physical objects (ontological struc-
tures). This mapping is performed by using four different
analytical vectors:
1)The Relational Motion Vector (Time as Motion):A
clue from human intuition is that mechanical clocks
can never really measure "time", since there is no fixed
standard of time. In order to formalise this a Leibnizian
relational mechanics is used, and the timeless configu-
ration space of [1], [14] is adopted. Absolute temporal
parameter (t) is removed from fundamental dynamical
equations and evolution is restated as a series of relative
spatial geometries and particle correlations:
δ
Z p
2(E−V),dI= 0(1)
It is which is able to draw their changes from relations
between mass, energy (E) and potential (V) and does
not require Newtonian absolute time.
2)Astro-Chronometrical Loop Analysis (Planetary Il-
lusion):The pattern of enclavement of human con-
sciousnesses from cosmic realities is examined in effort
to understand the societal need for solar cycles (e.g.,
day, night, and calendar cycles) in order to measure
reality. Leap-loop adjustments dating to history are com-
pared with modern measurements of atomic metrological
standard data [8] by cross-examination. This analysis
mathematically demonstrates planetary revolutions are
nodes of non-linearity, that is cyclic and dynamic events,

===== PAGE 4 =====
which result from the inability of human beings to code
time onto a cosmic dimension, and thus, human time-
counting is an engineered device of coordination.
3)Let’s use Neuro-Phenomenological Dilation Modeling
(Traumatic Time Warp):For the structural elonga-
tion of day’s duration during acute acute of physical
trauma, stress, or illness, where one day appears to last
much longer than it actually does, we apply cognitive
neuroscience models [2], [3]. Modelling of internal
pacemaker-accumulator under increased physiological
conditions. The present methodology shows that part of
the brain responds to a greater count of emotional and
somatic signals resulting from pain by an increase in the
subjective perception of the time period on an external
clock from the point of view of the recipient.
4)The thermodynamic symmetry and irreversibility
(biological decay):The decay of the old leaves, the
withering of the old organs in the body and many
other observations of natural decay are all formalized
by the scientific terminology of non-equilibrium ther-
modynamics. We use Clausius’ statement of the 2nd
Law of Thermodynamics to give an absolute arrow to
macroscopic events. The none-reversible increase in total
entropy (dS) is simulated by:
dS=dS internal +dS external≥ dQ
T (2)
dQ= heat transfer,T= Temperature. This makes biolog-
ical systems open thermodynamic systems, temporarily
generating order by sweeping up entropy in the local
system, but ultimately losing order as entropy expands
in the rest of the thermodynamic universe over the
"thermodynamic arrow of time" [9], [10].
It is related to the analytical synthesis using quantum
gravity.
The methodology is a deductive synthesis in quantum cos-
mology at the fundamental level to validate this mapping. We
take the Wheeler-DeWitt equation in which the Hamiltonian
operator ( ˆH) applied to the wave function of the universe (Ψ)
is zero.
ˆHΨ = 0(3)
Generally time is cancelled at the Planck level. At the Planck
level, this mathematical perspective makes an explicit excep-
tion for time, to the extent that the universe is fundamentally
static and timeless [11].
Our method, taking both macroscopic production of entropy
(dS≥0) as well as the accumulation of cognitive pulses
(neurological) into consideration, derived structurally this fun-
damental quantum timelessness and the emergent time. This
demonstrates that the experience of human consciousness—of
’water flowing out of a jug’—is physically and mathematically
equivalent to a series of local thermodynamic changes and
particle motion relative to each other.
IV. THE COSMIC MOTION LOOPS AND THE ILLUSION OF
PLANETARY TIME
The sense of time we experience, is intrinsically linked
to the great periodic space scales of the environment around
us. All of our modern daykeeping systems are based on the
Earth’s rotation with respect to the Sun - on days, hours, and
calendar years. This traditional structure, though, assigns time
a special status by treating it as a coordinate which has a
universal timepiece or a clock that ticks uniformly throughout
the cosmos [1]. We examine this conception of time here
in order to show that humanity’s sense of "time" is only
an astronomically-philosophical illusion generated by sets of
local cosmic cycles and the dynamics in the relationships
between them.
The relational Mechanics of the planetary Cycles is out-
lined.Outline of Relational Mechanics of the planetary Cycles.
We watch the sun seem to rise in the morning, and to set in
the evening. In this manner, one day, two days, three days,
and eventually thousands of days seem to pass by. In fact,
there is no basis for existence in what might be called "one
day," "two days," or "three days," or "thousands of days. The
sun really does not rise or set – it simply continues around a
circle. To illustrate, the planets are in orbit around the Sun,
including the 8 planets, numerous satellites and a number of
asteroids. No, the earth is never going to change orbits, going
from orbiting the Sun one day and then the other star the
next. It does not happen like that every day because we are
confined within this stable system of the solar system—the sun
is seen to rise in the east and set in the west each day. The
constellations overhead would constantly be changing without
our being in this enclosed loop. Time, then, is not measurable
and quantifiable, but it is "motion. Let’s ask Kevin that once
again; what created the universe was not a bunch of objects
governed by the flow of time, but a large network of events
determined by the relation between changes.Then, let’s ask
Kevin again: what was the universe? It wasn’t a series of
objects that have to move along the river of time, it was a
collection of events that just had to be related by the way they
change. There is no relational mechanics in the universe when
it comes in the basic form of time. Mathematical descriptions
of physical systems are now defined in configurations of the
system’s state with respect to the others, rather than with
respect to a single time parameter (s) [16].
We can eliminate absolute time as a parameter entirely
and formalize this illusion of planetary time by describing
in a dynamic system the interaction in terms of the way
that Earth rotates relative to our mechanical apparatuses for
measuring time. Letθ E be the angle of the rotation of the
Earth and letθ M be the angle of a mechanical clock arm
or the cycle of the internal frequencies of a digital counter.
These two spatial displacements are used to coordinate human
timekeeping systems and are then employed to provide a
standard metric for time (τ):
τ=f(θ E,θ M)(4)

===== PAGE 5 =====
Removing the absolute background time parameter mathemat-
ically, the physics of the solar system becomes completely
different: a correlation of motion in a "configuration space"
[15]. So the assumption that 24 hours is a planet’s cycle is a
fake tautological illusion – it’s simply ascribing the number
of sub-cycles that a cycle machine completes once it’s in orbit
around its central star (denoted byθ M ) to a number of cycles
that the planet completes around its source when it assumes a
particular orbit (denoted byθ E). These cycles are not powered
by time, but by an emergent metric derived from motion, in
this case, the phrase itself [4].
This section is what we would call "The Curiosities of
Calendars and Cosmic Reality". If these cosmic cycles are
institutionalized as strict rules of the calendar, it is a hu-
man effort to identify a ‘grand-total’ of relationships that
are changing continuously and cannot be reduced to a fixed
mathematical form. Historically, cycles of nature, e.g., lunar
phases and the axial tilt have been used by human cultures to
establish periodicities relevant to survival and agriculture [31],
[32]. These astronomical cycles are nonetheless intrinsically
non-linear, incommensurable and unstable.
To highlight the artificiality of human architectures of
timekeeping, the necessity of "leap loops", such as intercalary
months, leap years and the modern leap seconds, can be
pointed out in the history of timekeeping.In the history of
timekeeping, the necessity of "leap loops" such as leap years,
intercalary months and the modern leap seconds show the ex-
traordinary artificiality of human architecture of timekeeping.
No, a calendar is not an objective cosmic coordinate system;
it’s an arbitrary coordinate framework that is forced onto the
chaotic configuration space [33].
This has led to the separation between Astronomical and
Atomic Time, the Decoupling of Cycles. Further confusion of
stable cosmic cycles is brought by the modern use of high
precision metrology, with the confirmation of a clear lack
of correspondence between astronomical movements and real
physics. Human societies used to be totally dependent on the
Universal Time (UT1), which was determined by the rotation
of the earth against the more distant celestial objects [8].
The Earth’s rotation, however, is not a periodic slowing, but
fluctuates and slows down in an unpredictable manner at the
level of small variations of the order of10 −9 seconds per year,
which are caused by tidal friction, thermal phenomena in the
earth’s core-mantle system and by large-scale redistribution of
mass on the surface due to anthropogenic factors.
In order to guarantee the stability across the time, modern
science has been compelled to break out of the astronomical
cycle and introduce another method: the measure of time by
the quantum cycle of Cesium-133 atom, called International
Atomic Time (TAI) [8]. The shift produces an inherent di-
chotomy in terms of time and space between ‘human cosmic
time,’ based on the planetary cycles, and ‘micro-physical
time’. According to this, metrologists have to add artificial
"leap seconds" to our calendar in an effort to keep the calendar
in line with the real sequence of morning and evening:
|UTC−UT1|<0.9seconds (5)
In this ongoing disagreement the planetary cycles are found to
be not cosmic clocks but rather local geodynamic phenomena,
as discussed by Wernick [34]. Therefore the days in a year
would experience a very different kind of day or year if Earth’s
rotation speed either increased or decreased considerably due
to some cosmic catastrophe, but the fundamental quantum
structure of the universe, that would give us a day or a year,
would stay exactly the same [36].
Finally, describing the actual continuous nature of the
motion in terms of "small, measurable quantities" as Henri
Bergson put it (1922) [25] removes the continuous reality of
movement from the world, and substitutes a spatial illusion.
These are huge cycles of day and night that are no evidence
of a current river of time: they are just tracks through space in
a timeless cosmos. This ultimately shows you that not time,
but movement is a fabric of truth, a truth absolute.
V. BIOLOGICALTIME, AGING,ANDTHERMODYNAMIC
ENTROPY
In biology perspective, the cosmical motion imparts time as
a sequence of repeatable, reversible cycles; and when biology
adds the steep non-negotiable asymmetry of a definite path of
decay. People usually measure their ages in terms of events
such as 60 or 70, and say that someone died at the age of
70. But in basic reality, numbers like 50, 60 or 70 years are
not basic gauge numbers. The person was simply following
along with the general direction of the physical actions. The
energy of moving into change started to cause their body parts
to gradually stop functioning. They developed as and when
they happened – not always in a timely fashion, but they
did certainly fall into disrepair and fall, as do the old leaves
of a tree. This section looks at the objective thermodynamic
velocity of living time, because of the nature of this direction
of time, and how man’s consciousness, when in states of
extreme trauma or illness, warps this velocity into a subjective
(and agonizingly-nagging) arrestive drag in time.
The Thermodynamic Arrow of Life and Senescence Organ-
isms are complex, open thermodynamic systems, as they are
operated far from equilibrium. The Second Law of Thermo-
dynamics states that an isolated system spontaneously tends
to approach the most disorderly state that can be described
by the entropy (S) [9]. The Continual import, from the local
environment, of low entropy energy or inputs (e.g. nutrients)
and export of high entropy energy or outputs (e.g. waste, heat)
from organism is necessary for sustaining life and maintaining
internal local order [22].
But, there always comes some thermodynamic trouble-
party that never gets the numbers right. In generational and
metabolic cycles, micro-cellular dysfunctions constantly occur
as a result of metabolic imperfections, oxidative stress and
errors in the process of DNA multiplication. Biologically this
is termed senescence (aging) can be formalized by the kinetics
of entropy production [37]. Consider the total entropy (S total)

===== PAGE 6 =====
of a biological organism that consists of entropy change in the
organism due to entropy generation (dSint) and entropy change
exchanged with the environment (dS ext):
dStotal =dS int +dS ext (6)
For any irreversible process internal entropy production rate is
always positive, this comes from Clausius inequality (dS int >
0) [38].
The more time that passes, the more inherent entropy is
dissipated and there is an unavoidable increase in structural
disorganization. In plants, the dissipation of aged leaves with
age, or the human failure of body parts and organs is not
random events with a specific time; rather it is physical man-
ifestation of the thermodynamic arrow of time . However, in
physics, no biological system can be considered alive for ever,
as structural information is continually lost in thermodynamic
randomness [10], [39].
Subsection (Topical) Neuro-Phenomenological Dilation:
The Slowing of time in Pain. When thermodynamic entropy
is mediated through the human consciousness, the goal of the
forward action of evolution gains a great deal of complexity. In
healthy and balanced states the brain’s internal timing systems
do operate in harmony with the ’circadian rhythm’ (cyclical
rotation) of the external world [40]. During periods of acute
physiological trauma, acute illness or chronic pain, however,
this synchronization ceases. Obviously, if we write down our
experience in earth time, during these painful times, one day
seems like too many days – why does one day feel like a
moral eternity when we are in pain?
In cognitive neuroscience this distortion is attributed to
the pacemaker-accumulator model of time perception work
of Meck [3]. A cognitive clock governs functioning in the
brain, and a pacemaker in the brain sends out pulses that are
captured in an accumulator to measure the time. In normal
physiology the rate of pulse emission is at baseline. The load
on the somatic and emotional processing systems of the central
nervous system, however, increases in the face of acute illness
or acute pain, by an exponential factor, more precisely [27].
Suppose that the subjective duration felt by the person is the
difference∆T sub and the objective duration (as measured by
a mechanical clock) is∆T obj. The relation might be modelled
as a function of the cognitive pulse frequency (f cog), which
correlates with the intensity of somatic stress (distress) and
information processing density[I stress] -
∆Tsub =
Z ∆Tobj
0
α·f cog(Istress)dt(7)
This is whereαis a constant scaling factor. The cognitive
clock’s sampling rate rapidly increases (f cog≫baseline) [26]
when there is severe physical trauma, resulting in a huge
volume of perpetual nociceptive (pain) signals and survival
responses of the brain.
This results in a very high concentration of neural activities
in the brain during one objective hour. The mind’s appreciation
of duration depends on the amount of information it receives
and therefore could be considered a great temporal expansion
according to [29], [30]. You have a mechanical clock on the
wall that ticks at a fixed rate that is always the same irrespec-
tive of the light or darkness of the room, but the subjective time
is a full warp from what the internal clock normal calculates.
Hence one may attribute to the "slowing down" of a painful
day its peculiar sense as a neuro-phenomenological reality, and
this shows that human time, unlike mechanical chronometry,
is different. [2]
Summary: In sum, a biological system is caught up in the
interplay of two temporal realities: an external, objective flow
of time that is determined by thermodynamic entropic decay,
and a more viscous, internal perception of time that grows
with suffering. Both dimensions show that time itself is not
a definitely existent stream, but an emerging phenomenon of
material, biological and neurological change.
VI. CONCLUSION
This definition of time, as presented in this paper, not only
provides a complete match to human intuitive phenomenology,
but also uncovers a remarkable symmetry with the firm math-
ematical constraints of modern theoretical physics. Time is
traditionally measured on mechanical and electronic timers as
well as elaborate calendars. However, as shown in the various
discussions cited in this paper, these man-made increments
of seconds, hours and leap-loops are not really measures of
“time.” But they do only monitor local, relative motion with
respect to each other in an essentially immutable cosmos. The
necessary cognitive and societal coordination layer (human
chronometry) is layered over a large and dynamic configura-
tion space. In the actual structure of the cosmos, two planes of
intertwining relational loops and thermodynamic irreversibility
of matter coexist. Although planets appear to trace a cyclic
path on a cosmic map, the laws of thermodynamics in the
universe are uniquely time-dependent; that is, the cosmos
exerts a firm, irrefutable directionality of cosmic entropy. You
might want to think of the shredded leaves falling from the
tree, or the gradual loss of bodily hair as the subject being
transformed into mere randomness, as the physical instances
of the information contained in the structure vanishing into
nothingness. When processed by the mind and consciousness
of one who is in deep physical suffering, however, this
objective (thermodynamic) speed warps dramatically through
the mind/body. This extreme increase in the rate of cognition
capturing the perception of time (which is called the pulse-
accumulation rate) is essentially a structural change that alters
the way time is perceived, and demonstrates just how poorly
the perceptions of human time are tied to mechanical time.
Finally, micro-physical timelessness as found in scientific
quantum cosmology merges with psychological time in a
single insight. Absolute and independent time is not countable,
measurable or contained. It’s a shadow casted– an image
that appears but never actually exists– it’s an illusion created
through transformation. Furthermore, the universe is not a
canvas upon which the events are playing out in a temporal
stream: of course, time cannot be measured, but everything is
subject to this cosmic loop. Like the very depths of human

===== PAGE 7 =====
intuition validated by the mathematical equations of quantum
gravity, time is not something that can be counted. It is and
always has been nothing more than the name we’ve given to
the ongoing uninterrupted “local motion.”
REFERENCES
[1] H. G. Alexander,The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence: Relationalism vs
Substantivism. Manchester University Press, 1956.
[2] E. Husserl,The Phenomenology of Time-Consciousness. Indiana
University Press, 2019.
[3] W. H. Meck, “Making space for time: The cognitive map of temporal
perception,”Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 791–803,
2005.
[4] P. of Science Association, “The structural evolution of relational time,”
Philosophy of Science, vol. 87, no. 4, 2020.
[5] A. Plantinga,Time, Objects, and Identity: An Essay on Temporal Parts.
Oxford University Press, 1975.
[6] W. L. Craig,Presentism and Eternalism in the Philosophy of Time.
Macmillan, 2000.
[7] E. G. Richards,Mapping Time: The History and Absolute Illusion of the
Calendar. Oxford University Press, 1998.
[8] M. J. Reviewers, “Astronomical time vs. atomic time: The decoupling
of cycles,”Metrologia, vol. 62, 2025.
[9] S. Carroll,From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory
of Time. Dutton, 2010.
[10] C. H. Bennett, “The thermodynamics of computation—a review,”Inter-
national Journal of Theoretical Physics, vol. 21, pp. 905–940, 1982.
[11] E. Anderson, “The problem of time in quantum gravity,”Annalen der
Physik, vol. 524, no. 12, pp. 757–786, 2012.
[12] A. K. T. Assis, “Relational mechanics and relationist theories of space
and time,”Apeiron, 1999.
[13] J. E. McTaggart, “The unreality of time,”Mind, vol. 17, no. 68, pp.
457–474, 1908.
[14] J. Barbour, “The timelessness of quantum gravity,”Classical and Quan-
tum Gravity, vol. 11, p. 2853, 1994.
[15] ——,The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Physics. Oxford
University Press, 1999.
[16] C. Rovelli, “Forget time,”F oundations of Physics, vol. 41, no. 9, pp.
1475–1490, 2011.
[17] ——,The Order of Time. Riverhead Books, 2018.
[18] J. Al-Khalili and E. K. Chen, “The decoherent arrow of time and the
entanglement past hypothesis,”Nature Journal, 2026.
[19] A. Eddington,The Nature of the Physical World. Cambridge University
Press, 1928.
[20] H. Price,Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point: New Directions for the
Physics of Time. Oxford University Press, 1996.
[21] H. D. Zeh,The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2001.
[22] E. Schrödinger,What is Life?Cambridge University Press, 1944.
[23] B. J. West and L. A. Griffin, “Entropy production and the kinetics of
biological aging,”Physica A, 2019.
[24] H. J. Morowitz,Time’s Arrow in Living Systems. Academic Press,
1968.
[25] H. Bergson,Duration and Simultaneity. Sophia Perennis, 1922.
[26] M. Flaherty, “Why does time slow down in situations of fear and pain?”
Journal of Biological Psychology, 2018.
[27] A. Reyet al., “Pain and subjective time perception: A neuroscientific
review,”Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 2023.
[28] P. J. Authors, “Perceived duration of pain: Physiological and psycho-
logical factors,”Pain, vol. 75, 1998.
[29] K. Charmaz, “The experience of duration in illness and pain,”Sociology
of Health & Illness, 1991.
[30] S. P. R. Group, “Waiting for the pain to end: A study on human time-
distortion,”Systematic Psychology Reviews, 2025.
[31] S. Toulmin and J. Goodfield,The Discovery of Time. Harper & Row,
1965.
[32] A. Aveni,Empires of Time: Calendars, Clocks, and Cultures. University
Press of Colorado, 2002.
[33] D. Z. Albert,Time and Chance. Harvard University Press, 2000.
[34] F. Reviewers, “Physical time within human time,”Frontiers in Psychol-
ogy, 2022.
[35] S. Authors, “Space and time: Philosophical principles of cosmic origin,”
Journal of Modern Physics, 2026.
[36] J. of Astronomical History, “Cosmic motion and the relativity of cycles,”
Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage, 2024.
[37] L. Hayflick, “Entropy explains aging, disease, and death,”PLoS Genet-
ics, vol. 3, no. 12, p. e220, 2007.
[38] A. Bejan,The Physics of Life: The Evolution of Everything. St. Martin’s
Press, 2016.
[39] L. Hayflick, “Biological aging is no longer an unsolved problem,”Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 1100, pp. 1–13, 2007.
[40] C. S. Pittendrigh, “The temporal organization of living systems,”Annual
Review of Physiology, vol. 55, pp. 16–54, 1993.
