===== PAGE 1 =====
Lecture #7: Background 
 
In section 5.5.2 (heralded by Fig 5.18), Frisk heads for the continuous modes of the 
Pekeris waveguide.  The form for p(r,z) is shown explicitly as an integral in Eq. (5.175).  At this 
point, we will leave Frisk and evaluate an equivalent, but slightly different, integral for the 
continuum   following a paper by Tindle, Stamp, and Guthrie (TSG).  A set of written notes 
exists for this.  While the end results are the same, Frisk’s treatment is somewhat more 
mathematically elegant, whereas Tindle’s is more physically transparent – and both are worth 
reading
. 
 
 Before getting into details of the Tindle et al. paper, let me digress again slightly on the 
quantum physics/oc
ean acoustics connection.  Chris Tindle, the first author, was trained as a 
nuclear physicist (like me), and wandered a field into ocean acoustics in the 1970’s as did I, as it 
was a booming field with lots of jobs then.  This meant he had the physics “bag of tricks” at his 
disposal, and one of them, box normalization, is what he used in this paper.  Cross discipline 
transfer of knowledge/techniques is a very useful thing, and also a lot of fun (as you get to 
dabble in two or more fields, and see a lot more things!) 
 
 Tindle’s paper uses a rather different notation than Frisk’s, but at a graduate level, that’s 
just part of professional life and reading journal papers. ‘Nuff said. 
 
 TSG starts at ground z
ero with the Helmholtz equation in cylindrical coordinates, which 
is OK as you can get a feel for the notation from this.  One immediately sees that the    
normalization diverges for the continuous modes, where the bottom half space is infinite.  
Addressing this, along with evaluating the continuum integral, are the major hurdles to jump.  In 
the first part of the treatment, TSG define Z(z) in the bottom for the continuum, and then show 
how one can use the water-sediment interface BC’s to get the amplitude A.  The phase δ of the 
Z(z) is next.  To get the surface BC right (treating the water as a thin layer, so we can go from 
zero to infinity with the continuous modes), we must set δ = 0, so we’re ok there.  Now, we just 
have to deal with the extra L we’re introduced by the “box normalization.”  This is done in two 
steps.  First, we use the normalization integral, which gives the trapped modes and a huge 
number of discrete continuous modes (and is still a proper S-L system!).  The L still appears in 
the normalization at this point.  The next trick, which gets rid of the L, is to change the 
continuous mode sum to an integral in the limit    .  This conversion gives a 1/L that cancels 
the L we introduced before!  So in the limit, all is well! 
 
 At this point we have an integral free of infinite and arbitrary L factors – so let’s evaluate 
it!  T
his is a rather famous integral in ocean acoustics and seismology, and its exact evaluation is 
actually quite complicated.  But TSG show a very nice, physical approximate evaluation, and it 
is a pretty good one for most purposes. 
 
 Since    (the vertical wave number in the bottom) is the integration variable and ranges 
from    , we can look at “regimes” of   .  It is seen that small    is the important part, and 
that the integral is dominated by the behavior of the denominator.  In particular, the denominator 
is resonant where         , which is just the condition for the hard bottom eigenvalue equation 
that we discussed previously!  This seems odd, but on a moments reflection, we recall that the 
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
phase of the reflection coefficient is zero for        , so that each partial reflection of the 
sound off the bottom back into the waveguide had zero phase – thus the hard bottom condition! 
 
 Give
n a set of “continuum resonances” at the hard bottom eigenvalues, we can merrily 
evaluate these dominant contributions.  TSG do this, and one sees as a result a set of “virtual 
modes” at the hard bottom eigenvalues that continue the set of the discrete Pekeris trapped 
modes!  As we will see, these “virtuals” are very real modes, in fact.  
 
 Physically, the continuum virtual modes have an       behavior, where the     
 depends on the bottom density and sound speed.  This behavior can actually be predicted very 
simply by looking at an “equivalent ray” reflection picture, with the plane wave reflection 
coefficient added in.  (This is assigned as a homework problem).   
 
As a final note on the continuum, it is found in practice that it dies down at a relatively 
small distance from the source for the Pekeris waveguide.  So why care about it?  The answer is 
scattering, which repopulates the continuum via mode coupling.  The continuum is a “loss 
mechanism” that gets invoked very commonly in ocean acoustics! 
 
 There is yet another way to obtain the normal modes of the ocean waveguide, but a bit 
more roundabout.  This is wavenumber integration (the Hankel transform approach).  Its 
rationale is simple – the modes, as we’ve seen, are created by constructive interferences of up 
and down
-going place waves.  But at a point source in a waveguide (which immediately suggests 
a Greens function) produces spherical waves, not plane.  This means we need to decompose a 
spherical wave into a weighted sum of plane waves – which is the “wavenumber integration.”  
Whe
n we carry out this program, we indeed generate the modal picture, as we will see. 
 
 We start by looking at the problem of a point source over an infinite reflective halfspace 
(the sea bottom or surface).  This is our old “Lloyds mirror” setup, and is shown in Figure 4.13.  
Eq. (4.90) is the Helmholtz eq. for the system, which we 2-D Fourier transform to get the “depth 
dependent Greene function” found in 4.92.  The 2-D Fourier transformer pair between p and g is 
shown in Eqs. 4.93 and 4.94.  We now want a solution to Eq. 4.92, which we get by 
incorporating the reflecting boundary conditions and using the standard endpoint method for 
Green’s functions.  Doing this gives the g in Eqs. 4.98 and 4.99.  The forms one sees in Eqs. 
4.101 and 4.102, which are integrated over the horizontal wavenumbers, are in fact the plane 
waves decomposition of the point source incident and reflected fields.  So, first task 
accomplished! 
 
 The discussion just following Eqs. 4.101 and 4.102 also emphasizes that the 
decomposition must include homogeneous and inhomogeneous (imaginary/decaying) plane 
waves. 
 
 If one assumes cylindrical symmetry for the ocean waveguide (usually a good start, 
except on slopes and other regions of strong range dependence), one can fold the 2-D Fourier 
transform into a 1-D Hankel transform, shown in Eqs. 4.106 to 4.111.  Note that β is the angle to 
the source and α is the wave vector angle.  Doing this greatly simplifies things calculationally.  
The Hankel transform pair, Eqs. 4.108 and 4.110 will be the key to many developments. 
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
The next part of the notes show how to use the Hankel transform pair to both see the 
modal structure of the full waveguide (water column and bottom) and also, how to use it to set 
up a nice inverse problem for the ocean bottom properties!  (One can use either g (  ) or R (  ) 
to get c(z), α(Z), ρ(Z), and we’ve pursued both!). 
 
 The course notes show how one uses the endpoint method and HT to get the wave 
function for the point source in a full waveguide, and are pretty explicit.  The slightly messy 
looking Green function shown in Step 7 is the uber-result.  The key features of this g (       ) 
are:  1) it has poles at the real mode eigenvalues and 2) the R in it can accommodate any type of 
layered bottom (i.e., it is very general). 
 
Let’s look at this g (       ) for our two “well understood” waveguides, the hard bottom 
and Pekeris.  First we need the   , which is a trivial    = 1 for a hard bottom; we also show the 
plot for a typical Pekeris.  If we look at g for these cases, we see that there are sharp peaks 
(poles) at the trapped mode values, as expected.  One intriguing result is that a “less peaky, but 
substantial, virtual mode peak shows for the Pekeris waveguide at just the hard bottom value!!  
Gratifying!  We also see a phase flip of   at pole positions (why? ).  If we insert the source in a 
null of a mode, we see a very distinct zero (and π phase jump).  Interestingly, this works for both 
real and virtual modes!  Well, this is maybe not so surprising if we look at the form we generated 
for the virtual modes. 
 
One of the rationales for getting g (       ) wa s to try to use it to get at the bottom 
properties, and we do that next.  Our notes show the sequence for this.  As a historical note, it 
was initially thought that the reflection coefficient we would obtain would be the best way to get 
at the bottom prope
rties.  It turned out that the Green’s Function modal peaks were in fact easier 
to use, as they are large, robust features!  However,   is still in play even today, though it is 
harder to obtain – there is a large body of formal inverse theory based on    that also makes it 
attractive. 
 
The slide “Shallow Water HT experiment” shows a typical measurement of p(r), which 
can also be thought of as a synthetic aperture array.  If we make this “simple” measurement 
(actually, not so damn simple), we can do a finite aperture Hankel transform (hmmmm –
watsdat?) and see
 what we get for g (  ).  The pressure field we measure in the geometry shown 
has two trapped modes and one virtual mode, whose fields are shown in the next slide.   
 
If we compare the g (  ) for the infinite aperture and a 1000m finite aperture, for the 
example of a hard bottom, we get the (predictably smeared out) plot shown as “hard bottom.”  If 
we extend the aperture to 5000m, the peaks look much nicer, though the phases aren’t quite 
right.  (The reason for the latter is more subtle – let’s pass on that one for now!).  Next we look at 
the g (  ) f
or the Pekeris waveguide for 1000m aperture and the “theoretical case” (infinite 
aperture).  Again, the trapped peaks look a bit ratty for finite aperture, but the virtual mode looks 
ok!  This is because the
 virtual mode p(r) dies off quickly in r, and so we only need a short 
aperture to “capture it.”  And again, for the 5000m aperture, the trapped peaks look better.  
(There is a standard Fourier        relation that tells how well we can resolve the peak with a 
finite aperture– very useful). 
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Next, we look at how well we retrieve the reflection coefficient from g (  ).  It turns out, 
both for the hard bottom and the Pekeris waveguides – not very well.  This is because    has a 
very complicated phase structure in terms of the g (  )and phase errors are pernicious and 
unforgiving.  So initially at least,    was abandoned for doing inverses in favor of utilizing the g 
(  ) peaks. 
 
As a parting look at HT techniques, we look at Chapter 6 of Frisk, sections 6.1, 6.2 and 
6.3.  These sections fill in the derivation of the      and g (       ) discussed in the previous 
instructors notes.  They also show that, using the asymptotic form of   
   , we can approximate 
the HT by a FT and then of course use an FFT –> computer speed!  This latter topic will be 
examined further in the numerical methods section. 
 
We now take another step towards describing a more realistic ocean waveguide, one that 
varies in range along a source receiver track.  This is almost a complete description for the 
acoustics problem; it only neglects out-of-plane, fully 3-D acoustic propagation.  (We will get to 
that later.)  The range-dependent Helmholtz equation (COA Eq. 5.265) is not strictly separable 
into a          type solution, so one uses the trick of defining “local modes” and a partially 
separable solution, with factors       and          as shown in Eq. 5.266 of COA (2nd Edition), 
where the local modes are defined in Eq. 5.267.  Substitution of this solution into the Helmholtz 
equation gives an interesting result -  the modes are coupled along the range, and thus exchange 
energy
!  (See Eqs. 5.27-5.273).  This makes sense, in that the range dependent 
refraction/reflections change the grazing angles of the energy with range, thus sending it to 
different modes.  One interesting bit about Eqs. 5.271-5.275 is that they totally ignore coupling 
to the continuum.  But it is easy to see that energy can refract/scatter above the local critical 
grazing angle, so already something is missing.  (Q: Can you replace the continuum by a few 
virtual modes here?  This could be useful if it worked.  Hmmm.) 
 
Coupled mode calculations are a bit messy, though doable, and the results of seeing how 
the modes couple with range are often very enlightening.  However, one can generally get a 
coupled mode result (including the continuum!) by using parabolic equation methods and then 
projecting out the local modes.  So, on a scale of 1-10, I’m probably not a big fan of doing 
coupled mode calculations! 
 
However, one can also often appeal to the “Laziness can be a virtue” theorem, and get 
something good out of it.  We can just throw away the coupling coefficients (if the range 
dependenc
e is “weak,” the condition for which is not too hard to show) and get what is 
hilariously misnamed the “adiabatic solution” in which each mode keeps its own energy, but 
varies in range due to having a local modal wavenumber      .  This solution is shown in Eq. 
(5.280), and is so simple that it also should be put in ones arsenal of “simple analytical solution” 
tools.  In section 5.11.4, COA shows a nice example of the range independent, adiabatic and 
coupled mode solutions in Fig. 5.29.  The differences are apparent and striking! 
 
The examples shown in Fig. 5.24 of COA are nice worked examples for the reader, but to 
get a “hands-on” feel for coupled and adiabatic modes, it is always useful to generate a “toy 
example” and play with its workings.  This is done nicely in Katznelson and Petnikov’s “Shallow 
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
Water Acoustics”, section 3.2.  Written in a charming Russian-English prose (with a love of long 
sentences with many phrases), K & P start with the same local mode equation as COA, Eq 3.13, 
and then propose a radial WKB solution whose coefficients   
       are TBD.  By ignoring 
backscatter (the   
    ) and terms with second derivatives in r (which says you take the radial 
direction curvature of any waveguide feature as small), K&P reduce things to a system of 
coupled first order DE’s in r, to go along with the local modes.  This is much easier to work with.  
The (only for first order) coupling coefficient for the system is shown in Eq. 3.19, and the rather 
simple solution for the   
     is shown in Eq. 3.20.  If one sets the coupling coefficient     to 
zero in Eq. 3.20, the adiabatic solution ala COA is again obtained; Eq. 3.21. 
 
But, the more interesting part now is the coupling!  In Eq. 3.23-3.24, K&P explicitly 
show the criterion for keeping/discarding the coupling (which we mentioned was simple – it is!).  
This is im
portant in practical usage. 
 
 With a simple coupled mode equation, the coupling coefficient, and a solution in hand, 
we can explore the characteristics of a coupled mode system easily if we have a simple set of 
modes.  The simplest, as we’ve seen, is the hard bottom waveguide, and thus K&P used just this 
waveguide with a variable bottom topography as their example.  Eq. (3.25) shows the local 
modes for the example, and Eq. (3.27) the resulting coupling coefficient.  “Close coupling” and 
the adiabatic criterion are shown clearly and cleanly in Eqs. (3.27-3.31). This toy problem in 
K&P is perhaps one of the clearest pedagogical examples to be found. 
 
 To conclude this long-ish lecture, the re is a bit of simple “supplemental material” for 
those who might need a little brushing up on ocean acoustic normal modes (From Clay and 
Medwin) and end point methods for  obtaining the Greens Function (from Myint-U).  In 
engineering programs, academic backgrounds are often diverse, and there are occasional gaps 
that need a little filling! 
  
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
2.682 Acoustical Oceanography
Spring 2012
 
 
 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
