===== PAGE 1 =====
Physical Sciences
December 19, 2019
Unifying quantum mechanics with Einstein’s general
relativity
The quantum nature of gravity is an enigma which has eluded even the brightest of physicists for many decades. Now, Dr
Norma G. Sanchez at the French CNRS LERMA Observatory of Paris-PSL Sorbonne Université describes a possible
solution. Her approach takes the form of a general theory, incorporating both quantum mechanics and Einstein’s theory
of general relativity. If correct, her results could bring researchers a step forward in their knowledge of how the physics
which plays out on the very smallest of scales can be compatible with that which occurs on the very largest cosmological
scales.
The question of whether light is a wave or a particle has baffled physicists since the 17th century. The problem first emerged
when Isaac Newton developed his ‘corpuscle’ theory, which described particles of light which must only travel in straight lines;
as seen in the reflection in a mirror. At the same time, however, other physicists including Christiaan Huygens and Thomas
Young proposed that light must propagate as a wave, as it displays properties like diffraction and interference.
In fact, neither of these theories are necessarily ‘wrong’, since both of them are consistent with experimental observations when
the right context is applied. On quantum scales, light travels in packets which we now call photons, but also reliably follows
Maxwell’s equations, which describe the dynamics of classical electromagnetic waves. To explain how both theories can be
correct at the same time, physicists needed a way to unify both classical electrodynamics and quantum physics into a deeper,
more all-encompassing theory. Known among physicists as ‘quantum electrodynamics’, the theory was by no means simple to
develop, but nonetheless, it has been done.

===== PAGE 2 =====
Generalising classical physics
At around the beginning of the 20th century, several physicists began work on revolutionary theories to explain why matter
appears to behave differently on extremely small scales. In the subsequent decades, the resulting field of quantum mechanics
resolved many questions which classical physics didn’t have the means to answer. Ultimately, the success of the theory
stemmed from the fact that quantum theory is a ‘generalised’ theory, of which classical physics is just one specialised branch.
This means that while physics appears to be non-classical on quantum scales, classical behaviours emerge on larger scales,
where quantum processes become far less relevant overall. Ultimately, therefore, quantum mechanics unites explanations for
physical behaviours which are observed on a variety of scales. Yet despite the successes of quantum theory, physicists have
realised for some time that even quantum mechanics is not general enough to explain all of the physics we have observed in
the universe.
The incompleteness of gravity
Again, first described by Newton, the effects of gravity can be accurately described in many situations using classical physics
alone. However, these theories are unable to fully explain all phenomena ever observed by astronomers. Albert Einstein
famously resolved this issue through his theory of general relativity. His equations generalised gravity to a more all-
encompassing theory; this time, to a geometric model which unites space and time, named spacetime.
Fig. 1 (left): The quantum light-cone in a space-time diagram (time is the vertical axis). Fig. 2 (right): The known classical light-cone (future and
past) of classical relativity in a space-time diagram is a special case of Fig. 1. Copyright Norma Sanchez.
Yet although Einstein’s theory has been watertight enough to hold up to even the latest astronomical observations, it appears
to be completely incompatible with quantum mechanics. For physicists, this calls for an even deeper generalisation, which has
been pre-emptively given the name ‘quantum gravity’. In her research, Dr Sanchez aims to realise such a theory, in which both
quantum mechanics and general relativity are particular branches which are contained on their appropriate scales. To do this,
she has incorporated physical theories which have emerged since Einstein first drew out his famous equations. The key point in
her approach is that instead of starting from gravity and quantizing it, she starts from quantum theory and extends it to the high
energy scales where gravity and quantum effects are of the same importance.
 Dr Sanchez uses ‘semi-classical’ gravity as a standard theory, which emerges from her own
theories in particular situations. 
Building on an intermediate theory
Later on in the 20th century, a wide variety of intriguing discoveries about the nature of our universe began to emerge. These
included Stephen Hawking’s celebrated explanations for how black holes decay through radiation, as well as Cosmic Microwave
Background radiation – a faint source of light found across the entire sky, which indicates the density structure of the entire
universe.
These theories are united in the approximation that matter displays quantum behaviour, but moves around according to a
classical description of spacetime. Known as ‘semi-classical’ gravity, this model acts as a useful bridge between the separated
theories of quantum mechanics and general relativity, and a unified theory of quantum gravity. Because of this, Dr Sanchez uses
it as a standard theory, which emerges from her own theories in particular situations.
Extending classical-quantum duality
While previous theories which incorporate semi-classical gravity have described vast astronomical structures, Dr Sanchez brings
it down to quantum scales in her research. To describe how gravity could work in this regime, she starts from the classical-

===== PAGE 3 =====
Einstein’s theory of general
relativity solved many, but not all,
issues relating to gravity.
quantum duality of quantum theory and extends it across and beyond the Planck scale. This is
where a unification of three fundamental physical constants occurs: Planck’s constant,
originating from quantum mechanics; Newton’s gravitational constant from classical
gravitation; and the speed of light, which Einstein proved to be constant through general
relativity.
Dr Sanchez has now started a theory which incorporates these three constants into one unified
structure. In doing this, the property of ‘wave-particle-gravity’ duality, or ‘classical-quantum
gravity’ duality emerges. If Dr Sanchez’s calculations are correct, it could provide a solution to
the puzzle which has eluded physicists for centuries.
Emerging results from generalisation
Within Dr Sanchez’s universal theory, wave-particle duality of known quantum physics emerges
as a special case for when the right circumstances are applied, instead of being a general rule.
This means that instead of being at odds with each other, both theories that light is wave-like
and particle-like are simply special branches of the same, more deeply rooted theory.
This also allows for the emergence of properties including the classical-quantum duality of spacetime, whose quantum nature
has remained highly elusive so far. In addition, Dr Sanchez claims that an entirely new quantum domain emerges which is not
present in the classical description of spacetime – giving physicists a more complete description of its properties. Within this
domain, discrete levels of space-time appear at the quantum Planck scale. On classical macroscopic scales, the collective
behaviours of these levels appear indistinguishable from the space-time continuum which physicists are more familiar with.
Dr Sanchez’s work could transform our understanding of how the universe works. Image credit: Denis Belitsky/Shutterstock.com
Re-drawing the light cone
One particularly important result of Dr Sanchez’s theory has been the unexpected emergence of a ‘quantum light cone’, which
doesn’t appear within a classical description of the universe. In general relativity, a light cone describes the path taken by light
emerging from a single point in time and space; along with all paths taken by the light reaching the point as the flash occurs.
The cone shape emerges since all light must reach the same distance from the point at a given time no matter its direction.
The boundary of the cone arises because the speed of light is the highest possible velocity throughout the entire universe.
 One particularly important result of Dr Sanchez’s theory has been the unexpected
emergence of a ‘quantum light cone’. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Within Dr Sanchez’s theory, the new quantum light cone includes a small space between the tips of the opposite-facing cones,
which are, in fact, hyperbola-shaped instead of pointed. Quantum properties then emerge within this space, in the region of
time and space immediately surrounding the flash. On larger scales, where quantum effects are no longer relevant, the classical
light cone re-emerges; ultimately allowing both previous theories to work in harmony with each other.
Classical-quantum duality in black holes
Finally, Dr Sanchez has applied her theory of classical-quantum duality to black holes, whose inner workings are masked by an
‘event horizon’ from which light cannot escape. So far, this has meant that the physical nature of black hole interiors has
completely eluded astronomers.
According to Dr Sanchez, the outer regions of black holes are either classical or semi-classical, while the behaviours of their
interiors are totally governed by quantum mechanics. The event horizon disappears at the quantum level, a ‘quantum border’
emerges at which the interiors and exteriors of black holes become the same on quantum scales. Moreover, the classical space-
time central singularity – the point at the centre of a black hole at which curvature had been theorised to become infinite, is
avoided in this case. According to Dr Sanchez, the singularity must disappear at the quantum level, to remain consistent with
the smearing of singularities on quantum scales.
A transformation in understanding
Over the past decades, potential solutions to quantum gravity and several types of mathematical dualities have been hotly
debated, and it has remained uncertain whether or not our fundamental understanding of physics needs to be completely
rethought. But Dr Sanchez understood that is the physical and universal wave-particle duality of quantum physics which is at the
root of the solution. Ultimately, a unified idea of the quantum nature of astronomical-scale phenomena could transform our
understanding of how the universe works, and would set the stage for an exciting new era of theoretical physics and
cosmology.
Personal Response
What do you find most inspiring about your work?
<itemprop=”acceptedAnswer”> The fact that it is a creative, endless work with total freedom, motivated by true advance and
discovery beyond current knowledge.
Download this Article

===== PAGE 5 =====
Article References
Sanchez, N.G. (2019). New Quantum Structure of Space-Time. Gravitation and Cosmology, 25(2), 91-102.
The present article is one from a trilogy published by the author in 2019 on the subject, and from which much more
developments are going on: Sanchez, N.G. (2019). The classical-quantum duality of nature including gravity. International Journal
of Modern Physics D28, No. 03, 1950055.
Behind the Research
Prof Dr Norma G. Sanchez
Prof Dr Norma G. Sanchez is director of research at the French National Centre for Scientific Research and director of the
International School Daniel Chalonge – Hector de Vega. Her first work was on the scattering and absorption theory by
black holes and Hawking radiation, she obtained for the first time the whole absorption spectrum of the back hole,
(French These d’Etat, 1978), connected Einstein equations to other known non-linear theories and their solutions,
developed new approaches to quantum fields and strings in curved space-times and found new physical effects. Norma
does research in Physical Cosmology, Theoretical Physics, The Standard Model of the Universe from the early to the late
universe, with Inflation, the CMB and primordial gravitons, Warm Dark Matter, Dark Energy and quantum physics.
Contact Details
Research Objectives
Prof Dr Norma Sanchez’s theory unifies quantum mechanics with Einstein’s general relativity.
Cite this Article
DOI: 10.32907/RO-111-138141
Create Harvard Reference
Creative Commons Licence
(CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
What does this mean?
Share: You can copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format

===== PAGE 6 =====
This feature article was created with the approval of the research team featured. This is a
More Articles
What can Occam’s razor principle tell us about theories of dark matter?
Read This Article
Physical Sciences
Hydrogen’s Second Flavour: A Solution to Dark Matter?
Read This Article
Physical Sciences

===== PAGE 7 =====
collaborative production, supported by those featured to aid free of charge, global distribution.
Want to read more articles like this?
Sign up to our mailing list and read about the topics that matter to you the most.
Sign Up!
7 thoughts on “Unifying quantum mechanics with Einstein’s general
relativity”
1. 
  Richard Waller Jr says:
April 8, 2020 at 4:51 pm
If these formulas can be demonstrated this could be the golden goose we have been longing for. We need to keep a
close eye on Dr. S.s’ work.
Log in to Reply
2. 
  Rock Brentwood says:
June 18, 2020 at 7:11 pm
I won’t discuss the merits of the idea, but this much needs to be noted and is almost uniformly ignored.
(1) The law of gravity has been verified down to the level of single neutrons https://physics.aps.org/articles/v11/s34
(2) Particle physics, which is grounded in Quantum Theory, is well-established
(3) A gravitational monopole solution with the same mass, electroweak and color charge as any of the fundamental
particles (possibly except neutrinos) is a NAKED ring singularity – essentially a mini-Stargate. There is serious causality
violation in the vicinity of such singularities; even time travel.
Whatever fundamental particles are, if they are not this, then they are something (a) that is not accounted for by General
Relativity and (b) lies well within our capacity to problem. If they are this, then (c) we’re on the verge of probing a
causality-violating sector of General Relativity, by virtue of (1).
So, any (and all) speculations about the causal structure of spacetime — particularly what that structure looks like from the
perspective of Quantum Theory are on the table – including Dr. Sanchez’s.
I believe that the world is a hybrid classical-quantum system; which is a highly non-trivial proposition by virtue of the large
number of no-go theorems that populate the minefield; that gravity is classical – the metric, the frame field, the Weyl
tensor, the light cone field and gravitational radiation (c.f. “Exclusion of standard ℏ ω  gravitons by LIGO observation”
https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.04437), though the connection and torsion may be quantized; that the Born Rule itself arises as
a consequence of the way in which the classical and quantum sectors interface, particularly under the action of
gravitational decoherence.
Log in to Reply
3. 
  david Meyer says:
June 19, 2020 at 9:17 am
A very commendable advance based on dual particle wave behaviour of photons. I have been doing a similar focussed
thought process in an amateur way as I am a biochemist who noticed that physics had several large problems. After many
floundering years I reach simple conclusions which can explain rather a lot. One may be relevant to Dr Sanchez to
progress further, namely that another basic property of photons is that they do not thermodynamically with the universe
(hence with universal time) except by gravitation, that is their mass equivalent will alter space and be altered by relativistic
spacetime without their wave function collapsing, hence they do cause slight movements of the macroscopic world and
therefore slightly affect the thermodynamic evolution of the universe (time) whilst remaining quantised. In other
interactions time only passes (for the universe) when the ‘wave function collapses’ and the energy is absorbed. The
quantised world is therefore a different time zone / dimension / or if the end of the universe is a dispersed photon cloud,
it all takes place under conditions of time at the end of the universe.
(My own conclusions agree that it is time and scale that separate the main physical theories, but that time itself should be
represented as universal time or more specifically Universal dates, which actually is entropy. This could be evaluated in
physical formulae I think simply by placing a minimal S(entropy) for the start of the universe and a maximal S for the end –
this could be 0 and 1 when normalised, and using it instead of ‘t’ (seconds). Then all quantised materials would have an S

===== PAGE 8 =====
of 1 or close to 1 and practically are not part of the macro-universe which is why quantum behaviour, like entanglement,
seems counter-intuitive. Changing t to S allows quantum behaviour to ‘make sense’. One aspect I remain unclear on : the
red-shift, maybe it is not the result of space expanding, but the cause, ie. light is dark energy, could it be named any
worse? and the energy lost increases the wavelength of the light.)
I wanted to try and use the dimensions of entropy inserted for time in the equations of relativity and quantum theory to
see what sense might arise, but I do not have the mathematical ability. Maybe my ideas will reach someone who has.
Log in to Reply
4. 
  Silvio says:
July 26, 2020 at 6:14 pm
Spyroe theory uses similar ideology but shows the light cones ends not as a hyperbola but a single helix which connects
to the outbound light cone.
Doing this on the 3 axis forms a shape that can represent one quantum of energy, displaying characteristics of both
general relativity and quantum mechanics.
Log in to Reply
5. 
  Caleigh Fisher says:
September 6, 2020 at 8:22 pm
Have you used this using a 5d manifold?
With a degenerate Toroid one realizes that the inside of event horizon shares the same surface as the outside of
everywhere. All geodesic end up at event horizon which is concentration of mass/energy since the flow is always downhill.
Towards density.
Log in to Reply
6. 
  ian bartlett says:
March 30, 2021 at 1:38 pm
Possibly/probably a stupid question; But what existed before the Big Bang?
Log in to Reply
7. 
  James Rey says:
August 7, 2021 at 4:48 pm
I call it quantum relativity
More or less if time is not linear than you can combine both theories
And I believe what we think is time is not
Everything had happened before and we just can’t completely see it
Free will is still exists but how can predestination exist
Well if you say time is not linear and everything happened then it’s not predestination it’s destination
I have been writing a book and I finally came to that conclusion
Log in to Reply
Leave a Reply
You must be logged in to post a comment.
Get social with us!
   

===== PAGE 9 =====
Research Outreach
Suite 20 Westend Office Suites
Westend
Stonehouse
GL10 3FA
United Kingdom
T: +44 1453 828 951.
E: au @ ch.org
Publication
Our Company
FAQ
Testimonials
Our Services
Privacy Notice
Cookies Notice
Terms of Use
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion & Sustainable Practice statement
Accessibility
CONTACT US
Arts & Humanities
Behavioural Sciences
Biology
Business & Economics
Earth & Environment
Education & Training
Engineering & Technology
Health & Medicine
Physical Sciences
Thought Leaders
