===== PAGE 1 =====
The self exists and it is an illusion
Is there a self within consciousness?
26th August 2025
 cite
Ricky Williamson | Philosopher, Contributing Editor and Production Lead at the IAI and
HowTheLightGetsIn.
1,470 words
Read time: approx. 7 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
From modern figures like Sam Harris to philosophers like David Hume, many claim
that the self is an illusion. However, what this claim amounts to continues to puzzle
and confuse us. The reality of some kind of self seems self-evident. And yet, many
appear sure the self is illusory. Contributing Editor Ricky Williamson argues that both
things are true: the self exists, and it is an illusion. The answer depends on our
understanding of the structure of consciousness and the nature of the self in question.
For more on this topic, the HowTheLightGetsIn festival will be debating The
Structure of Consciousness, featuring Julian Baggini, Susan Schneider, Karl
Friston, and Alex O'Connor this September 21st. Book your tickets now.
 
From spiritualists to neuroscientists to philosophers, it is common to hear the
argument that the self is an illusion. But what is this self? And is it indeed an illusion?
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
Penrose’s theory
of consciousness
supported by new
quantum evidence
New studies
suggest
consciousness
exists in
organisms
without brains
Patterns are alive,
and we are living
patterns
Kierkegaard, Bob
Dylan, and how to
become yourself
Related Videos:
Consciousness
has evolutionary
roots, with Eva
Jablonka
On the face of it, of course I exist, and therefore of course this I, which is this self,
exists. I am here. I am writing. The self is. The self exists.
But then what is this “I,” this self? Descartes famously stated, “I think, therefore I am.”
Here lie many of our answers—but also much of our confusion. “I think, therefore I
am.” I am thinking, there is thought, therefore there is an I. But if I am the one thinking
in the first place, isn’t this a circular argument? It is—unless the “I” at the start of the
sentence is a different “I” from the one at the end. As we will soon find, this is the
case! They are different “I”s.
SUGGESTED VIEWING
In search of oneself
With Joanna Kavenna, John Vervaeke, Isabel Millar,
Frank Furedi
Descartes’ famous sentence could have many meanings, depending on how we
understand some of the words in it. “Thinking” has two meanings. One is the linguistic
process of thoughts appearing within consciousness. The thought “I need to cook
dinner later,” the thought “God, I hate Descartes!”… this stream of linguistic thoughts
that appear within consciousness is one definition of what thinking is. And we can
expand this to include not just linguistic thoughts, but also imagined images or beings
(like Descartes’ imagined evil demon), and emotions like anger.
But notice how I worked the word “consciousness” in there. There lies the second
meaning of the word “thinking.” For some, to “think” means to be conscious, to have
“thought” means to have conscious awareness. And we can have conscious
awareness of things like linguistic thoughts, but also awareness of things like sights,
sounds, touch, and objects. Some call the blank screen of consciousness on which all
phenomena appear “thinking” and “thought.”
___
If we use our first definition of thinking, then Descartes’ “I”
exists because it can think linguistic thoughts. If we use the
second definition, Descartes’ “I” exists because it is
conscious.
___
The same applies to the word “mind.” For some, mind means “the thing that thinks
linguistic thoughts,” whereas for others, “mind” means consciousness.
The double meaning of these words has run amok in philosophy. Much debate
revolves around people using these words in different ways, to mean different things,
completely talking past each other.


===== PAGE 3 =====
21 June 2026
Reply 
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
stephen morley
There are a lot of thoughts in this piece. I wonder where they came from and how they were put together. Obviously they are not random, so
there must be something that selects them, reflects on them and makes them into a reasoned argument. What could that be?
Free will is real
Consciousness is
quantum
mechanical, with
Stuart Hameroff
Freedom and fate
And we can see that, depending on how we use the word “think” in Descartes’ “I think,
therefore I am,” the sentence has radically different meanings. If we use our first
definition of thinking, then Descartes’ “I” exists because it can think linguistic thoughts.
If we use the second definition, Descartes’ “I” exists because it is conscious.
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too

===== PAGE 4 =====
20 September 2025
Reply 
30 August 2025
Reply 
27 August 2025
Reply 
Themis Matsoukas
As a prerequisite for all cognition the Self cannot cognize itself to be an illusion, or anything else for that matter.
cristian diaz
Great post Mr Williamson
Abhishek Rai
“I”itself is a thought. When there are no thoughts, there is still a perception of being me, which has always existed and has never changed.
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
