===== PAGE 1 =====
The Strong Free Will
T
heorem
John H. Conway and Simon Kochen
T
h
e two theories that revolutionized
physics in the twentieth century, rela-
tivity and quantum mechanics, are full
of predictions that defy common sense.
Recently, we used three such para-
doxical ideas to prove “The Free Will Theorem”
(strengthened here), which is the culmination of
a series of theorems about quantum mechanics
that began in the 1960s. It asserts, roughly, that if
indeed we humans have free will, then elementary
particles already have their own small share of
this valuable commodity. More precisely, if the
experimenter can freely choose the directions
in which to orient his apparatus in a certain
measurement, then the particle’s response (to
be pedantic—the universe’s response near the
particle) is not determined by the entire previous
history of the universe.
Our argument combines the well-known conse-
quence of relativity theory, that the time order of
space-like separated events is not absolute, with
the EPR paradox discovered by Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen in 1935, and the Kochen-Specker Para-
dox of 1967 (See [2].) We follow Bohm in using a
spin version of EPR and Peres in using his set of 33
directions, rather than the original conﬁguration
used by Kochen and Specker. More contentiously,
the argument also involves the notion of free will,
but we postpone further discussion of this to the
last section of the article.
Note that our proof does not mention “probabil-
ities” or the “states” that determine them, which is
John H. Conway is professor of mathematics at Princeton
U
niversity. His email address is jhorcon@yahoo.com.
Simon Kochen is professor of mathematics at Prince-
ton University. His email address is kochen@math.
princeton.edu.
fortunate because these theoretical notions have
l
ed to much confusion. For instance, it is often said
that the probabilities of events at one location can
be instantaneously changed by happenings at an-
other space-like separated location, but whether
that is true or even meaningful is irrelevant to
our proof, which never refers to the notion of
probability.
For readers of the original version [1] of our
theorem, we note that we have strengthened it
by replacing the axiom FIN together with the as-
sumption of the experimenters’ free choice and
temporal causality by a single weaker axiom MIN.
The earlier axiom FIN of [1], that there is a ﬁnite
upper bound to the speed with which informa-
tion can be transmitted, has been objected to by
several authors. Bassi and Ghirardi asked in [3]:
what precisely is “information”, and do the “hits”
and “ﬂashes” of GRW theories (discussed in the
Appendix) count as information? Why cannot hits
be transmitted instantaneously, but not count as
signals? These objections miss the point. The only
information to which we applied FIN is the choice
made by the experimenter and the response of
the particle, as signaled by the orientation of the
apparatus and the spot on the screen. The speed
of transmission of any other information is irrel-
evant to our argument. The replacement of FIN
by MIN has made this fact explicit. The theorem
has been further strengthened by allowing the
particles’ responses to depend on past half-spaces
rather than just the past light cones of [1].
The Axioms
We now present and discuss the three axioms on
which the theorem rests.
226 N otices of the AMS Volume 56, Number 2

===== PAGE 2 =====
Figure 1. The three colored cubes in Figure 1a are obtained by r otating the white cube through
45◦◦◦ about its coordinate axes. The 33 directions are the symmetry axes of the colored cubes and
pass through the spots in Figure 1a. Figure 1b shows where these directions meet the white cube.
(i) The SPIN Axiom and the Kochen-Specker Para-
d
ox
Richard Feynman once said that “If someone
tells you they understand quantum mechanics,
then all you’ve learned is that you’ve met a liar.”
Our ﬁrst axiom initially seems easy to understand,
but beware—Feynman’s remark applies! The ax-
iom involves the operation called “measuring the
squared spin of a spin 1 particle”, which always
produces the result 0 or 1.
SPIN Axiom: Measurements of the squared (com-
ponents of) spin of a spin 1 particle in three orthog-
onal directions always give the answers 1, 0, 1 in
some order.
Quantum mechanics predicts this axiom since
for a spin 1 particle the squared spin operators
s 2
x , s2
y , s2
z commute and have sum 2.
This “101 property” is paradoxical because it
already implies that the quantity that is suppos-
edly being measured cannot in fact exist before
its “measurement”. For otherwise there would be
a function deﬁned on the sphere of possible di-
rections taking each orthogonal triple to 1 , 0, 1 in
some order. It follows from this that it takes the
same value on pairs of opposite directions, and
never takes two orthogonal directions to 0.
We call a function deﬁned on a set of direc-
tions that has all three of these properties a “101
function” for that set. But unfortunately we have:
The Kochen-Specker Paradox: There does not
exist a 101 function for the 33 pairs of directions of
Figure 1 (the Peres conﬁguration).
Proof. We shall call a node even or odd according
as the putative 101 function is supposed to take
the value 0 or 1 at it, and we progressively assign
even or odd numbers to the nodes in Figure 1b as
we establish the contradiction.
We shall use some easily justiﬁed orthogonal-
ities—for instance the coordinate triple rotates to
the triple (2, 3, −3) that starts our proof, which
in turn rotates (about −1) to the triples (8, −7, 9)
and (−8, 7, −9) that ﬁnish it.
Without loss of generality nodes 1 and −1 are
odd and node 2 even, forcing 3 and −3 to be odd.
Now nodes 4 and -x form a triple with 3, so one of
them (without loss of generality 4) is even. In view
of the reﬂection that interchanges −4 and x while
ﬁxing 4 and -x, we can without loss of generality
suppose that −4 is also even.
There is a 90◦ rotation about 1 that moves 7, 5, 9
to 4, 6, x, showing that 5 is orthogonal to 4, while
1, 5, 6 is a triple, and also that 6 is orthogonal to
both 7 and 9. Thus 5 is odd, 6 even, and 7, 9 odd.
A similar argument applies to nodes −5, −6, −7,
−9.
Finally, 8 forms a triple with −7 and 9, as does
−8 with 7 and −9. So both these nodes must
be even, and since they are orthogonal, this is a
contradiction that completes the proof. □
Despite the Kochen-Specker paradox, no physi-
cist would question the truth of our SPIN axiom,
since it follows from quantum mechanics, which
is one of the most strongly substantiated scien-
tiﬁc theories of all time. However, it is important
to realize that we do not in fact suppose all of
February 2 009 Notices of the AMS 227

===== PAGE 3 =====
quantum mechanics, but only two of its testable
c
onsequences, namely this axiom SPIN and the
axiom TWIN of the next section.
It is true that these two axioms deal only with
idealized forms of experimentally veriﬁable pre-
dictions, since they refer to exact orthogonal and
parallel directions in space. However, as we have
shown in [1], the theorem is robust, in that approx-
imate forms of these axioms still lead to a similar
conclusion. At the same time, this shows that any
more accurate modiﬁcations of special relativity
(such as general relativity) and of quantum theory
will not aﬀect the conclusions of the theorem.
(ii) The TWIN Axiom and the EPR Paradox
One of the most curious facts about quantum
mechanics was pointed out by Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen in 1935. This says that even though the
results of certain remotely separated observations
cannot be individually predicted ahead of time,
they can be correlated.
In particular, it is possible to produce a pair of
“twinned” spin 1 particles (by putting them into
the “singleton state” of total spin zero) that will
give the same answers to the above squared spin
measurements in parallel directions. Our “TWIN”
axiom is part of this assertion.
The TWIN Axiom: For twinned spin 1 particles,
suppose experimenter A performs a triple exper-
iment of measuring the squared spin component
of particle a in three orthogonal directions x, y, z,
while experimenter B measures the twinned par-
ticle b in one direction, w . Then if w happens to
be in the same direction as one of x, y, z, experi-
menter B’s measurement will necessarily yield the
same answer as the corresponding measurement
by A.
In fact we will restrict w to be one of the 33 di-
rections in the Peres conﬁguration of the previous
section, and x, y, z to be one of 40 particular or-
thogonal triples, namely the 16 such triples of that
conﬁguration and the 24 further triples obtained
by completing its remaining orthogonal pairs.
(iii) The MIN Axiom, Relativity, and Free Will
One of the paradoxes introduced by relativity
was the fact that temporal order depends on the
choice of inertial frame. If two events are space-
like separated, then they will appear in one time
order with respect to some inertial frames, but
in the reverse order with respect to others. The
two events we use will be the above twinned spin
measurements.
It is usual tacitly to assume the temporal causal-
ity principle that the future cannot alter the past.
Its relativistic form is that an event cannot be inﬂu-
enced by what happens later in any given inertial
frame. Another customarily tacit assumption is
that experimenters are free to choose between
possible experiments. To be precise, we mean that
the choice an experimenter makes is not a func-
tion of the past. We explicitly use only some very
special cases of these assumptions in justifying
our ﬁnal axiom.
The MIN Axiom: Assume that the experiments
performed by A and B are space-like separated.
Then experimenter B can freely choose any one of
the 33 particular directions w , and a’s response
is independent of this choice. Similarly and inde-
pendently, A can freely choose any one of the 40
triples x, y, z, and b’s response is independent of
that choice.
It is the experimenters’ free will that allows the
free and independent choices of x, y, z, and w . But
in one inertial frame—call it the “ A-ﬁrst” frame—
B’s experiment will only happen some time later
than A’s, and so a’s response cannot, by temporal
causality, be aﬀected by B’s later choice of w . In a
B-ﬁrst frame, the situation is reversed, justifying
the ﬁnal part of MIN. (We shall discuss the mean-
ing of the term “independent” more fully in the
Appendix.)
The (Strong) Free Will Theorem
Our theorem is a strengthened form of the original
version of [1]. Before stating it, we make our terms
more precise. We use the words “properties”,
“events”, and “information” almost interchange-
ably: whether an event has happened is a property,
and whether a property obtains can be coded by
an information-bit. The exact general meaning of
these terms, which may vary with some theory
that may be considered, is not important, since we
only use them in the speciﬁc context of our three
axioms.
To say that A’s choice of x, y, z is free means
more precisely that it is not determined by (i.e.,
is not a function of) what has happened at earlier
times (in any inertial frame). Our theorem is the
surprising consequence that particle a’s response
must be free in exactly the same sense, that it is
not a function of what has happened earlier (with
respect to any inertial frame).
The Free Will Theorem . The axioms SPIN, TWIN
and MIN imply that the response of a spin 1 parti-
cle to a triple experiment is free—that is to say, is
not a function of properties of that part of the uni-
verse that is earlier than this response with respect
to any given inertial frame.
Proof. We suppose to the contrary—this is the
“functional hypothesis” of [1]—that particle a’s
response (i, j, k) to the triple experiment with
directions x, y, z is given by a function of proper-
ties α, . . . that are earlier than this response with
respect to some inertial frame F. We write this as
θF
a (α) = one of (0, 1, 1), (1, 0, 1), (1, 1, 0)
(in which only a typical one of the properties α is
indicated).
228 N otices of the AMS Volume 56, Number 2

===== PAGE 4 =====
Similarly we suppose that b’ s response 0 or 1
for the direction w is given by a function
θG
b (β) = one of 0 or 1
of properties β, . . . that are earlier with respect to
a possibly diﬀerent inertial frame G.
(i) If either one of these functions, say θF
a , is
inﬂuenced by some information that is free in the
above sense (i.e., not a function of A’s choice of
directions and events F-earlier than that choice),
then there must be an an earliest (“inﬁmum”)
F-time t0 after which all such information is avail-
able to a. Since the non-free information is also
available at t0, all these information bits, free and
non-free, must have a value 0 or 1 to enter as
arguments in the function θF
a . So we regard a’s
response as having started at t0.
If indeed, there is any free bit that inﬂuences
a, the universe has by deﬁnition taken a free
decision near a by time t0, and we remove the
pedantry by ascribing this decision to particle a.
(This is discussed more fully in the section “Free
Will Versus Determinism”.)
(ii) From now on we can suppose that no such
new information bits inﬂuence the particles’ re-
sponses, and therefore that α and β are functions
of the respective experimenters’ choices and of
events earlier than those choices.
Now an α can be expected to vary with x, y, z
and may or may not vary with w . However, whether
the function varies with them or not, we can intro-
duce all of x, y, z, w as new arguments and rewrite
θF
a as a new function (which for convenience we
give the same name)
θF
a (x, y, z, w ; α′) (⋆)
of x, y, z, w and properties α′ independent of
x, y, z, w .
To see this, replace any α that does depend
on x, y, z, w by the constant values α1, . . . , α1320 it
takes for the 40 × 33 = 1320 particular quadru-
ples x, y, z, w we shall use. Alternatively, if each
α is some function α(x, y, z, w ) of x, y, z, w , we
may substitute these functions in (⋆) to obtain
information bits independent of x, y, z, w .
Similarly, we can rewrite θG
b as a function
θG
b (x, y, z, w ; β′)
of x, y, z, w and properties β′ independent of
x, y, z, w .
Now for the particular choice of w that B will
make, there is a value β0 for β′ for which
θG
b (x, y, z, w ; β0)
is deﬁned. By the above independence of β′ from
w , the function θG
b (x, y, z, w ; β0) is deﬁned with
the same value β0 for all 33 values of w . (The fact
that MIN allows B to freely vary his choice of w
makes this intuitively clear.)
We now deﬁne
θG
0 (w ) = θG
b (x, y, z, w ; β0) ,
noting that since by MIN the response of b cannot
vary with x, y, z, θG
0 is a function just of w .
Similarly there is a value α0 of α′ for which the
function
θF
1 (x, y, z) = θF
a (x, y, z, w ; α0)
is deﬁned for all 40 triples x, y, z, and it is al-
so independent of w , which argument we have
therefore omitted.
But now by TWIN we have the equation
θF
1 (x, y, z) = (θG
0 (x), θ G
0 (y), θ G
0 (z)) .
However, since by SPIN the value of the left-hand
side is one of (0, 1, 1), (1, 0, 1), (1, 1, 0), this shows
that θG
0 is a 101 function, which the Kochen-
Specker paradox shows does not exist. This com-
pletes the proof.
Locating the Response
We now provide a fuller discussion of some delicate
points.
(i) Since the observed spot on the screen is the
result of a cascade of slightly earlier events, it
is hard to deﬁne just when “the response” really
starts. We shall now explain why one can regard
a’s response (say) as having already started at any
time after A’s choice when all the free information
bits that inﬂuence it have become available to a.
Let N(a) and N(b) be convex regions of space-
time that are just big enough to be “neighborhoods
of the respective experiments”, by which we mean
that they contain the chosen settings of the ap-
paratus and the appropriate particle’s responses.
Our proof has shown that if the backward half-
space t < t F determined by a given F-time tF is
disjoint from N(a), then the available informa-
tion it contains is not enough to determine a’s
response. On the other hand, if each of the two
such half-spaces contains the respective neigh-
borhood, then of course they already contain the
responses. By varying F and G, this suﬃces to lo-
cate the free decisions to the two neighborhoods,
which justiﬁes our ascribing it to the particles
themselves.
(ii) We remark that not all the information in the
G-backward half-space (say) need be available to
b, because MIN prevents particle b’s function θG
b
from using experimenter A’s choice of directions
x, y, z. The underlying reason is of course, that rel-
ativity allows us to view the situation from a B-ﬁrst
frame, in which A’s choice is made only later than
b’s response, so that A is still free to choose an
arbitrary one of the 40 triples. However, this is our
only use of relativistic invariance—the argument
actually allows any information that does not re-
veal A’s choice to be transmitted superluminally,
or even backwards in time.
February 2 009 Notices of the AMS 229

===== PAGE 5 =====
(iii) Although we’ve precluded the possibility
t
hat θG
b can vary with A’s choice of directions, it is
conceivable that it might nevertheless vary witha’s
(future!) response. However, θG
b cannot be aﬀected
by a’s response to an unknown triple chosen by
A, since the same information is conveyed by the
responses (0, 1, 1), to (x, y, z), (1, 0, 1) to (z, x, y),
and (1, 1, 0) to (y, z, x). For a similar reason θF
a
cannot use b’s response, since B’s experiment
might be to investigate some orthogonal triple
u, v, w and discard the responses corresponding
to u and v.
(iv) It might be objected that free will itself
might in some sense be frame-dependent. Howev-
er, the only instance used in our proof is the choice
of directions, which, since it becomes manifest in
the orientation of some macroscopic apparatus,
must be the same as seen from arbitrary frames.
(v) Finally, we note that the new proof involves
four inertial frames— A-ﬁrst, B-ﬁrst, F, and G.
This number cannot be reduced without weak-
ening our theorem, since we want it to apply to
arbitrary frames F and G, including for example
those in which the two experiments are nearly
simultaneous.
Free Will Versus Determinism
We conclude with brief comments on some of the
more philosophical consequences of the Free Will
Theorem (abbreviated to FWT).
Some readers may object to our use of the
term “free will” to describe the indeterminism of
particle responses. Our provocative ascription of
free will to elementary particles is deliberate, since
our theorem asserts that if experimenters have a
certain freedom, then particles have exactly the
same kind of freedom. Indeed, it is natural to
suppose that this latter freedom is the ultimate
explanation of our own.
The humans who choose x, y, z, and w may of
course be replaced by a computer program con-
taining a pseudo-random number generator. If we
dismiss as ridiculous the idea that the particles
might be privy to this program, our proof would
remain valid. However, as we remark in [1], free
will would still be needed to choose the random
number generator, since a determined determinist
could maintain that this choice was ﬁxed from the
dawn of time.
We have supposed that the experimenters’
choices of directions from the Peres conﬁguration
are totally free and independent. However, the
freedom we have deduced for particles is more
constrained, since it is restricted by the TWIN
axiom. We introduced the term “semi-free” in [1]
to indicate that it is really the pair of particles
that jointly makes a free decision.
Historically, this kind of correlation was a great
surprise, which many authors have tried to ex-
plain away by saying that one particle inﬂuences
the other. However, as we argue in detail in [1],
the correlation is relativistically invariant, unlike
any such explanation. Our attitude is diﬀerent:
following Newton’s famous dictum “Hypotheses
non ﬁngo”, we attempt no explanation, but accept
the correlation as a fact of life.
Some believe that the alternative to determin-
ism is randomness, and go on to say that “allowing
randomness into the world does not really help
in understanding free will.” However, this objec-
tion does not apply to the free responses of the
particles that we have described. It may well be
true that classically stochastic processes such as
tossing a (true) coin do not help in explaining free
will, but, as we show in the Appendix and in §10.1
of [1], adding randomness also does not explain
the quantum mechanical eﬀects described in our
theorem. It is precisely the “semi-free” nature of
twinned particles, and more generally of entan-
glement, that shows that something very diﬀerent
from classical stochasticism is at play here.
Although the FWT suggests to us that determin-
ism is not a viable option, it nevertheless enables
us to agree with Einstein that “God does not play
dice with the Universe.” In the present state of
knowledge, it is certainly beyond our capabilities
to understand the connection between the free
decisions of particles and humans, but the free
will of neither of these is accounted for by mere
randomness.
The tension between human free will and phys-
ical determinism has a long history. Long ago,
Lucretius made his otherwise deterministic parti-
cles “swerve” unpredictably to allow for free will.
It was largely the great success of deterministic
classical physics that led to the adoption of deter-
minism by so many philosophers and scientists,
particularly those in ﬁelds remote from current
physics. (This remark also applies to “compati-
balism”, a now unnecessary attempt to allow for
human free will in a deterministic world.)
Although, as we show in [1], determinism may
formally be shown to be consistent, there is no
longer any evidence that supports it, in view of the
fact that classical physics has been superseded by
quantum mechanics, a non-deterministic theory.
The import of the free will theorem is that it is not
only current quantum theory, but the world itself
that is non-deterministic, so that no future theory
can return us to a clockwork universe.
Appendix. Can There Be a Mechanism for
Wave Function Collapse?
Granted our three axioms, the FWT shows that
nature itself is non-deterministic. It follows that
there can be no correct relativistic deterministic
230 N otices of the AMS Volume 56, Number 2

===== PAGE 6 =====
theory of nature. In particular, no relativistic ver-
s
ion of a hidden variable theory such as Bohm’s
well-known theory [4] can exist.
Moreover, the FWT has the stronger impli-
cation that there can be no relativistic theory
that provides a mechanism for reduction. There
are nonlinear extensions of quantum mechanics,
which we shall call collectively GRW theories (after
Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber, see [5]) that attempt
to give such a mechanism. The original theories
were not relativistic, but some newer versions
make that claim. We shall focus here on Tumul-
ka’s theory rGRWf (see [6]), but our argument
below applies, mutatis mutandis, to other rela-
tivistic GRW theories. We disagree with Tumulka’s
claim in [7] that the FWT does not apply to rGRWf,
for reasons we now examine.
(i) As it is presented in [6], rGRWf is not a de-
terministic theory. It includes stochastic “ﬂashes”
that determine the particles’ responses. However,
in [1] we claim that adding randomness, or a
stochastic element, to a deterministic theory does
not help:
“To see why, let the stochastic element in a
putatively relativistic GRW theory be a sequence
of random numbers (not all of which need be
used by both particles). Although these might
only be generated as needed, it will plainly make
no diﬀerence to let them be given in advance.
But then the behavior of the particles in such a
theory would in fact be a function of the informa-
tion available to them (including this stochastic
element).”
Tumulka writes in [7] that this “recipe” does
not apply to rGRWf:
“Since the random element in rGRWf is the set
of ﬂashes, nature should, according to this recipe,
make at the initial time the decision where-when
ﬂashes will occur, make this decision ‘available’
to every space-time location, and have the ﬂash-
es just carry out the pre-determined plan. The
problem is that the distribution of the ﬂashes
depends on the external ﬁelds, and thus on the
free decision of the experimenters. In particular,
the correlation between the ﬂashes in A and those
in B depends on both external ﬁelds. Thus, to
let the randomness ‘be given in advance’ would
make a big diﬀerence indeed, as it would require
nature to know in advance the decision of both
experimenters, and would thus require the theory
either to give up freedom or to allow inﬂuences to
the past.”
Thus, he denies that our “functional hypothe-
sis”, and so also the FWT, apply to rGRWf. However,
we can easily deal with the dependence of the
distribution of ﬂashes on the external ﬁelds FA
and FB, which arise from the two experimenters’
choices of directions x, y, z, and w .1 There are
40 × 33 = 1320 possible ﬁelds in question. For
each such choice, we have a distribution X(FA, FB)
of ﬂashes, i.e., we have diﬀerent distributions
X1, X2, . . . , X1320. Let us be given “in advance”
all such random sequences, with their diﬀerent
weightings as determined by the diﬀerent ﬁelds.
Note that for this to be given, nature does not have
to know in advance the actual free choices FA (i.e.,
x, y, z) and FB (i.e., w ) of the experimenters. Once
the choices are made, nature need only refer to
the relevant random sequence Xk in order to emit
the ﬂashes in accord with rGRWf.
If we refer to the proof of the FWT, we can see
that we are here simply treating the distributions
X(FA, FB) [= X(x, y, z, w )] in exactly the same way
we treated any other information-bit α that de-
pended on x, y, z, w . There we substituted all the
values α1, . . . , α1320 for α in the response function
θa(x, y, z, w ; α). Thus, the functional hypothesis
does apply to rGRWf, as modiﬁed in this way by
the recipe.
Tumulka [7] grants that if that is the case, then
rGRWf acquires some nasty properties: In some
frame Λ, “[the ﬂash] f Λ
y will entail inﬂuences to
the past.” Actually, admitting that the function-
al hypothesis applies to rGRWf has more dire
consequences—it leads to a contradiction. For if,
as we just showed, the functional hypothesis ap-
plies to the ﬂashes, and the ﬁrst ﬂashes determine
the particles’ responses, then it also applies to
these responses, which by the FWT leads to a
contradiction.
(ii) Another possible objection is that in our
statement of the MIN axiom, the assertion that a’s
response is independent of B’s choice was insuf-
ﬁciently precise. Our view is that the statement
must be true whatever precise deﬁnition is given
to the term “independent”, because in no inertial
frame can the past appearance of a macroscopic
spot on a screen depend on a future free decision.
It is possible to give a more precise form of MIN
by replacing the phrase “particle b’s response is
independent of A’s choice” by “if a’s response is
determined by B’s choice, then its value does not
vary with that choice.” However, we actually need
precision only in the presence of the functional
hypothesis, when it takes the mathematical form
that a’s putative response function θF
a cannot in
fact vary with B’s choice. To accept relativity but
deny MIN is therefore to suppose that an exper-
imenter can freely make a choice that will alter
the past, by changing the location on a screen of
a spot that has already been observed.
1T his unfortunately makes rGRWf non-predictive—it can
only ﬁnd the ﬂash distribution that “explains” either
particle’s behavior when both experimenters’ ﬁelds are
given.
February 2009 Notices of the AMS 231

===== PAGE 7 =====
Tumulka claims in [7] that since in the twinning
e
xperiment the question of which one of the ﬁrst
ﬂashes at A and B is earlier is frame-dependent, it
follows that the determination of which ﬂash inﬂu-
ences the other is also frame-dependent. However,
MIN does not deal with ﬂashes or other occult
events, but only with the particles’ responses as
indicated by macroscopic spots on a screen, and
these are surely not frame-dependent.
In any case, we may avoid any such questions
about the term “independent” by modifying MIN
to prove a weaker version of the FWT, which nev-
ertheless still yields a contradiction for relativistic
GRW theories, as follows.
MIN′: In an A-ﬁrst frame, B can freely choose any
one of the 33 directions w , and a’s prior response
is independent of B’s choice. Similarly, in a B-ﬁrst
frame, A can independently freely choose any one
of the 40 triples x, y, z, and b’s prior response is
independent of A’s choice.
To justify MIN ′ note that a’s response, signaled
by a spot on the screen, has already happened in
an A-ﬁrst frame, and cannot be altered by the later
free choice of w by B; a similar remark applies to
b’s response. In [7], Tumulka apparently accepts
this justiﬁcation for MIN ′ in rGRWf: “ . . . the ﬁrst
ﬂash fA does not depend on the ﬁeld FB in a frame
in which the points of B are later than those of A.”
This weakening of MIN allows us to prove a
weaker form of the FWT:
FWT′: The axioms SPIN, TWIN, and MIN ′ imply
that there exists an inertial frame such that the re-
sponse of a spin 1 particle to a triple experiment is
not a function of properties of that part of the uni-
verse that is earlier than the response with respect
to this frame.
This result follows without change from our
present proof of the FWT by taking F to be an
A-ﬁrst frame and G a B-ﬁrst frame, and applying
MIN′ in place of MIN to eliminate θF
a ’s dependence
on w and θG
b ’s dependence on x, y, z.
We can now apply FWT ′ to show that rGRWf’s
ﬁrst ﬂash function ( f Λ
y of [4]), which determines
a’s response, cannot exist, by choosing Λ to be the
frame named in FWT ′.
The Free Will Theorem thus shows that any
such theory, even if it involves a stochastic ele-
ment, must walk the ﬁne line of predicting that for
certain interactions the wave function collapses to
some eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian, without
being able to specify which eigenfunction this is.
If such a theory exists, the authors have no idea
what form it might take.
References
[1] J. Conway and S. Kochen , The Free Will Theorem,
Found. Phys. 36 (2006), 1441–1473.
[2] S. Kochen and E. Specker , The problem of hidden
variables in quantum mechanics, J. Math. Mech. 17
(1967), 59–88.
[3] A. Bassi and G. C. Ghirardi , The Conway-Kochen
argument and relativistic GRW models, Found. Phys.
37(2) (2007), 169–185.
[4] D. Bohm , Quantum Theory in terms of “hidden”
variables, I, Phys. Rev. 85 (1952), 166–193.
[5] G. C. Ghirardi , A. Rimini, and T. Weber, Uniﬁed dy-
namics for microscopic and macroscopic systems,
Phys. Rev. D34 (1986), 470–491.
[6] R. Tumulka , arXiv:0711.oo35v1 [math-ph] Octo-
ber 31, 2007.
[7] , Comment on “The Free Will Theorem”, F ound.
Phys. 37 (2) (2007), 186–197.
Authors’ Note: We thank Eileen Olszewski for
typesetting the paper and Frank Swenton for the
graphics.
Mat he maticians rare ly ma ke it int o 
the newspaper, much less i nto fashion 
spreads. But on September 21, 2008, the 
fashion s ection of the New Y ork Times
Sunday magazine carried a picture of An-
nalisa Crannell, a professor of mathemat-
ics at Franklin & Marshall College (and a 
book reviewer in this issue of the Notices).
The magazine contacted Crannell saying 
that it was doing a photo portfolio about 
academics and had chosen h er b ecause 
she had received the Haimo Award from 
the Mathematical Association of America. 
“By phone, I learned that the ‘photo port-
folio’ was really about fashion, which was 
pretty funny because part of my Haimo 
Award speech included the price tags of 
the clothes I usually wear (US$1 or less),” 
she said. 
A crew of eight spent three hours 
dressing Crannell and doing her hair and 
makeup. One of them told Crannell h e 
loves mathematics and asked her s ome 
questions about fractals. The picture of 
Crannell, which can be found on the Web, 
does not show the US$2,500 Gucci boots, 
which Crannell called “pretty darned un-
comfortable”. “I was wearing my blue AMS 
‘I love math’ bracelet that I’d picked up at 
MathFest, and the guy admired it so I gave 
it to him,” Crannell recalled. “I didn’t get 
to keep any of the clothes they brought, 
but he got to keep my bracelet!”
232 N otices of the AMS Volume 56, Number 2
