===== PAGE 1 =====
TIF-UNIMI-2026-5
Interpreting Parton Distributions with Shapley Values
Raphaël Bonnet-Guerrini1,3, Stefano Carrazza2,3, Stefano Forte2,3,
Eva Groenendijk2,3, Vincenzo Piuri1, Ramon Winterhalder2,3
1Dipartimento di Informatica, Università di Milano, Via Celoria 18, I-20133 Milano, Italy
2TIF Lab, Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Milano, and
3INFN, Sezione di Milano, Via Celoria 16, I-20133 Milano, Italy
Abstract
We show that Shapley values can be used to trace how individual parton distributions (PDFs)
shape the theory predictions for high-energy observables computed from them. This provides
a tool for assessing the impact of data on PDFs when determining them, and the impact of
PDF uncertainties when using the PDFs to compute collider observables. The Shapley value
is computed by treating the regression of PDFs from data as a cooperative game. The PDFs
are the players, and the reward is the likelihood (χ2) that characterizes the agreement between
data and the predictions obtained from a given PDF, with theory and methodology held fixed.
The method is agnostic to the way PDFs have been determined in the first place: for PDFs
determined with a black-box AI model it may be used in order to explain the behavior of the
model, and for PDFs determined using a fixed parametrization it may be used in order to expose
the features and potential limitations of the parametrization. We find that the method recovers
known expectations about which data constrain which PDFs in a global fit, while placing them
on a more quantitative footing. We demonstrate its effectiveness in two ways. We uncover an
unexpected loss of sensitivity of the gluon PDF at intermediatex, with potential implications
for BSM searches and the gluon fusion Higgs cross section. We also show that the method can
be used to improve the hyperparameter optimization procedure currently used by the NNPDF
collaboration.
1
arXiv:2607.02647v2  [hep-ph]  7 Jul 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 From PDFs to observables and vice-versa 4
2.1 Factorization and evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 PDF parametrization and determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.3 The black-box problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3 Shapley values for PDFs 8
3.1 The Shapley value in game theory and XAI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 Shapley implementation for PDFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4 Analyzing the NNPDF4.0 PDF set 12
4.1 The Shapley value for the full dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Dataset impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3 Diagnostics and optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5 Conclusion and outlook 24
A Dataset tables 26
B Dataset regularization. 31
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
1 Introduction
Parton distribution functions (PDFs) enter the computation of every process at a hadron collider,
and how precisely they are known directly shapes the reliability of theory predictions. This is
a central challenge for precision particle phenomenology, with two distinct facets. On the one
hand, PDF uncertainties can hamper the search for new physics by masking the signal [1]. On
the other hand, since PDFs are themselves determined from data, understanding how the data
constrain them is essential to optimize their extraction. This is nontrivial because PDFs are only
indirectly related to the data, through perturbative QCD evolution and then convolution with a
partonic cross section.
Several tools have been developed to study the sensitivity of PDFs to the data used to deter-
mine them [2–4]. All of them assume that PDFs are found by maximum-likelihood determination
of the parameters of a fixed functional form, and study the dependence of the likelihood on the
parameters in the vicinity of its stationary point. This setup has the disadvantage of only testing
PDF sensitivity in the subspace of PDF shapes allowed by the given functional form. Also, it does
not apply when PDFs are determined using a machine learning model such as neural networks,
in which case they are no longer determined by maximum likelihood. The latter approach to
PDF determination was proposed long ago [5] and is central to the NNPDF methodology, which
produces state-of-the-art sets of parton distributions [6]. In this case, the impact of the data on
the PDFs is also obscured by the intrinsic opacity of the neural network, whose high-dimensional,
non-linear structure makes it difficult to interpret directly [7].
Explainable AI (XAI) methods have been suggested in this context as a way to classify PDFs
by their sensitivity to individual data points [8]. However, many standard XAI techniques that
relate features to the behavior of the underlying model [9–11] are not straightforwardly applicable
here: the input is a one-dimensional momentum fractionxrather than a high-dimensional feature
vector with clear semantic interpretation, and the quality of the output can only be assessed after
propagating the PDFs through the full theory pipeline.
In this work, we address this problem by adapting a specific XAI technique: Shapley val-
ues [12], a cooperative game-theoretic concept that assigns each player their average marginal
contribution across all possible coalitions. While Shapley values are often used to elucidate the
behavior of a machine-learning (ML) model, such as a neural network, here we use them in a
model-agnostic way. We take a previously determined set of PDFs as given, without using any
information on how it was constructed. We then use the Shapley value to quantify the sensitivity
of these PDFs to data, and conversely, the sensitivity of predictions obtained from them to the
underlying PDFs. This holds regardless of whether the data and predictions considered here
were used in the original PDF determination. Our method thus allows us to answer questions
about the mutual sensitivity of data and PDFs, irrespective of the particular technique used to
determine the PDFs.
In ML applications, a common implementation of the Shapley value is the additive SHAP
framework [13]. However, this has been shown to be problematic in high-energy physics applica-
tions when correlations are important [14], which is specifically the case for PDFs. The reason
is that SHAP relies on an additivity assumption, namely that features are approximately inde-
pendent. We tackle this issue by setting up the problem in such a way that the space of features
is low-dimensional, which allows us to compute the Shapley values exactly while accounting for
correlations using the sum rules.
Our implementation of the Shapley value views individual PDF flavors as the players of a
game. The reward of the game is the likelihood (χ2), computed as follows: starting from a set
of PDFs determined with the NNPDF4.0 neural-network model [6], we introduce a controlled
Gaussian perturbation in a localized range of the momentum fractionx, applied to one PDF
flavor at a time, for various choices of PDF basis. Evaluating the Shapley value on different
subsets of the global dataset used to determine the PDFs then allows us to disentangle the
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
impact of each subset on each PDF andxrange.
We find that the results for the Shapley value largely reproduce standard lore on the impact
of data on PDFs, as discussed in references such as [15,16]. However, we also find that they
reveal some less obvious aspects of the connection between PDF features and data, with the
possible implications for the possibility that PDFs may reabsorb signals of new physics [17].
As applications, we discuss a case of diagnostics of lack of sensitivity of PDFs to data that is
not revealed by standard methods, and the optimization of the fold design used by NNPDF for
K-fold cross-validation in their hyperparameter optimization procedure.
The paper is structured as follows. In Sec. 2, we review the PDF-to-observable pipeline in
the NNPDF ML approach, and discuss its black-box nature. In Sec. 3, we introduce Shapley
values, discuss the limitations of existing frameworks, and describe our exact implementation
in PDF space, including the perturbation design and uncertainty quantification. In Sec. 4, we
demonstrate the method on NNPDF4.0, scanning overxregions and individual dataset families,
and then discuss examples of applications. We conclude with a summary and outlook in Sec. 5.
2 From PDFs to observables and vice-versa
To make our treatment self-contained, we provide a brief overview of the NNPDF approach for
PDF determination, focusing specifically on the implementation and methodology used for the
construction of the published NNPDF4.0 PDF set. As mentioned before, our technique and
results do not depend on the particular methodology used to determine the PDFs that we con-
sider. However, in addition to helping establish notation and making the paper accessible to
readers who are not necessarily familiar with PDF determination, this survey of the NNPDF
methodology also partly motivates the development of our technique. We refer the reader to the
NNPDF4.0 paper [6] and its associated code and documentation [18] for a more detailed treat-
ment. We first discuss how predictions for physical observables are computed from input PDFs,
and then how PDFs are determined from data by solving the corresponding inverse problem
in the NNPDF methodology. Because we use the published NNPDF4.0 PDF set, we describe
settings and assumptions used in that determination, ignoring subsequent improvements and
changes in methodology that may have intervened.
2.1 Factorization and evolution
PDFs are determined by performing a regression of theory predictions to experimental measure-
ments of physical observables. The factorization theorem expresses these predictions as convolu-
tions of PDFs with perturbatively calculable partonic cross sections. The PDFs characterize the
quark and gluon content of the incoming hadrons, while the partonic cross sections describe the
scattering of the corresponding initial-state quarks and gluons, collectively denoted as partons.
For processes with two incoming hadrons, this takes the form
O(Q2) =
X
i,j
Z
dx1 dx2fi(x1,µ 2
F)fj(x2,µ 2
F) ˆσij

x1,x 2,Q2
µ2
F

,(1)
whereO(Q 2)is a physical observable, here the inclusive cross section, depending on a hard scale
Q2,f i(x,µ 2
F)is the PDF for flavoriat momentum fractionxand factorization scaleµ F, and
ˆσij is the perturbatively calculable partonic cross section. The observable does not depend on
the factorization scaleµ F, since this dependence cancels between the PDF and the hard cross
section, up to perturbatively subleading terms. To improve perturbative convergence, the scale
µF is chosen of the order of the physical scaleQ, so that no large scale ratios arise. After imposing
momentum conservation, the integral overxi takes the form of a convolution of the momentum
fraction with some dimensionless ratio of physical scales on which both the observable and the
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
partonic cross section depend. For lepton–hadron scattering, only one PDF is present, and the
double convolution reduces to a single one.
The scale dependence of the PDF is fixed by evolution equations of the form
∂fi(x,µ 2)
∂lnµ 2 =
2Nf +1X
j=1
Z 1
x
dz
z Pij

αs(µ2),x
z

fj(z,µ 2),(2)
where the sum runs over the gluon and theNf quark and antiquark flavors with massm2
i ≲µ 2,
and suitable matching conditions are imposed when passing through the production threshold
for heavy quarks. The evolution kernels (splitting functions) in Eq. (2) admit a perturbative
expansion in powers of the strong coupling
Pij
 
αs(µ2),x

= αs(µ2)
2π P (0)
ij (x) +
αs(µ2)
2π
2
P (1)
ij (x) +...,(3)
and give the probability of partonjto emit a partonithat carries a fractionxof its momentum.
Equation (2) implies that Mellin moments
¯fi(N,µ 2) =
Z 1
0
dxx N−1fi(x,µ 2)(4)
of the PDFs satisfy ordinary differential evolution equations driven by anomalous dimensions
γij(N)related by Mellin transformation to the splitting functions:
∂ ¯fi(N,µ 2)
∂lnµ 2 =
2Nf +1X
j=1
γij
 
αs(µ2),N
 ¯fj(N,µ 2),(5)
where
γij
 
αs(µ2),N

=
Z 1
0
dxx N−1Pij
 
αs(µ2),x

,(6)
It follows that, even if PDFs must be evaluated at a variety of different scalesµto obtain
accurate theory predictions, they can all be expressed in terms of a set of basis PDFs evaluated at
a reference scaleµ=Q 0. By choosing a suitable (scale-independent) basis of linear combinations
of PDFs, the evolution equations decouple into a pair of coupled equations, and2Nf−1decoupled
equations. We refer to this basis as the evolution basis. The two coupled equations couple the
gluon and the singlet combination, defined as
Σ(x,µ 2) =
NfX
i=1
q+
i (x,µ 2),(7)
where
q±
i =q i±¯qi,(8)
andq i and¯qi are the quark and antiquark PDFs, respectively. The other decoupled equations
evolve specific linear combinations of quark and antiquark distributions, and have at most three
independent evolution kernels – only one at leading order (LO) and two at next-to-leading order
(NLO) – so several equivalent choices of evolution basis are possible.
At all scales, PDFs satisfy a set of integral constraints, namely the momentum sum rule
Z 1
0
dxx
 
g(x,µ 2) + Σ(x,µ2)

= 1,(9)
and the valence sum rules
Z 1
0
dxu−(x,µ 2) = 2
Z 1
0
dxd−(x,µ 2) = 2,
Z 1
0
dxs−(x,µ 2) =
Z 1
0
dxc−(x,µ 2) = 0,(10)
whereu,d,sandcdenote the up, down, strange and charm quark PDFs, respectively.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
2.2 PDF parametrization and determination
In the NNPDF approach of Ref. [6] the PDFs, viewed as a function ofxbut at a fixed scaleQ0,
are parametrized by a preprocessed neural network
xfi(x,Q 2
0) =A ix1−αi(1−x) βi NNi(x),(11)
whereα i andβ i are preprocessing exponents, andAi are normalization constants that may be
fixed to enforce the sum rules Eqs. (9-10). PDFs at all scales are obtained by solving the evolution
equations (2), and then convoluting the PDF at the scale of the data with the appropriate
partonic cross sections according to Eq. (1). This provides a map from PDF space to data
space, which in the NNPDF methodology is implemented through a suitable discretization and
optimization pipeline [19].
The neural network is then trained to minimize a loss function, which takes the form of a
negative log-likelihood describing the agreement between theory and data,
LNNPDF =χ 2(f,D) =
NdatX
n,m
[On(f)−d n] Σ−1
nm [Om(f)−d m],(12)
whereO n(f)denotes the theoretical prediction for data pointncomputed using a given PDF
setf,d n is the corresponding experimental measurement of the full datasetD={d1,...,d Ndat},
andΣ nm is a covariance matrix that encodes both statistical and systematic experimental uncer-
tainties as well as theory uncertainties originating from approximations in the theory predictions.
The loss minimization is stopped via cross-validation: the data are divided into training and
validation samples, the network is trained by minimizing the loss on the training sample, and
training is halted once the loss evaluated on the validation sample has failed to improve for a
specified number of iterations (the patience). PDF uncertainties are determined in two steps.
First, a Gaussian distribution of pseudodata replicasDk is generated, whose mean and covariance
over the replica sample reproduce the original data and their correlated uncertainties. Then, a
best-fit PDFf k is determined for each pseudodata replica, leading to a distribution of best-
fit neural networks whose mean and covariance represent the final PDF determination and its
associated correlated uncertainties. The training and validation partition is determined randomly
for each replica, and the preprocessing exponents are varied randomly in a self-consistently
determined interval that ensures that their choice does not bias the final result.
Both the architecture and other features of the neural network (such as the initialization or
the activation function) and the minimization algorithm and its features (such as the maximum
gradient or the stopping patience) are determined through aK-fold hyperparameter optimiza-
tion procedure, performed by dividing the data into four folds, excluding one fold at a time from
the training process, and optimizing the agreement with the excluded fold. Note that whereas
in the NNPDF approach PDF uncertainties are natively represented through Monte Carlo repli-
cas, commonly available tools [20] enable the conversion of PDF uncertainties represented as
a multivariate Gaussian in parameter space into the Monte Carlo replica representation. The
Monte Carlo representation is accordingly commonly used to compare and combine different
PDF sets [4].
While any set of basis PDFs can be chosen, the basis of the gluon and individual quark and
antiquark flavors (flavor basis) as well as the aforementioned evolution basis are of particular
interest. In the NNPDF4.0 determination the basis includes eight independently determined
PDFs: the charm and anticharm PDFs are assumed to coincide (so the charm valence sum rule
in Eq. (10) is automatically satisfied), and heavier flavors (bottom and top) are not independently
parametrized but rather determined perturbatively. The basis PDFs then are, in the flavor basis,
Bflav ={u,¯u,d, ¯d,s,¯s,c= ¯c,g},(13)
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
and in the evolution basis
Bev ={V,V 3,V 8,T 3,T 8,T 15,Σ,g},(14)
whereΣis defined in Eq. (7), the total valence distribution is
V=
NfX
i=1
q−
i ,(15)
and the non-singlet combinations are
T3 =u +−d +, T 8 =u + +d +−2s +, T 15 =u + +d + +s +−3c +,(16)
V3 =u−−d−, V 8 =u− +d−−2s−.(17)
2.3 The black-box problem
We can view the set of experimental data (about 4000 for NNPDF4.0) as a probability distri-
bution over a high-dimensional data space, typically a multivariate Gaussian about the central
data points, with width determined by the eigenvalues of the total covariance matrix along its
eigenvectors. The regression from data to PDFs is an inverse problem that maps the probability
distribution in data space onto a probability distribution in PDF space. Because of the way
predictions are obtained from PDFs (discussed in Sec. 2.1), this inverse problem has strong non-
localities and correlations, and makes the inference chain behave like a black box as described
below.
Discrete data coverage.Data provide information at a discrete set of points, moreover in
a limited kinematic region. The neural net interpolates and extrapolates this discrete
information, so that distinct PDF shapes can yield the same value of the loss function. The
space of acceptable shapes, and their likelihood, are determined by the hyperparameters
of the neural network and its minimization in such a way that the most likely PDF shapes
in the final distribution are generally not those leading to the lowest loss, which usually
correspond to overfitted results.
Convolutional structure.Each observable is sensitive to PDFs that are evaluated not at a
singlexvalue, but rather in the whole regionx 0 < x <1, for somex0 depending on the
process kinematics, through the convolution in Eq. (1). The convolution becomes a local
ordinary product upon Mellin transformation. Hence the interpolation and extrapolation
mentioned above actually happen in a conjugate Mellin space.
Scale dependence.PDFs are determined at a reference scaleQ0, but the PDFs that enter the
physical prediction Eq. (1) are evaluated at the factorization scaleµF, in turn chosen of
order of a physical scale for each data point. The two are related through convolution
with an evolution kernel that solves the evolution Eq. (2), thereby further modifying in a
scale-dependent way the relation between thexvalue of the PDF and the kinematics of
the data.
Scaling violations.Because data are available for several values of scale, and the scale de-
pendence (scaling violation) of the PDF must satisfy the evolution Eq. (2), the PDFs are
determined not only by the data directly, but also by the scale dependence of the data
which is related to the PDF by convolution with the splitting function. Hence the PDF is
effectively determined by the mutual relation of data at different scales.
Flavor mixing.Individual quark flavors are a linear combination of different evolution eigen-
states, hence they mix with each other as the scale varies, and consequently the linear
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
combinations that appear in a given physical observable are related through this scale-
dependent mixing to the flavor basis PDFs. Even if one chooses the evolution basis, ob-
servables cannot be fully expressed in terms of scale-independent evolution eigenstates
because the singlet and gluon satisfy coupled equations with scale-dependent coefficients.
Non-local correlations.Both data and PDFs that enter different individual predictions of the
form of Eq. (1) are correlated with each other in a highly non-local way. The PDFs are
correlated because of sum rules Eqs. (9-10) that relate PDFs at allxvalues. The data
are correlated through the covariance matrixΣ−1
nm that enters the definition of the loss
Eq. (12), which may correlate data coming from independent experiments, but sharing a
common source of uncertainty.
Taken together, these effects make it difficult to answer the simple question, which PDF
flavor, and in whichxregion, is responsible for the theory prediction to be compared to a
specific data point. These effects are intrinsic to the PDF-to-observable pipeline itself, and are
present regardless of the way the PDFs are determined. The use of ML adds a further layer
of opacity on top of this. Because the regression is performed by a neural network rather than
a fixed functional form, the map between data and PDFs has no analytic form to begin with,
compounding the difficulty just described. Indeed, an alternative possibility, adopted by several
groups [4], is to determine the PDFs by assuming a fixed functional form whose parameters
are determined by maximum likelihood. In such a case, the mapping between the probability
distribution in data space and that in PDF space is known analytically, as it is fixed by the
maximum-likelihood condition combined with error propagation, and its behavior in the vicinity
of the maximum. The price to pay is that only the space of functions allowed by the chosen
model is accessible. In the NNPDF approach the neural network model does not restrict the
space of allowed functional forms, but the set of more likely functional forms is effectively chosen
by the ML model through the hyperoptimization of its architecture and training parameters and
is consequently opaque.
3 Shapley values for PDFs
Motivated by the black-box structure discussed in Sec. 2.3, we approach the problem using
the Shapley value, a game-theoretic concept [12] that has more recently been adopted as an
XAI technique to probe the behavior of ML models. We use it here in its original, broader
sense. In conventional XAI applications, the players are the input features of a model, such
as a neural network, and the Shapley value explains how that model maps those inputs to its
output. Here, instead, the players are the PDFs themselves, already determined by a previous,
possibly opaque fitting procedure. We use the Shapley value to relate these PDFs to the theory
predictions obtained from them, without ever examining the model that produced the PDFs in
the first place. While the black-box nature of the NNPDF methodology motivates our approach
to understanding the relation between data and PDFs, our solution to the problem is completely
independent of the methodology used to determine the PDFs.
Our main idea is to treat the PDF-to-observable pipeline as a cooperative game, where the
players are the individual PDFs and the payoff is the loss. We first briefly review the game-
theoretic foundations of Shapley values and its use as an XAI tool, and then we present our
specific implementation in the context of PDF determination. Our procedure is schematically
summarized in Fig. 1.
3.1 The Shapley value in game theory and XAI
Ingametheory, theShapleyvalueistheaveragemarginalcontributionϕ i ofaplayeri, determined
by comparing the outcomes of a cooperative game with and withouti:v(S∪{i})versusv(S),
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
wherevis a value function that maps a coalition, i.e. a subset of the total set ofNplayers
S⊆N, to a real number that gives the payoff achieved by that coalition [12]. Note that for
brevity we denote withSandNboth the sets, and the number of elements in the respective
sets. The Shapley value is then given by
ϕi =
X
S⊆N\{i}
w(S) [v(S∪{i})−v(S)],(18)
where the sum runs over all possible coalitions ofN−1players not including thei-th player,
and the weightw(S)ensures that coalitions are weighted accounting for the combinatorial factor
that provides the number of different coalitions, namely the reciprocal of the number of different
coalitions withSmembers. Indeed, the weightw(S)is given by the number of different (non-
ordered) subsets ofSout ofN−1elements, which is the binomial coefficient times the number
Nof possible choices of thei-th element,
w(S) =

N
 N−1
S
−1
= S! (N−S−1)!
N! .(19)
In ML applications, the Shapley value is used to determine the contribution of individual
features to the loss function: the features are the players, and the loss is the value function. In
this context, the exact computation of Shapley values is usually intractable, since the typical
numberNof features is of order of 50 or more, hence the sum over2N−1 coalitions is unfeasible.
A common way out is the use of the SHAP framework [13] (SHapley Additive exPlanations), that
addresses this by unifying a class of additive feature attribution methods – including LIME [9],
DeepLIFT [10], and LRP [11] – and approximating the Shapley values by assuming feature
independence, which then allows for a linear expansion, such that the number of coalitions
only grows linearly, rather than exponentially withN. In high-energy physics applications,
where input features are typically strongly correlated, this leads to distorted results, as explicitly
demonstrated for jet substructure variables in top tagging in Ref. [14]. As discussed in Sec. 2.3,
in our case PDFs and their features are also strongly correlated, thereby suggesting that this
approximation would be equally problematic. As we shall see, we will consider a setup in which
the players are theN flav = 8PDF flavorsB flav orB ev Eqs. (13-14). Hence, even though we
will consider a large number of different games, in which one flavor is perturbed in a specific
region, for each of them we will only have to consider27 = 128coalitions, thereby enabling the
computation of the exact Shapley value Eq. (18).
x
n3fitfit
PDF parametrization
fit beforehand
no retraining
10□5 10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1
x
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
NNPDF4.0 (NNLO), x f(x,Q2
0)
u
d
s
c+
g/10
¯u
¯d
¯s
Shapley input
loaded baseline PDFs
Shapley valuesϕ j
flavorj, fixedx,D
V alue function
v(S) =χ 2 
O(f (S));D

Coalitionf (S)
fixedxregion
Black box
Theory pipeline
Predictions
O(f (S))
coalition score
players = flavors
Figure 1.Schematic overview of the Shapley value analysis. A previously determined PDF set is loaded
as input. For a fixedxregion and coalitionS, perturbed PDFsf (S) are propagated through the theory
pipeline to obtain predictions that are compared to some datasetDthrough a suitableχ2 log-likelihood.
Shapley valuesϕj quantify the contribution of each flavor for a chosenxregion and datasetD.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
3.2 Shapley implementation for PDFs
The idea of our approach is to take as a basic feature the behavior of each PDF in a certainx
region. We start with a pre-existing PDF set, and we consider as a player a perturbed PDF,
namely a PDF from this set whose behavior in a givenxregion has been modified. We then
assess the effect of the perturbation by computing the Shapley value for the perturbed PDF in
coalition with all other possible coalitions of perturbed PDFs, using as a value function the loss
Eq. (12) used for PDF determination.
The players are theN flav = 8flavors inB flav orB ev, see Eqs. (13)–(14). For any subset
S⊆B flav/ev, a coalition configuration is obtained by perturbing only the flavors inS,
f (S)
j =
(
fpert
j , j∈S,
f (0)
j , j /∈S,
(20)
wheref (0) denotes the unperturbed baseline PDF set. The value function is obtained from the
lossEq.(12), evaluatedusing, ineachinstanceinthesumovercoalitions, thePDFscorresponding
to coalitionSas defined in Eq. (20). The perturbation is designed in such a way as to single out
the features that we want to study, namely the behavior of each PDF flavor in a givenxregion.
We now discuss the perturbation and corresponding value function in turn. In order to select
the behavior in a givenxregion, we apply a localized perturbation, chosen to be a Gaussian
bump, thereby ensuring that the smoothness of the unperturbed PDFs as a function of their
argument is preserved. Because we want to single out the effect of modifying the PDF about its
central value in either direction, the perturbation is applied with either a positive or a negative
sign. The bump is centered at somex=x µ and has a widthwon a logarithmic scale, such
that the PDF is probed on a fixed-width interval on a log scale. The height of the bump is
calibrated to the PDF uncertainty at the center of the perturbation, so that the perturbation
is physically meaningful and comparable across flavors. Specifically, the height of the positive
(negative) perturbation is set equal to the upper (lower) 68% confidence interval of the replica
ensemble evaluated atxµ. We thus have
xfpert±
j (x,Q 2
0) =xf j(x,Q 2
0) +δ±
j (x),(21)
δ±
j (x) =±∆±
j (xµ) exp
"
−
 
log10(x)−log 10(xµ)
2
2w2
#
,(22)
where∆ +
j (xµ)and∆ −
j (xµ)are the upper and lower 68% confidence interval bounds relative to
the central value of theNrep replicas. A representative example of this calibrated perturbation
is shown in Fig. 2.
The value function is then constructed out of the loss in the following way. First, either the
perturbationδ + orδ− Eq. (22) is applied to all PDFs in coalitionSEq. (20). Next, the sum rules
Eqs. (9-10) are enforced in the perturbed PDF set: this means that if the coalitionSincludes
some but not all of the PDFs that enter one of the sum rules, then only the PDFs in the coalition
are perturbed according to Eq. (21), but all the other PDFs entering the sum rule are adjusted
by modifying their normalization constantsAi in Eq. (11) in such a way that the sum rule still
holds. This then produces for each coalition two perturbed PDFsf(S+) andf (S−), in which the
PDFs in the coalitions are perturbed, and the sum rules always hold. Finally, the value function
is evaluated by taking the average of the loss Eq. (12) evaluated for these perturbed PDF sets
v(S) = 1
2
h
χ2

f (S+);D

+χ 2

f (S−);D
i
,(23)
The Shapley value is finally computed using this value function in its expression Eq. (18),
thereby leading to a valueϕj(xµ), depending on the perturbed flavorjand the centerx µ of
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6x f(x,Q2
0)
Reference ¯s
Perturbed ¯s
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6 Reference ¯u
Perturbed ¯u
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6 Reference ¯d
Perturbed ¯d
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3x f(x,Q2
0)
Reference g/10
Perturbed g/10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6 Reference d
Perturbed d
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Reference u
Perturbed u
10□5 10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 100
x
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6x f(x,Q2
0)
Reference s
Perturbed s
10□5 10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 100
x
0.00
0.05
0.10
Reference c+
Perturbed c+
Figure 2.Calibrated perturbation Eq. (21) centered atx µ = 10−3 in the flavor basis, with amplitude
normalized to1σatQ 0 = 1.65 GeVandw= 0.3.
the perturbation. As mentioned, a common way of representing PDF uncertainties, specifically
used by NNPDF, is to deliver PDF sets as sets of replicasfk such that the central expected
PDF is the ensemble mean and the uncertainty and correlation are found from the ensemble
covariance over the replica sample. Accordingly, we can determine both the PDF Shapley value
and its uncertainty for a given PDF set by evaluating the Shapley valueϕ(k)
i =ϕ i(fk)for each
PDF replicaf k, i.e. evaluating the value function Eq. (23) with fixed dataDand thek-th PDF
replicaf k. The Shapley valueϕi and its uncertaintyσϕi are then determined as the mean and
1σstandard deviation ofϕ i across the PDF replica ensemble,
ϕi≡ ¯ϕi = 1
Nrep
NrepX
k=1
ϕ(k)
i , σ 2
ϕi = 1
Nrep−1
NrepX
k=1
 
ϕ(k)
i − ¯ϕi
2.(24)
For a quicker evaluation of the Shapley value, without an evaluation of its uncertainty, we will
also compute it directly for the central expected PDF, obtained by averaging over the PDF
replica sample.
With our definition, the Shapley value is effectively the marginal change of the value function
Eq. (23) when flavorjis added to an existing coalitionS, with a baseline given byv(∅) =
χ2(f (0);D), which is just the value of the loss which is found when comparing the unperturbed
PDF setfj under investigation to the dataD. Accordingly, the Shapley value can be computed
for a given PDF set using any dataset: it then measures the sensitivity of the PDF set to the
data, which are not necessarily the ones used to determine the PDFs in the first place. As such,
it can be used to assess the impact of adding new data to an existing PDF determination. On
the other hand, because it is defined as the impact of a deviation of the given PDF set from its
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
reference best fit, if computed over a subset of the data used to determine the given PDF set, it
assesses how much of the information on the given PDF set came from that data.
Evaluating the value may lead to three possible situations:
•ϕ j(xµ)>0: the perturbation of flavorjincreasesχ 2 on average, indicating that the dataset
Dis sensitive to and constrains that flavor in the givenxregion.
•ϕ j(xµ)≈0: the dataset is insensitive to flavorjin the givenxregion, either because the
flavor does not contribute meaningfully to the relevant predictions or because its effect
cancels across coalitions.
•ϕ j(xµ)<0: the perturbation improvesχ 2 on average, suggesting that the baseline PDF is
locally suboptimal for this dataset, which might happen for instance if there are tensions
between the data.
As a final comment, we note that what allows us to take into account all correlations between
features is the small number of coalitions that enables an exact computation of the Shapley index.
However, this is only possible because we have defined the coalition of perturbed PDFs according
to Eq. (20), in which the same perturbation is applied to all the PDFs in the coalition, so the
numberofplayersisequaltoN flav, andmoreoverweareonlyconsideringsymmetricperturbations
according to Eq. (23).
These are somewhat restrictive assumptions, because, in principle, the set of features under
investigation is the behavior of each PDF in a certainxregion, so in a full analysis, players
should be taken as the set of all possible perturbed PDFs, in anyxrange, and possibly including
up and down perturbations. Even if the full physically relevantxrange10−4 ≲x≲0.7was only
subdivided into, say, four bins for each PDF, this would lead to4Nflav players, or twice as many
if up and down perturbations are included separately, which corresponds to232∼10 9 coalitions,
thereby making an exact treatment unmanageable. However, we shall show in the next section
that even within our simplified setting, the Shapley value performs adequately as a means to
probe the impact of data on PDFs.
4 Analyzing the NNPDF4.0 PDF set
We now apply the technique discussed in the previous section to the NNPDF4.0 PDF set, with
the dual goal of checking the viability of our method and exploring its potentialities. We use
the default published NNLO baseline PDF setNNPDF40_nnlo_as_01180, with 100 PDF replicas,
and we adopt the same global dataset used for the determination of these PDFs, as described in
Ref. [6]. Individual datasets and experiments included in this global dataset are listed in Table 1
of Appendix A. The kinematic coverage of this dataset in the(x,Q2)plane is shown in Fig. 2 of
Ref. [6].
In the NNPDF4.0 determination (unlike in later NNPDF studies) no theory uncertainty
contribution associated with missing perturbative higher orders was included. We consequently
adopt as a covariance matrix in the value function Eqs. (23,12) the (full) experimental covariance
matrix. NotethatthisdiffersfromthelossusedforthetrainingoftheneuralnetsinRef.[6]intwo
respects: first, it does not include a contribution introduced to account for nuclear uncertainties
in datasets involving nuclear targets, and second, it uses the experimental covariance matrix also
for the treatment of multiplicative uncertainties, for which a separate uncertainty treatment is
necessary to avoid biased results. Consequently, our value function measures the PDF impact
on experimental data calibrated to the purely experimental uncertainty.
We will first evaluate the Shapley value for the full dataset, thus assessing the impact of
individual PDFs on the description of the global dataset, thereby providing a first check on the
viability of the method. We then turn to individual subsets of data, studying how different
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
PDFs are correlated to different processes in specific kinematic regions. Results generally follow
textbook [21,22] expectations, but we find a few mildly surprising results, and one specific case in
which the Shapley index analysis reveals an unexpected feature of the gluon PDF determination.
Finally, we provide two studies testing the potentialities of our methodology. In the first, we
show that the unexpected results found in the dataset analysis reveal a potentially dangerous
behavior of the gluon PDF uncertainty. Next, we provide a proof-of-concept application to the
design of folds used in the NNPDF hyperparameter optimization procedure.
4.1 The Shapley value for the full dataset
We compute the Shapley value for each PDF in turn, using the full global dataset: this provides
an estimate of the global impact of PDFs on theory prediction for the NNPDF4.0 dataset. Before
doing this by means of the localized perturbation discussed in Sec. 3.2, we perform a first check
of the method, in which instead of using Eq. (21), we simply set
xfpert
j (x,Q 2
0) = 0.(25)
This cannot be done for the full NNPDF4.0 dataset, as setting some PDFs to zero leads to the
vanishing of some theory predictions, thereby producing ill-defined values for some observables,
typically cross-section ratios. We have consequently excluded datasets for which this happens,
which are listed in Table 2.
The Shapley values are shown in Fig. 3 for each PDF in the flavor (top) or evolution (bottom)
bases, Eqs. (13), (14), respectively. Comparing the values gives an indication of which PDF has
the biggest impact on the theory predictions for the NNPDF4.0 dataset, and conversely, which
PDF is most constrained by the NNPDF4.0 data. Note that the loss function used in the
computation of the Shapley value is normalized by the experimental uncertainty in the basis of
eigenvectors of the experimental covariance matrix, but the perturbation applied to the PDFs
is normalized to the PDF uncertainty. So what the Shapley value is telling us is the marginal
contribution of that PDF to the theory prediction in units of the data uncertainty. We find that
the flavor-basis Shapley values are ordered according to
ϕu>ϕ d>ϕ g >ϕ ¯u>ϕ ¯d>ϕ s>ϕ ¯s>ϕ c+,(26)
in agreement with physical expectations: the up and down quarks, whose valence distributions
u− andd− carry the proton baryon number (see Eq. (10)), have the largest impact; the gluon,
though carrying the largest fraction of the proton momentum, has a lower impact because its
contribution to the majority of processes in the NNPDF4.0 dataset starts only at NLO; and
heavier quarks have an impact that scales as their reciprocal mass.
After this initial test, we turn to the perturbation Eq. (21). We perform a scan across50
logarithmically spacedxµ values in the interval[10−4,0.9], withw= log10(0.9)−log10(10−4)
50 . We first
compute the Shapley index using the central PDF set: results are shown as heat maps in Fig. 4 for
all values of the perturbation center, both in the flavor and evolution basis. We then compute
the values and uncertainties now using Eq. (24), as a mean and standard deviation over the
replica sample. In this case, it turns out that some coalitions lead to pathological values, related
again to the vanishing or near-vanishing of some cross sections, which distort the probability
distribution, and are discarded using a regularization procedure discussed in Appendix B. This
procedure will henceforth be applied to all computations of the Shapley value performed using
Eq. (24). Results for six different values of the perturbation center (offset to improve readability)
are shown in Fig. 5.
In order to understand the observed behavior, it is useful to keep in mind that the data
are concentrated in the10 −3 ≲x≲0.5region, with the vast majority of data at a scale
Q2 ≳100GeV 2 rather higher than the parametrization scaleQ 0, and that the form of the
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
¯s ¯u ¯d g d u s c+0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0φi
Mean contribution
Σ g V V3 V8 T3 T8 T15
0
5
10
15
20
25
30φi
Figure 3.Shapley value obtained setting each PDF to zero in turn according to Eq. (25) in the flavor
basis (top) and evolution basis (bottom). The dashed horizontal line corresponds to the average over
flavors.
evolution kernels in Eq. (2) is such that the behavior of the initial conditionfi(x,Q 2
0)in some
x∼x 0 region mostly affects the behavior of the evolved PDFsfi(x,Q 2)forx < x 0 when the
evolved scale is greater than the starting scaleQ>Q0. Finally, it should be kept in mind that
PDFs are constrained to vanish at the endpointx= 1, and must satisfy the sum rules Eqs. (9-10).
Based on these considerations, the overall pattern that emerges from Figs. 4-5 is that Shapley
value differs from zero in the data region, and it vanishes forx≲10−4 where there are no data,
as it should be. Several more detailed features are less obvious, but can be understood based on
the known dependence on PDFs of the partonic cross sections that enter the specific processes
in the dataset considered here:
•While at very smallxthe Shapley value fluctuates about zero, one may naively expect a
rapid drop at the edge of the data region, rather than the slow decrease observed. Indeed,
the perturbation is calibrated to the PDF uncertainty, hence as the data become more
sparse at smallx, the PDF uncertainty increases, the perturbation grows stronger, and one
may consequently expect the Shapley value to remain approximately constant. However, at
smallxthe effect of perturbative evolution according to Eq. (2) leads to a rise of the PDF
asxdecreases andQ 2 increases, which is at LO independent of the boundary condition,
and thus largely washes out the dependence of evolved PDFs on the boundary condition for
x≲10 −2 in the region where data are available [23]. This explains the gradual reduction
of sensitivity signaled by the decrease of the Shapley value.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
•The Shapley value is maximum atxµ = 0.5, despite the fact that the majority of the data is
at smallerxvalues. This is driven by the gluon and singlet, and thus it can be understood
as a consequence of two effects. First, a large bump in this region then propagates into
smallerxregions at higher scales, where data are abundant and precise. Second, because
the momentum sum rule is a constraint on the second moment of the PDF, a bump at
largexhas an enhanced effect on it, and thus leads to sizable deviations in the wholex
range when the normalization is readjusted to maintain the sum rule.
•The Shapley value remains substantial even forxµ = 0.8, despite the fact that there are
almost no data there. This can be understood as a combination of various effects. First, the
bump atx∼0.8at the starting scale will propagate into PDFs at lowerxvalues at the data
scale. Furthermore, as mentioned, the perturbation is calibrated so it will become large at
largexas the PDF uncertainty grows, and also, the vanishing constraint atx= 1forces
the PDF uncertainty to shrink to a point asx→1. Finally, the impact of the momentum
sum rule is now even larger than atxµ = 0.5. These observations are interesting in view of
searches for heavy resonances that probe PDFs at largex, and thus one may be interested
in understanding to what extent a signal may or may not be hidden in the PDFs [17].
This analysis suggests that, despite the lack of direct experimental constraints, the largex
PDF uncertainty is reliable enough that a signal of new physics, such as a heavy resonance,
would not be easily reabsorbed in it.
10□4 4×10□4 10□3 5×10□3 2×10□2 7×10□2 2×10□1 9×10□1
xµ
〈|φ|〉j
¯s
¯u
¯d
g
d
u
s
c+
 □100
□10□1
□10□2
□10□30
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
φi
10□4 4×10□4 10□3 5×10□3 2×10□2 7×10□2 2×10□1 9×10□1
xµ
〈|φ|〉j
Σ
g
V
V3
V8
T3
T8
T15
□10□2
□10□3
□10□40
10□4
10□3
10□2
φi
Figure 4.Scan of flavor-basis (top) and evolution-basis (bottom) Shapley values as a function of
perturbation centerxµ for NNPDF4.0, computed for the central PDF set. The valueϕj(xµ)is shown for
all PDF flavorsjand for 50 values ofxµ, equally spaced on a logarithmic scale in the range10−4≤x µ≤
0.9. Each column corresponds to one value ofxµ, each row to a parton flavor, and the color encodes the
signed contribution magnitude on a symlog scale (green: positive, red: negative). The top row shows the
mean absolute contribution across flavors, highlighting the overall sensitivity trend withxµ.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
□10□1
□10□2
□10□3
0
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
φi
NNPDF4.0 datasets (ﬂavor basis)
¯s
¯u
¯d
g
d
u
s
c+
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
NNPDF4.0 datasets (evolution basis)
Σ
g
V
V3
V8
T3
T8
T15
Figure 5.The median Shapley value ˜ϕj(xµ)over replicas, with an uncertainty band given by the central
68% interval[ϕ16
j ,ϕ 84
j ](16th–84th percentiles) of the replica distribution, plotted with a symlog scale on
theyaxis for six different values of the perturbation centerx µ for all PDF flavors in the flavor basis
(left) and evolution basis (right). The values corresponding to eachxµ are offset for readability, and are
all evaluated at the center of the displayedxbin. The distribution of values over replicas forxµ = 0.5is
displayed in Fig. 6.
•While the flavor non-singlet valenceV 3 andV 8 combinations are well constrained at large
x∼0.3, the correspondingq + combinationsT 3 andT 8 are not, and become well constrained
only for smallerx≲0.2. This can be understood as a consequence of the fact that flavor
non-singletq −
i combinations are mostly probed in charged-current interactions, such as
Wproduction and neutrino deep-inelastic scattering, covering the wholexrange. On the
other hand, the flavor non-singletq+ combinationsT 3 andT 8 are mostly probed by neutral-
current deep-inelastic and fixed-target Drell–Yan data for production on nuclear targets,
which are mostly concentrated at smallerx.
•The flavor singlet valence combinationVis largely unconstrained at largex. This mildly
surprising result can be explained by noting that there is in fact no individual data that
specifically probes this combination. Specifically, at the LHC, because of the proton–
proton initial state, quarks and antiquarks contribute symmetrically to physical observables
whose partonic cross section involves a quark–antiquark initial state. As it is clear from a
comparison of the flavor-basis and evolution-basis plots in Fig. 4, this lack of sensitivity to
the total valence combination is only visible when considering evolution-basis PDFs, and
not when looking at individual quark flavors, each of which is a combination of singlet, non-
singlet and various valence components. This is again relevant for new-physics searches, as
it reveals a potential loss of sensitivity to signals that couple to this specific combination
and would be masked by the PDF uncertainty.
•The distributions over replicas shown in Fig. 6 display clear deviations from Gaussian
behavior, with an asymmetric shape, a large number of outliers, concentrated in the upper
direction, and possibly even a double-peak shape in the case of the gluon. A similar
(though somewhat less pronounced) behavior is observed for the other largexvalues of the
perturbation center,x µ = 0.1,0.8, but is completely absent for smaller values ofxµ (not
shown here). This can be understood by noting that in the largexregion the momentum
sum rule constraint has a large impact because of thexweight in Eq. (9), though less so at
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
¯s ¯u ¯d g d u s c+
0
1
2
3
4φi
Replicas at xµ= 0.5
Figure 6.The Shapley valuesϕ j(0.5)in the flavor basis (same as shown in Fig. 5), now shown for all
replicas. The width of the colored band corresponds to the density of the replica distribution, while each
gray dot corresponds to a single replica, randomly offset for readability. The three solid horizontal lines
correspond to the mean, maximum, and minimum over the replica sample. Note that in this plot the
scale on theyaxis is linear.
x= 0.8where the PDF is very small. The momentum sum rule is a non-local constraint,
hence the effect of the perturbation may affect the prediction for a large number of precisely
measured data points, along some direction in data space. The data replicas to which PDF
replicas are fitted are generated as multivariate Gaussian along directions of eigenvectors of
the experimental covariance matrix, but, because of the non-linear relation between data
and observables, the shifts are non-linearly related to a shift along the direction of the
perturbation. Consequently, the effect of the perturbation on individual PDF replicas can
be related in a highly non-linear way to their shifts, thereby leading to a non-Gaussian
distribution of Shapley values.
One particular feature is unexpected: while the Shapley value generally peaks somewhere in
the data region and vanishes at very large or very smallx, where data are absent, the gluon Shap-
ley value instead has a localized dip between10−2 and10−1, essentially vanishing atxµ∼0.07.
We discuss this behavior, its likely explanation, and its implications for new-physics searches in
Sec. 4.3 below.
4.2 Dataset impact
After testing the behavior of the Shapley value over the full dataset, we now turn to studying the
impact of individual datasets on PDF determination and, conversely, the impact of individual
PDFs on theoretical predictions for specific datasets. To this purpose, we compute the Shapley
value for specific subsets of the full NNPDF4.0 dataset. A complementary exercise would be
to compute the Shapley value for data not included in the NNPDF4.0 dataset, but this will be
left for future studies. We specifically study deep-inelastic scattering (DIS) data, Drell–Yan, i.e.
gauge boson production data, and the combination of jet and top pair production data. In each
case, we compute the Shapley value for all PDF flavors and for eight values ofxµ and look at
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
□10□3
0
10□3
10□2
φi
DIS HERA datasets
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
DIS ﬁxed-target datasets
Σ
g
V
V3
V8
T3
T8
T15
Figure 7.Same as Fig. 5 in the evolution basis, for deep-inelastic scattering data only, from the HERA
collider (left) and fixed-target experiments (right). Note that the scale on theyaxis differs from that of
Fig. 5.
their profile, analogous to Fig. 5, but with a coarser graining inx. When comparing Shapley
values across datasets, it must be kept in mind that the value is computed using a perturbation
calibrated to the PDF uncertainty, but normalized to the data uncertainty. Consequently, when
many different datasets contribute to the determination of an individual PDF, the Shapley values
from each dataset will be lower than those found when computing the value for a dataset that
entirely or almost entirely determines a PDF. We now discuss each case in turn, by selecting
flavor-basis or evolution-basis plots that highlight the most relevant physics features.
Deep-inelastic scatteringDeep-inelastic scattering (DIS) data, in principle, allow a full de-
termination of all PDFs if both charged-current (neutrino) and neutral-current (charged lepton)
data are available. However, they are only available in a restricted kinematic region. The Shapley
value computed from DIS data for each PDF in the evolution basis is shown in Fig. 7, where we
separate data from the HERA electron–proton collider from data for DIS with electron, muon,
and neutrino beams from a variety of fixed-target experiments, and in Fig. 8, where we instead
compare charged current (neutrino) DIS to neutral current (charged lepton) DIS. The HERA
data included in this analysis are listed in Table 3, and the fixed-target data, separated into
charged and neutral current, are listed in Table 4.
The HERA data are at higher energy, hence largerQ2 and smallerxcompared to fixed-target
data, and their Shapley values are thus peaked at smallerx. At smallx≲0.001the singlet and
gluon are larger than any other PDF combination. The values ofQ 2 reached at HERA are
large enough that the contributions from photon andZexchange are comparable in the large
Q2 bins, which cover the medium-largex≳10−2 region. Consequently the LO DIS cross section
depends on three different linear combinations of quark PDFs, so there is also sensitivity to the
non-singletT 3 andT 8 combinations, which depend on the asymmetry between up, down, and
strangeq +
i combinations.
HERA data are available both in a neutral-current and charged-current channel, hence in
principle they are also sensitive to valenceq−
i PDF combinations, that depend on the quark–
antiquark difference. However, valence PDFs are largely determined by fixed-target neutrino DIS
data and Drell–Yan data, and thus the contribution to the Shapley value from HERA data only
is very small. Fixed-target datasets are only available for largerx≳10−2 and indeed the index
correspondingly vanishes at smallerx. Because of the lower energy they are quite insensitive to
the gluon. Fixed-target DIS data are available both on proton and deuteron targets, thereby
accessing the up–down quark difference, and indeed they display very large sensitivity to the
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
□10□3
0
10□3
10□2
φi
DIS FT CC datasets
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
DIS FT NC datasets
¯s
¯u
¯d
g
d
u
s
c+
Figure 8.Same as Fig. 7, but now for fixed-target charged-current (i.e. neutrino) DIS data (left) and
neutral-current fixed-target (i.e. charged lepton) DIS data (right). Note that the scale on theyaxis differs
from that of previous plots.
triplet combinationT 3, as well as sensitivity to the independent linear combinationT 8 that
includes strangeness. As they include neutrino DIS data, that couple asymmetrically to quarks
and antiquarks of different flavors, they display some sensitivity to the valence combinations.
Because valence PDFs are determined by a combination of neutrino and HERA charged-
current data and Drell–Yan data, the Shapley value for fixed-target data only remains small.
When separating off charged-current from neutral-current data, the smaller Shapley values of
charged-current data become visible (see Fig. 8) and the sensitivity of the charged-current data to
the valence combinations becomes apparent, along with a sensitivity to the non-singlet combina-
tionsT 3 andT 8, while the sensitivity to the singlet, which is always dominant for neutral-current
data, is absent for charged current.
Gauge boson (Drell–Yan) productionWe now turn to the Drell–Yan process. We consider
both transverse momentum and rapidity distributions, with results shown in Fig. 9. The datasets
included in either case are listed in Table 5 and Table 6, respectively. Data onWandZrapidity
distributions from the LHC are extremely precise and abundant over a wide kinematic range,
and provide the bulk of the information on flavor separation, especially at very largex, as it is
clear from the large Shapley values seen in Fig. 9 (right) for all quark and antiquark flavors. For
smallerx≲0.1values, fixed-target DIS also plays a significant role, and the Shapley value from
Drell–Yan data drops by more than one order of magnitude, becoming comparable to the values
seen in Fig. 8 for fixed-target DIS.
The Drell–Yan transverse momentum distributions constrain the gluon, that contributes to
it at LO, while it only enters the rapidity distribution at NLO. Nevertheless, the gluon Shapley
value is comparable for both observables, and in fact even larger for the rapidity distribution
forx∼10 −3, for which it is as large as for HERA data, and larger than the Shapley value for
quarks. The fact that Drell–Yan rapidity distributions may have a significant impact on the
gluon distribution, which is perhaps unexpected, was already observed in Ref. [24].
Top and jetsWhile the gluon PDF at smallxis constrained mostly by DIS data, at large
x >0.1it is constrained mostly by jet and top pair production data. The Shapley value,
computed for the jet and top data respectively listed in Table 7 and Table 8, shown in Fig. 10,
confirms this, by displaying a value for the gluon that greatly exceeds that of any other PDF, and
moreover a large numerical value, characteristic of the fact that no other data impact the gluon
in this region. In the case of top, the LO process comes only from gluon–gluon interactions, and
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
□100
□10□1
□10□2
□10□30
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
φi
DY PT datasets
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
DY y datasets
¯s
¯u
¯d
g
d
u
s
c+
Figure 9.Same as Fig. 7, but now in the flavor basis, for Drell–Yan transverse momentum (left) and
rapidity (right) distributions. Note that the scale on theyaxis differs from that of previous plots.
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
□100
□10□1
□10□2
□10□30
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
φi
Jet datasets
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 0.5 0.8
xµ
t¯t datasets
¯s
¯u
¯d
g
d
u
s
c+
Figure 10.Same as Fig. 9, but now for jet (left) and top pair (right) production. Note that the scale
on theyaxis differs from that of previous plots.
the Shapley index is accordingly negligible for all other PDFs. In the case of jets all PDF flavors
contribute on an equal footing, so the Shapley value is significant also for quark PDFs, though
in this case many more data, including DIS and Drell–Yan, have a large impact so the value of
the index is accordingly smaller.
4.3 Diagnostics and optimization
The Shapley value analysis has two main use cases: diagnosing the potentialities and limitations
of a given PDF determination, i.e. identifying which PDF flavors andxregions are more or less
constrained by the data, and optimizing the PDF determination procedure itself. We present
one example of each.
The gluon at intermediatex.In Sec. 4.1, we have seen that the gluon Shapley value for
the full NNPDF4.0 dataset exhibits a pronounced localized dip in the range0.05≲xµ ≲0.2,
see Fig. 4. This behavior is unexpected: for all other PDF flavors, the Shapley value peaks
somewhere in the data region and then decreases gradually towards both small and largex. The
gluon, by contrast, is sizable both below and above this range but drops sharply within it. To
understand this, we recall that the gluon PDF is largely determined by scaling violations, i.e.
by theQ 2-dependence of the data. Indeed, for deep-inelastic scattering the gluon only enters
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00
N0
10□1
3×10□2
4×10□2
6×10□2
2×10□1
x(N0)
Saddle point of gluon PDF
Q= 1.65 GeV
Figure 11.The momentum fractionxcorresponding to the valueN 0 of the saddle point of the Mellin
inversion integral for the gluon distribution, evaluated using NNPDF4.0 PDFs.
the partonic cross section at NLO, while it already drives the scale dependence at LO through
the coupled singlet–gluon evolution equations, which in Mellin moment space take the form of
Eq. (5), unlike the quark, on which the LO cross section depends.
The key observation is that the momentum sum rule Eq. (9) implies that a specific linear
combination of the second Mellin moments (N= 2) of the quark singlet and the gluon is
scale-independent. As a consequence, the anomalous dimension matrixγij(N)in Eq. (5) has a
vanishing eigenvalue atN= 2: there is an exact flat direction in the space of Mellin-space PDFs,
and the corresponding eigenvector – which is almost aligned with the gluon forN≲2[21] –
cannot be constrained by scaling violations. By continuity, the eigenvalue remains close to zero
in a neighborhood ofN= 2, so the gluon is poorly determined by the data for a finite range of
Mellin moments aroundN= 2.
The question is then how to relate the behavior of the gluon PDF inN- andx-space. This
can be done easily [25], thanks to the fact that the Mellin inversion
f(x,Q 2) = 1
2πi
Z c+i∞
c−i∞
dNx−N ¯f(N,Q 2).(27)
thatexpressesthex-spacePDFf(x,Q 2)intermsoftheN-spacePDF ¯f(N,Q 2)canbeaccurately
evaluated by saddle point. Writing
f(x,Q 2) = 1
2πi
Z c+i∞
c−i∞
dNe E(x,N,Q 2), E(x,N,Q 2)≡−Nlnx+ ln ¯f(N,Q 2),(28)
the saddle-point conditiondE/dN= 0gives
lnx= d ln ¯f(N)
dN

N=N 0
,(29)
which maps each value ofN0 to a correspondingxvalue at which the PDFf(x)is dominated
by ¯f(N 0). In Fig. 11 we show thisx–N0 correspondence for the NNPDF4.0 gluon evaluated at
the reference scaleQ0. It is visible thatN0 = 2maps tox≈7×10 −2, which coincides with the
center of the dip observed in Fig. 4. This provides a direct and quantitative explanation: the
gluon PDF inx-space aroundx∼0.07is dominated by its Mellin transform nearN= 2, which
is the very moment that scaling violations cannot constrain.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
One might then expect an inflated gluon uncertainty in thisxrange. However, this does not
happen in practice. For physically motivated functional forms, smoothness of admissible PDF
shapes is built in by construction, and it excludes a localized bump. For the neural network
parametrization used in NNPDF, a bump is in principle possible, and could be obtained by a
targeted training, but it is disfavored by the hyperoptimization of the methodology [26], and
only appears in low-probability tails of the PDF distribution. In either case, the uncertainty
band therefore smoothly interpolates between the neighboring regions without revealing the local
loss of sensitivity. This has a potentially important phenomenological consequence: a genuine
localized enhancement of the gluon PDF in this region – for instance from new physics – could
be absorbed into the fit without producing any visible distortion of the uncertainty band, and
would therefore remain hidden from standard PDF diagnostics. The Shapley value, by contrast,
reveals the insensitivity directly.
Because this explanation is based on universal properties of QCD evolution, if correct it
should hold for any PDF set. In order to test this, we repeat the analysis using two other global
PDF sets, namely CT18 [27] and MSHT20 [28], that were compared to NNPDF4.0 in Ref. [6]:
we apply the same perturbation Eq. (21), calibrated in each case to the uncertainty band of the
corresponding set. We then compute for the gluon of these PDF sets the Shapley values that were
shown for all PDFs of the NNPDF4.0 set in Fig. 4, namely the value obtained using the central
PDF and applying the perturbation on a finely spaced grid. Also for other PDF sets it turns out
that some datasets must be discarded because they lead to pathological behavior; they are also
listed in Appendix B. Results are shown in Fig. 12: the dip atxµ≈7×10−2 is present for all three
sets. While the position of the dip is universal, the overall normalization of the gluon Shapley
value varies across sets, as a direct consequence of the perturbation amplitude being set by each
set’s own uncertainty band. In particular, the CT18 gluon Shapley value lies somewhat above
the NNPDF4.0 and MSHT20 results. Rescaling the CT18 perturbation amplitude brings it into
close agreement with the other two sets at roughly0.5δpert, demonstrating that the uncertainty
estimate for the CT18 PDF set is more conservative than for the MSHT20 and NNPDF4.0 PDF
sets, whose uncertainties instead are in broad agreement.
Interestingly, Fig. 12 also shows a somewhat broader dip for a smaller valuexµ ≈10 −2,
which for CT18 is in fact even deeper and extending to negative values. While we see no simple
explanationforthisdip, itisinterestingtoobservethatitcorrespondstothegluonregionrelevant
forgg→Hproductionat theLHC. Indeed, the possibility of constructing gluonshapesout ofthe
NNPDF4.0 replicas with a bump in this region, but a very similarχ2 as the central NNPDF4.0
PDF, was pointed out in Ref. [29]. Our analysis shows that a similar behavior would also be
observed for MSHT20 and even more for CT18 PDFs by allowing for a PDF parametrization
that allows for such a bump.
Fold designAs discussed in Sec. 2.2, the hyperparameters that control the NNPDF4.0 PDF
determination methodology have been selected through a hyperoptimization procedure, whereby
the data are divided into four folds. The data contained in each fold should be representative of
the full dataset. The folds actually used in Ref. [6] were constructed trying to achieve this goal,
based on physical intuition and knowledge of the properties of the datasets and physical processes
involved. The Shapley value analysis might provide a better way of verifying the properties of
the folds and optimizing their construction.
As a first test of the viability of this idea we have computed the Shapley values as a function
ofx µ for the central NNPDF4.0 PDF for each of the four folds actually used in the NNPDF4.0
hyperoptimization (see Table 8 of Ref. [6]). Results are shown in Fig. 13, where we compare the
Shapley values for the gluon, singletΣ, tripletT3 and octetT 8 PDFs (see Eqs. (7,16)) computed
for each fold to that of the full dataset. Note that, because the values are computed for the
central PDF (which is what the NNPDF4.0 hyperoptimization was based on), these values do
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 100
xµ
□10□2
□10□30
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
101
φg
g NNPDF4.0
MSHT20
CT18
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 100
xµ
g NNPDF4.0
CT18δpert
CT18 0.8δpert
CT18 0.5δpert
Figure 12.Left: the gluon Shapley value computed from the central NNPDF4.0 PDF (same as shown
in Fig. 4), compared to the results obtained using the MSHT20 and CT18 PDFs. Right: the CT18 gluon
Shapley value for various rescalings of the perturbation amplitude, compared to NNPDF4.0.
0
10□2
10□1
100
101
φi
g
□10□1
□10□2
□10□3
□10□4
0
10□4
10□3
10□2
 T3
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 100
xµ
0
10□3
10□2
10□1
100
φi
Σ
10□4 10□3 10□2 10□1 100
xµ
□10□2
□10□3
□10□40
10□4
10□3
10□2
 T8
NNPDF4.0 fold 1 fold 2 fold 3 fold 4
Figure 13.The Shapley value computed using central PDFs (same as in Fig. 4) now using the full
NNPDF4.0 dataset, as well as the datasets corresponding to the four folds used for NNPDF4.0 hyper-
parameter optimization. Results are shown for the gluon, singletΣ, tripletT3 and octetT 8 PDFs (see
Eqs. (7,16)).
not include the PDF uncertainty. By and large, the four folds appear to be adequately designed in
that the Shapley profiles are quite similar, showing that the fold design of Ref. [6] was adequate.
An interesting observation is that at very largex, for some PDF combinations, such as the triplet
T3 and octetT 8, the behavior of the full dataset differs from that of all four folds, with Shapley
values becoming negative. This is not contradictory, because the total dataset includes some
data that were not included in any of the four folds, as they only became available after the
hyperoptimization was performed. The negative Shapley value thus suggests a possible tension
between these data and the rest of the dataset.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
This first analysis suggests that the Shapley value could be a valuable tool for fold optimiza-
tion. A quantitative way of doing this could be to select the partition of data into folds that
minimizes the distance between the Shapley profiles for each PDF in each fold, as measured for
instance by the Kullback–Leibler divergence. This could be especially effective given that the
more recent NNPDF hyperoptimization methodology [30,31], unlike that of Ref. [6], now allows
for inclusion of the PDF uncertainty.
5 Conclusion and outlook
We have introduced a novel, model-agnostic method to interpret global PDF determinations
using exact Shapley values. Treating the individual PDF flavors as the players of a cooperative
game, and the fit likelihoodχ2 as the value function, the Shapley value quantifies the marginal
contribution of each flavor, in a givenxregion, to the agreement between a PDF set and a chosen
dataset. Because the procedure acts on a previously determined PDF set without reference to
how it was obtained, it can be equally applied to ML-based PDF determinations discussed in
Sec. 2.3, as well as to PDFs determined from fixed functional forms. The small number of players
– eight flavors, hence27 = 128coalitions per game – allows the Shapley value to be computed
exactly, retaining all correlations between flavors and avoiding the feature-independence approx-
imation that underlies SHAP and is known to distort results in correlated high-energy-physics
settings [14].
Applied to the NNPDF4.0 set, the method reproduces the expected ordering of flavor impact
and, scanning over the perturbation centerxµ, it recovers the known map between data and
PDFs: sensitivity is concentrated in the data region, washes out at smallxwhere evolution drives
the PDF largely independently of its boundary condition, and persists at largexthrough the
combinedeffectofevolution, theendpointconstraint, andthemomentumsumrule. Decomposing
the dataset into DIS, Drell–Yan, and jet/top families reproduces the standard lore on which
processes constrain which flavors – HERA fixing the small-xsinglet and gluon, fixed-target and
charged-current data the large-xnon-singlet and valence combinations, Drell–Yan the flavor
separation, and jets and top pairs the large-xgluon – while placing these statements on a
quantitative footing.
Beyond confirming expectations, the analysis exposes features that standard diagnostics do
not reveal. The flavor-singlet valence combinationVis found to be essentially unconstrained
at largex, reflecting the absence of any single measurement that probes it directly; this is of
direct relevance to searches for new physics whose quantum numbers might couple to the valence
sector. Most strikingly, the gluon Shapley value displays a pronounced dip aroundx∼0.07,
which we trace to the vanishing eigenvalue of the singlet–gluon anomalous-dimension matrix at
N= 2enforced by momentum conservation, mapped tox-space through the saddle point of the
Mellin inversion integral. This is a genuine local loss of sensitivity that the smoothness of the
parametrization hides inside an otherwise unremarkable uncertainty band, so that a localized
enhancement of the gluon in this region could be absorbed by a fit without distorting its errors
and would escape standard PDF diagnostics. The Shapley value makes this blind spot explicit.
Also, it suggests a potential lack of sensitivity in the region of the gluon PDF which is relevant
for Higgs production in gluon fusion at the LHC.
The applications discussed here provide a first proof of concept, and several future appli-
cations to actual PDF determination and assessment can be envisaged, keeping in mind that,
because the construction takes the PDFs as input and is blind to the way they were determined, it
applies unchanged to PDF sets obtained with different methodologies. Accordingly, the method
can be used for various kinds of PDF diagnostics. Specifically, the method enables PDF bench-
marking – such as comparing different PDFs used for precision phenomenology, or constructing
combined PDF sets [4] – by providing a direct, methodology-independent measure of where and
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
which PDFs in each set are genuinely constrained by data, as opposed to parametrization or
fitting choices. A related application is diagnosing the PDF’s sensitivity to possible signals of
new physics.
On the other hand, it can be used for the assessment of the potential sensitivity of PDFs
to new data, flagging redundant or strongly constraining measurements before they are added
to a global determination. More generally, for fit diagnostics it can be used to identify under-
constrained regions and localized tensions between datasets. Finally, it can be used for the
optimization of specific aspects of the PDF determination methodology, such as theK-fold
hyperparameter optimization used by NNPDF, where the Shapley index can be used in order to
optimize the partition of data between folds, as discussed in Sec. 4.3.
More broadly, the construction is not tied to neural networks or to PDFs at all: because
the Shapley value is computed directly on the mapping from data to predictions, without ever
inspecting the internal structure of the model that produced that mapping, the same approach
applies to any black-box system for which a likelihood or other suitable reward can be defined.
In this respect, our results show how the Shapley value can be used not only in order to explain
the behavior of a machine learning model, as it is customary in XAI applications, but also to
relate the input and output of a regression procedure in a model-agnostic way.
An interesting possible line of development is investigating the applicability of our method
to more complex sets of features, while retaining the full exact computation of the Shapley value
without resorting to the additive approximation. Indeed, we have considered onexregion at
a time for all PDFs, with a symmetric perturbation, even though in principle allxregions of
all PDFs are correlated with each other. A more extensive treatment would therefore require
enlarging the feature space to include severalxbins for all PDFs simultaneously, together with
the sign of the perturbation as an independent feature. While this would most likely require
some approximation in order to treat the very large number of coalitions, it would be interesting
to investigate controlled approximations that nonetheless respect the strong correlations among
PDFs. We leave this to future work.
Acknowledgements
We thank Felix Hekhorn and especially Juan Cruz Martinez for useful comments on a preliminary
version of this paper. Part of this work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon Europe
research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No
101168829, Challenging AI with Challenges from Physics: How to solve fundamental problems
in Physics by AI and vice versa (AIPHY). Computing resources were provided by the CINECA
Leonardo HPC cluster through the INFN grant PML4HEP.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
A Dataset tables
We provide the list of datasets used in the analyses presented in Sec. 4.
Experiment Dataset Reference
NMCNMC_NC_NOTFIXED_EM-F2[32]
NMCNMC_NC_NOTFIXED_P_EM-SIGMARED[33]
SLACSLAC_NC_NOTFIXED_P_EM-F2[34]
SLACSLAC_NC_NOTFIXED_D_EM-F2[34]
BCDMSBCDMS_NC_NOTFIXED_P_EM-F2[35]
BCDMSBCDMS_NC_NOTFIXED_D_EM-F2[36]
CHORUSCHORUS_CC_NOTFIXED_PB_NU-SIGMARED[37]
CHORUSCHORUS_CC_NOTFIXED_PB_NB-SIGMARED[37]
NUTEVNUTEV_CC_NOTFIXED_FE_NU-SIGMARED[38]
NUTEVNUTEV_CC_NOTFIXED_FE_NB-SIGMARED[38]
HERAHERA_NC_318GEV_EM-SIGMARED[39]
HERAHERA_NC_225GEV_EP-SIGMARED[39]
HERAHERA_NC_251GEV_EP-SIGMARED[39]
HERAHERA_NC_300GEV_EP-SIGMARED[39]
HERAHERA_NC_318GEV_EP-SIGMARED[39]
HERAHERA_CC_318GEV_EM-SIGMARED[39]
HERAHERA_CC_318GEV_EP-SIGMARED[39]
HERAHERA_NC_318GEV_EAVG_CHARM-SIGMARED[40]
HERAHERA_NC_318GEV_EAVG_BOTTOM-SIGMARED[40]
DYE866DYE866_Z0_800GEV_DW_RATIO_PDXSECRATIO[41]
DYE866DYE866_Z0_800GEV_PXSEC[42]
DYE605DYE605_Z0_38P8GEV_DW_PXSEC[43]
DYE906DYE906_Z0_120GEV_DW_PDXSECRATIO[44]
CDFCDF_Z0_1P96TEV_ZRAP[45]
D0D0_Z0_1P96TEV_ZRAP[46]
D0D0_WPWM_1P96TEV_ASY[47]
ATLASATLAS_WPWM_7TEV_36PB_ETA[48]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_7TEV_36PB_ETA[48]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_7TEV_49FB_HIMASS[49]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_7TEV_LOMASS_M[50]
ATLASATLAS_WPWM_7TEV_46FB_CC-ETA[51]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_7TEV_46FB_CC-Y[51]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_7TEV_46FB_CF-Y[51]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_8TEV_HIMASS_M-Y[52]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_8TEV_LOWMASS_M-Y[53]
ATLASATLAS_Z0_13TEV_TOT[54]
ATLASATLAS_WPWM_13TEV_TOT[54]
ATLASATLAS_WJ_8TEV_WP-PT[55]
ATLASATLAS_WJ_8TEV_WM-PT[55]
ATLASATLAS_Z0J_8TEV_PT-M[56]
ATLASATLAS_Z0J_8TEV_PT-Y[56]
ATLASATLAS_TTBAR_7TEV_TOT_X-SEC[57]
ATLASATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_TOT_X-SEC[57]
ATLASATLAS_TTBAR_13TEV_TOT_X-SEC[58]
ATLASATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YT-NORM[59]
ATLASATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YTTBAR-NORM[59]
ATLASATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_2L_DIF_YTTBAR-NORM[60]
ATLASATLAS_1JET_8TEV_R06_PTY[61]
ATLASATLAS_2JET_7TEV_R06_M12Y[62]
ATLASATLAS_PH_13TEV_XSEC[63]
(continues on next page)
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
Experiment Dataset Reference
ATLASATLAS_SINGLETOP_7TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC[64]
ATLASATLAS_SINGLETOP_13TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC[65]
ATLASATLAS_SINGLETOP_7TEV_T-Y-NORM[64]
ATLASATLAS_SINGLETOP_7TEV_TBAR-Y-NORM[64]
ATLASATLAS_SINGLETOP_8TEV_T-RAP-NORM[66]
ATLASATLAS_SINGLETOP_8TEV_TBAR-RAP-NORM[66]
CMSCMS_WPWM_7TEV_ELECTRON_ASY[67]
CMSCMS_WPWM_7TEV_MUON_ASY[68]
CMSCMS_Z0_7TEV_DIMUON_2D[69]
CMSCMS_WPWM_8TEV_MUON_Y[70]
CMSCMS_Z0J_8TEV_PT-Y[71]
CMSCMS_2JET_7TEV_M12-Y[72]
CMSCMS_1JET_8TEV_PTY[73]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_7TEV_TOT_X-SEC[74]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_8TEV_TOT_X-SEC[74]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_13TEV_TOT_X-SEC[75]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YTTBAR-NORM[76]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_5TEV_TOT_X-SEC[77]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_8TEV_2L_DIF_MTTBAR-YT-NORM[78]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_13TEV_2L_DIF_YT[79]
CMSCMS_TTBAR_13TEV_LJ_2016_DIF_YT[79]
CMSCMS_SINGLETOP_7TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC[80]
CMSCMS_SINGLETOP_8TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC[81]
CMSCMS_SINGLETOP_13TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC[82]
LHCBLHCB_Z0_7TEV_DIELECTRON_Y[83]
LHCBLHCB_Z0_8TEV_DIELECTRON_Y[84]
LHCBLHCB_WPWM_7TEV_MUON_Y[85]
LHCBLHCB_Z0_7TEV_MUON_Y[85]
LHCBLHCB_WPWM_8TEV_MUON_Y[86]
LHCBLHCB_Z0_8TEV_MUON_Y[86]
LHCBLHCB_Z0_13TEV_DIMUON-Y[87]
LHCBLHCB_Z0_13TEV_DIELECTRON-Y[87]
T able 1.The NNPDF4.0 dataset. For each dataset we indicate the experiment, the name with which
it will be referred to in following tables and the original reference. More details, such as the kinematic
coverage and the number of data points, are provided in Tables 1–5 of Ref. [6].
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
Dataset
NMC_NC_NOTFIXED_EM-F2
DYE866_Z0_800GEV_DW_RATIO_PDXSECRATIO
D0_Z0_1P96TEV_ZRAP
ATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YT-NORM
ATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YTTBAR-NORM
ATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_2L_DIF_YTTBAR-NORM
CMS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YTTBAR-NORM
CMS_TTBAR_8TEV_2L_DIF_MTTBAR-YT-NORM
ATLAS_SINGLETOP_7TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC
ATLAS_SINGLETOP_13TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC
ATLAS_SINGLETOP_7TEV_T-Y-NORM
ATLAS_SINGLETOP_7TEV_TBAR-Y-NORM
ATLAS_SINGLETOP_8TEV_T-RAP-NORM
ATLAS_SINGLETOP_8TEV_TBAR-RAP-NORM
CMS_SINGLETOP_8TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC
CMS_SINGLETOP_13TEV_TCHANNEL-XSEC
D0_WPWM_1P96TEV_ASY
CMS_WPWM_7TEV_ELECTRON_ASY
CMS_WPWM_7TEV_MUON_ASY
DYE906_Z0_120GEV_DW_PDXSECRATIO
T able 2.Datasets excluded from the Shapley value computation of Fig. 3.
Dataset Observable
HERA_NC_318GEV_EM-SIGMAREDNC DIS
HERA_NC_225GEV_EP-SIGMAREDNC DIS
HERA_NC_251GEV_EP-SIGMAREDNC DIS
HERA_NC_300GEV_EP-SIGMAREDNC DIS
HERA_NC_318GEV_EP-SIGMAREDNC DIS
HERA_CC_318GEV_EP-SIGMAREDCC DIS
HERA_CC_318GEV_EM-SIGMAREDCC DIS
HERA_NC_318GEV_EAVG_CHARM-SIGMAREDcharm DIS
HERA_NC_318GEV_EAVG_BOTTOM-SIGMAREDbottom DIS
T able 3.The HERA DIS data.
Dataset Observable
NMC_NC_NOTFIXED_EM-F2NC DIS
NMC_NC_NOTFIXED_P_EM-SIGMAREDNC DIS
SLAC_NC_NOTFIXED_P_EM-F2NC DIS
SLAC_NC_NOTFIXED_D_EM-F2NC DIS
BCDMS_NC_NOTFIXED_P_EM-F2NC DIS
BCDMS_NC_NOTFIXED_D_EM-F2NC DIS
CHORUS_CC_NOTFIXED_PB_NU-SIGMAREDCC DIS
CHORUS_CC_NOTFIXED_PB_NB-SIGMAREDCC DIS
NUTEV_CC_NOTFIXED_FE_NU-SIGMAREDCC DIS
NUTEV_CC_NOTFIXED_FE_NB-SIGMAREDCC DIS
T able 4.The fixed-target DIS data.
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
Dataset Observable
ATLAS_WJ_8TEV_WP-PTW + transverse momentum
ATLAS_WJ_8TEV_WM-PTW − transverse momentum
ATLAS_Z0J_8TEV_PT-MZ p T vs invariant mass
ATLAS_Z0J_8TEV_PT-YZ p T vs rapidity
CMS_Z0J_8TEV_PT-YZ p T vs rapidity
T able 5.Drell–Yan transverse momentum distribution datasets.
Dataset Observable
CDF_Z0_1P96TEV_ZRAPZrapidity
D0_Z0_1P96TEV_ZRAPZrapidity
ATLAS_WPWM_7TEV_36PB_ETAW ± pseudorapidity
ATLAS_Z0_7TEV_36PB_ETAZpseudorapidity
ATLAS_WPWM_7TEV_46FB_CC-ETAW ± pseudorapidity (central)
ATLAS_Z0_7TEV_46FB_CC-YZrapidity (central-central)
ATLAS_Z0_7TEV_46FB_CF-YZrapidity (central-forward)
ATLAS_Z0_8TEV_HIMASS_M-YZrapidity (high mass)
ATLAS_Z0_8TEV_LOWMASS_M-YZrapidity (low mass)
CMS_WPWM_8TEV_MUON_YW ± rapidity
LHCB_Z0_7TEV_DIELECTRON_YZrapidity (e +e−)
LHCB_Z0_8TEV_DIELECTRON_YZrapidity (e +e−)
LHCB_WPWM_7TEV_MUON_YW ± rapidity (µ)
LHCB_Z0_7TEV_MUON_YZrapidity (µ +µ−)
LHCB_WPWM_8TEV_MUON_YW ± rapidity (µ)
LHCB_Z0_8TEV_MUON_YZrapidity (µ +µ−)
LHCB_Z0_13TEV_DIMUON-YZrapidity (µ +µ−)
LHCB_Z0_13TEV_DIELECTRON-YZrapidity (e +e−)
T able 6.Drell–Yan rapidity (y) and pseudorapidity (η) distribution datasets.
Dataset Observable
ATLAS_1JET_8TEV_R06_PTYinclusive jets
ATLAS_2JET_7TEV_R06_M12Ydijets
CMS_2JET_7TEV_M12-Ydijets
CMS_1JET_8TEV_PTYinclusive jets
T able 7.Single-inclusive jet and dijet datasets.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
Dataset Observable
ATLAS_TTBAR_7TEV_TOT_X-SECtotalt ¯t
ATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_TOT_X-SECtotalt ¯t
ATLAS_TTBAR_13TEV_TOT_X-SECtotalt ¯t
CMS_TTBAR_5TEV_TOT_X-SECtotalt ¯t
CMS_TTBAR_7TEV_TOT_X-SECtotalt ¯t
CMS_TTBAR_8TEV_TOT_X-SECtotalt ¯t
CMS_TTBAR_13TEV_TOT_X-SECtotalt ¯t
ATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YT-NORMdσ/dy t
ATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YTTBAR-NORMdσ/dy t¯t
ATLAS_TTBAR_8TEV_2L_DIF_YTTBAR-NORMdσ/dy t¯t
CMS_TTBAR_8TEV_LJ_DIF_YTTBAR-NORMdσ/dy t¯t
CMS_TTBAR_8TEV_2L_DIF_MTTBAR-YT-NORMdσ/dm t¯t
CMS_TTBAR_13TEV_2L_DIF_YTdσ/dy t
CMS_TTBAR_13TEV_LJ_2016_DIF_YTdσ/dy t
T able 8.Top pair production datasets.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
B Dataset regularization.
For some Shapley value computations, the calibrated perturbation of Eq. (21) may lead to
unphysical vanishing or near-vanishing of some cross sections, which in turn leads to diverging
values for observables that correspond to cross-section ratios. This behavior biases the entire
Shapley game, leading to unreliable values of the Shapley central value and uncertainty. To
prevent this, we iteratively remove any dataset wherevDi(S)>10 5, whereD i⊂Dis thei-th
subset ofD, and re-evaluate until no dataset is flagged by this condition. Across all analyses
performed for this work, this only happens for the two fixed-target Drell–Yan deuteron/proton
ratios of Refs. [41,44], for particular values of the perturbation centerxµ. The discarded datasets
are listed in Table 9, along with the PDF sets and values of the perturbation center for which
this regularization procedure is necessary.
Figure PDF set Basis Discarded dataset and centersx µ
Fig. 4 NNPDF4.0 evolutionDYE906:0.30,0.36,0.43,0.52,0.62,0.75
Fig. 5 NNPDF4.0 flavorDYE906:10 −3,10 −2,0.5
Fig. 5 NNPDF4.0 evolutionDYE906:0.1,0.5,0.8
Fig. 12 CT18 flavorDYE906:28x µ,10 −4−2.2×10 −2;DYE866:
15x µ,10 −4−3.4×10 −3
Fig. 12 CT18 (0.8δ pert) flavorDYE906:26x µ,10 −4−1.3×10 −2;DYE866:9
xµ,1.5×10 −4−1.6×10 −3
Fig. 12 CT18 (0.5δ pert) flavorDYE906:17x µ,10 −4−4.1×10 −3;DYE866:
1.5×10 −4
Fig. 12 MSHT20 flavorDYE906:15x µ,10 −4−2.4×10 −3;DYE866:
1.8,2.1,3.7×10 −4
T able 9.Datasets discarded by the iterative stabilization procedure. In each case we list the figure
displaying the results of the corresponding Shapley value computation, the PDF set, the PDF basis,
and dataset and perturbation center. HereDYE906denotes theDYE906_Z0_120GEV_DW_PDXSECRATIOset
andDYE866theDYE866_Z0_800GEV_DW_RATIO_PDXSECRATIOset of Table 1. For CT18 and MSHT20 we
provide the number of discardedxµ values and the range.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
References
[1] E. Cole, M. N. Costantini, E. Hammou, L. Mantani, F. Merlotti, M. Morales-Alvarado,
and M. Ubiali, “Tailored PDFs for New Physics searches,”arXiv:2602.20235 [hep-ph].
[2] B.-T. Wang, T. J. Hobbs, S. Doyle, J. Gao, T.-J. Hou, P. M. Nadolsky, and F. I. Olness,
“Mapping the sensitivity of hadronic experiments to nucleon structure,”Phys. Rev. D98
no. 9, (2018) 094030,arXiv:1803.02777 [hep-ph].
[3] X. Jinget al., “Quantifying the interplay of experimental constraints in analyses of parton
distributions,”Phys. Rev. D108no. 3, (2023) 034029,arXiv:2306.03918 [hep-ph].
[4]PDF4LHC Working GroupCollaboration, R. D. Ballet al., “The PDF4LHC21
combination of global PDF fits for the LHC Run III,”J. Phys. G49no. 8, (2022) 080501,
arXiv:2203.05506 [hep-ph].
[5] S. Forte, L. Garrido, J. I. Latorre, and A. Piccione, “Neural network parametrization of
deep inelastic structure functions,”JHEP05(2002) 062,arXiv:hep-ph/0204232.
[6]NNPDFCollaboration, R. D. Ballet al., “The path to proton structure at 1% accuracy,”
Eur. Phys. J. C82no. 5, (2022) 428,arXiv:2109.02653 [hep-ph].
[7] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability,”arXiv:1606.03490 [cs.LG].
[8] B. Kriesten, J. Gomprecht, and T. J. Hobbs, “Explainable AI classification for parton
density theory,”JHEP11(2024) 007,arXiv:2407.03411 [hep-ph].
[9] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “"why should i trust you?": Explaining the
predictions of any classifier,”arXiv:1602.04938 [cs.LG].
https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.04938.
[10] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje, “Learning important features through
propagating activation differences,”arXiv:1704.02685 [cs.CV].
[11] A. Binder, G. Montavon, S. Bach, K.-R. Müller, and W. Samek, “Layer-wise relevance
propagation for neural networks with local renormalization layers,”arXiv:1604.00825
[cs.CV].
[12] L. S. Shapley, “A value for n-person games,” inContributions to the Theory of Games II,
H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker, eds., vol. 28 ofAnnals of Mathematics Studies,
pp. 307–317. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1953.
[13] S. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,”
arXiv:1705.07874 [cs.AI].
[14] S. Vent, R. Winterhalder, and T. Plehn, “How to Deep-Learn the Theory behind
Quark-Gluon Tagging,”SciPost Phys.20(2026) 084,arXiv:2507.21214 [hep-ph].
[15] S. Forte, “Parton distributions at the dawn of the LHC,”Acta Phys. Polon. B41(2010)
2859–2920,arXiv:1011.5247 [hep-ph].
[16] J. Gao, L. Harland-Lang, and J. Rojo, “The Structure of the Proton in the LHC Precision
Era,”Phys. Rept.742(2018) 1–121,arXiv:1709.04922 [hep-ph].
[17] S. Carrazza, C. Degrande, S. Iranipour, J. Rojo, and M. Ubiali, “Can New Physics hide
inside the proton?,”Phys. Rev. Lett.123no. 13, (2019) 132001,arXiv:1905.05215
[hep-ph].
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
[18]NNPDFCollaboration, R. D. Ballet al., “An open-source machine learning framework
for global analyses of parton distributions,”Eur. Phys. J. C81no. 10, (2021) 958,
arXiv:2109.02671 [hep-ph].
[19] A. Barontini, A. Candido, J. M. Cruz-Martinez, F. Hekhorn, and C. Schwan, “Pineline:
Industrialization of high-energy theory predictions,”Comput. Phys. Commun.297(2024)
109061,arXiv:2302.12124 [hep-ph].
[20] G. Watt and R. S. Thorne, “Study of Monte Carlo approach to experimental uncertainty
propagation with MSTW 2008 PDFs,”JHEP08(2012) 052,arXiv:1205.4024 [hep-ph].
[21] R. K. Ellis, W. J. Stirling, and B. R. Webber,QCD and collider physics. Cambridge
monographs on particle physics, nuclear physics, and cosmology. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2003.https://cds.cern.ch/record/318585. Photography by S.
Vascotto.
[22] S. Forte and G. Watt, “Progress in the Determination of the Partonic Structure of the
Proton,”Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.63(2013) 291–328,arXiv:1301.6754 [hep-ph].
[23] R. D. Ball and S. Forte, “Double asymptotic scaling at HERA,”Phys. Lett. B335(1994)
77–86,arXiv:hep-ph/9405320.
[24] M. Fusi, “HTowards an explainable machine learning model of proton structure,” 2024.
https:
//nnpdf.mi.infn.it/wp-content/uploads/2025/06/2024_Magistrale_Fusi.pdf.
[25] M. Bonvini, S. Forte, and G. Ridolfi, “Soft gluon resummation of Drell-Yan rapidity
distributions: Theory and phenomenology,”Nucl. Phys. B847(2011) 93–159,
arXiv:1009.5691 [hep-ph].
[26]NNPDFCollaboration, R. D. Ball, J. Cruz-Martinez, L. Del Debbio, S. Forte,
Z. Kassabov, E. R. Nocera, J. Rojo, R. Stegeman, and M. Ubiali, “Response to ”Parton
distributions need representative sampling”,”arXiv:2211.12961 [hep-ph].
[27] T.-J. Houet al., “New CTEQ global analysis of quantum chromodynamics with
high-precision data from the LHC,”Phys. Rev. D103no. 1, (2021) 014013,
arXiv:1912.10053 [hep-ph].
[28] S. Bailey, T. Cridge, L. A. Harland-Lang, A. D. Martin, and R. S. Thorne, “Parton
distributions from LHC, HERA, Tevatron and fixed target data: MSHT20 PDFs,”Eur.
Phys. J. C81no. 4, (2021) 341,arXiv:2012.04684 [hep-ph].
[29] A. Courtoy, J. Huston, P. Nadolsky, K. Xie, M. Yan, and C. P. Yuan, “Parton
distributions need representative sampling,”Phys. Rev. D107no. 3, (2023) 034008,
arXiv:2205.10444 [hep-ph].
[30] J. Cruz-Martinez, A. Jansen, G. van Oord, T. R. Rabemananjara, C. M. R. Rocha,
J. Rojo, and R. Stegeman, “Hyperparameter optimisation in deep learning from ensemble
methods: applications to proton structure,”Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech.6no. 2, (2025)
025027,arXiv:2410.16248 [hep-ph].
[31] J. M. Cruz-Martinez, T. Giani, and T. R. Rabemananjara, “Hyperoptimisation algorithm
for the next generation of PDF determinations: ensemble regression with an unbiased
selection model,”arXiv:2605.31482 [hep-ph].
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
[32]New MuonCollaboration, M. Arneodoet al., “Accurate measurement of F2(d) / F2(p)
and R**d - R**p,”Nucl. Phys. B487(1997) 3–26,arXiv:hep-ex/9611022.
[33]New MuonCollaboration, M. Arneodoet al., “Measurement of the proton and deuteron
structure functions, F2(p) and F2(d), and of the ratio sigma-L / sigma-T,”Nucl. Phys. B
483(1997) 3–43,arXiv:hep-ph/9610231.
[34] L. W. Whitlow, E. M. Riordan, S. Dasu, S. Rock, and A. Bodek, “Precise measurements of
the proton and deuteron structure functions from a global analysis of the SLAC deep
inelastic electron scattering cross-sections,”Phys. Lett. B282(1992) 475–482.
[35]BCDMSCollaboration, A. C. Benvenutiet al., “A High Statistics Measurement of the
Proton Structure Functions F(2) (x, Q**2) and R from Deep Inelastic Muon Scattering at
High Q**2,”Phys. Lett. B223(1989) 485–489.
[36]BCDMSCollaboration, A. C. Benvenutiet al., “A High Statistics Measurement of the
Deuteron Structure Functions F2 (X,Q2) and R From Deep Inelastic Muon Scattering at
HighQ 2,”Phys. Lett. B237(1990) 592–598.
[37]CHORUSCollaboration, G. Onengutet al., “Measurement of nucleon structure functions
in neutrino scattering,”Phys. Lett. B632(2006) 65–75.
[38] D. A. Mason,Measurement of the strange - antistrange asymmetry at NLO in QCD from
NuTeV dimuon data. PhD thesis, Oregon U., 2006.
[39]H1, ZEUSCollaboration, H. Abramowiczet al., “Combination of measurements of
inclusive deep inelastice±pscattering cross sections and QCD analysis of HERA data,”
Eur. Phys. J. C75no. 12, (2015) 580,arXiv:1506.06042 [hep-ex].
[40]H1, ZEUSCollaboration, H. Abramowiczet al., “Combination and QCD analysis of
charm and beauty production cross-section measurements in deep inelasticepscattering at
HERA,”Eur. Phys. J. C78no. 6, (2018) 473,arXiv:1804.01019 [hep-ex].
[41]NuSeaCollaboration, R. S. Towellet al., “Improved measurement of the anti-d / anti-u
asymmetry in the nucleon sea,”Phys. Rev. D64(2001) 052002,arXiv:hep-ex/0103030.
[42]NuSeaCollaboration, J. C. Webbet al., “Absolute Drell-Yan Dimuon Cross Sections in
800 GeV/cppandpdCollisions,”arXiv:hep-ex/0302019.
[43] G. Morenoet al., “Dimuon Production in Proton - Copper Collisions at√s= 38.8-GeV,”
Phys. Rev. D43(1991) 2815–2836.
[44]SeaQuestCollaboration, J. Doveet al., “The asymmetry of antimatter in the proton,”
Nature590no. 7847, (2021) 561–565,arXiv:2103.04024 [hep-ph]. [Erratum: Nature
604, E26 (2022)].
[45]CDFCollaboration, T. A. Aaltonenet al., “Measurement ofdσ/dyof Drell-Yane +e−
pairs in theZMass Region fromp¯pCollisions at√s= 1.96TeV,”Phys. Lett. B692
(2010) 232–239,arXiv:0908.3914 [hep-ex].
[46]D0Collaboration, V. M. Abazovet al., “Measurement of the Shape of the Boson Rapidity
Distribution forp¯p→Z/γ∗→e +e− +XEvents Produced at √sof 1.96-TeV,”Phys. Rev.
D76(2007) 012003,arXiv:hep-ex/0702025.
[47]D0Collaboration, V. M. Abazovet al., “Measurement of the Muon Charge Asymmetry in
p¯p→W+X→µν+ X Events at √s=1.96 TeV,”Phys. Rev. D88(2013) 091102,
arXiv:1309.2591 [hep-ex].
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
[48]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of the inclusiveW ± and Z/gamma
cross sections in the electron and muon decay channels inppcollisions at√s= 7TeV with
the ATLAS detector,”Phys. Rev. D85(2012) 072004,arXiv:1109.5141 [hep-ex].
[49]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of the high-mass Drell–Yan
differential cross-section in pp collisions at sqrt(s)=7 TeV with the ATLAS detector,”
Phys. Lett. B725(2013) 223–242,arXiv:1305.4192 [hep-ex].
[50]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of the low-mass Drell-Yan
differential cross section at√s= 7 TeV using the ATLAS detector,”JHEP06(2014) 112,
arXiv:1404.1212 [hep-ex].
[51]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Precision measurement and interpretation of
inclusiveW + ,W − andZ/γ ∗ production cross sections with the ATLAS detector,”Eur.
Phys. J. C77no. 6, (2017) 367,arXiv:1612.03016 [hep-ex].
[52]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of the double-differential high-mass
Drell-Yan cross section in pp collisions at√s= 8TeV with the ATLAS detector,”JHEP
08(2016) 009,arXiv:1606.01736 [hep-ex].
[53]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Measurement of the Drell-Yan
triple-differential cross section inppcollisions at√s= 8TeV,”JHEP12(2017) 059,
arXiv:1710.05167 [hep-ex].
[54]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement ofW ± andZ-boson production cross
sections inppcollisions at √s= 13TeV with the ATLAS detector,”Phys. Lett. B759
(2016) 601–621,arXiv:1603.09222 [hep-ex].
[55]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Measurement of differential cross sections and
W +/W− cross-section ratios forWboson production in association with jets at√s= 8
TeV with the ATLAS detector,”JHEP05(2018) 077,arXiv:1711.03296 [hep-ex].
[Erratum: JHEP 10, 048 (2020)].
[56]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of the transverse momentum andϕ∗
η
distributions of Drell–Yan lepton pairs in proton–proton collisions at√s= 8TeV with the
ATLAS detector,”Eur. Phys. J. C76no. 5, (2016) 291,arXiv:1512.02192 [hep-ex].
[57]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of thet ¯tproduction cross-section
usingeµevents with b-tagged jets in pp collisions at√s= 7 and 8TeVwith the ATLAS
detector,”Eur. Phys. J. C74no. 10, (2014) 3109,arXiv:1406.5375 [hep-ex].
[Addendum: Eur.Phys.J.C 76, 642 (2016)].
[58]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of thet ¯tproduction cross-section in
the lepton+jets channel at√s= 13TeV with the ATLAS experiment,”Phys. Lett. B810
(2020) 135797,arXiv:2006.13076 [hep-ex].
[59]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurements of top-quark pair differential
cross-sections in the lepton+jets channel inppcollisions at√s= 8TeV using the ATLAS
detector,”Eur. Phys. J. C76no. 10, (2016) 538,arXiv:1511.04716 [hep-ex].
[60]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Measurement of top quark pair differential
cross-sections in the dilepton channel inppcollisions at√s= 7 and 8 TeV with ATLAS,”
Phys. Rev. D94no. 9, (2016) 092003,arXiv:1607.07281 [hep-ex]. [Addendum:
Phys.Rev.D 101, 119901 (2020)].
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
[61]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Measurement of the inclusive jet cross-sections
in proton-proton collisions at√s= 8TeV with the ATLAS detector,”JHEP09(2017)
020,arXiv:1706.03192 [hep-ex].
[62]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Measurement of dijet cross sections inppcollisions
at 7 TeV centre-of-mass energy using the ATLAS detector,”JHEP05(2014) 059,
arXiv:1312.3524 [hep-ex].
[63]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Measurement of the cross section for inclusive
isolated-photon production inppcollisions at √s= 13TeV using the ATLAS detector,”
Phys. Lett. B770(2017) 473–493,arXiv:1701.06882 [hep-ex].
[64]ATLASCollaboration, G. Aadet al., “Comprehensive measurements oft-channel single
top-quark production cross sections at√s= 7TeV with the ATLAS detector,”Phys. Rev.
D90no. 11, (2014) 112006,arXiv:1406.7844 [hep-ex].
[65]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Measurement of the inclusive cross-sections of
single top-quark and top-antiquarkt-channel production inppcollisions at√s= 13 TeV
with the ATLAS detector,”JHEP04(2017) 086,arXiv:1609.03920 [hep-ex].
[66]ATLASCollaboration, M. Aaboudet al., “Fiducial, total and differential cross-section
measurements oft-channel single top-quark production inppcollisions at 8 TeV using data
collected by the ATLAS detector,”Eur. Phys. J. C77no. 8, (2017) 531,
arXiv:1702.02859 [hep-ex].
[67]CMSCollaboration, S. Chatrchyanet al., “Measurement of the Electron Charge
Asymmetry in InclusiveWProduction inppCollisions at √s= 7TeV,”Phys. Rev. Lett.
109(2012) 111806,arXiv:1206.2598 [hep-ex].
[68]CMSCollaboration, S. Chatrchyanet al., “Measurement of the Muon Charge Asymmetry
in Inclusivepp→W+XProduction at √s=7 TeV and an Improved Determination of
Light Parton Distribution Functions,”Phys. Rev. D90no. 3, (2014) 032004,
arXiv:1312.6283 [hep-ex].
[69]CMSCollaboration, S. Chatrchyanet al., “Measurement of the Differential and
Double-Differential Drell-Yan Cross Sections in Proton-Proton Collisions at√s=7 TeV,”
JHEP12(2013) 030,arXiv:1310.7291 [hep-ex].
[70]CMSCollaboration, V. Khachatryanet al., “Measurement of the differential cross section
and charge asymmetry for inclusivepp→W± +Xproduction at √s= 8TeV,”Eur. Phys.
J. C76no. 8, (2016) 469,arXiv:1603.01803 [hep-ex].
[71]CMSCollaboration, V. Khachatryanet al., “Measurement of the Z boson differential
cross section in transverse momentum and rapidity in proton–proton collisions at 8 TeV,”
Phys. Lett. B749(2015) 187–209,arXiv:1504.03511 [hep-ex].
[72]CMSCollaboration, S. Chatrchyanet al., “Measurements of Differential Jet Cross
Sections in Proton-Proton Collisions at√s= 7TeV with the CMS Detector,”Phys. Rev.
D87no. 11, (2013) 112002,arXiv:1212.6660 [hep-ex]. [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 87,
119902 (2013)].
[73]CMSCollaboration, V. Khachatryanet al., “Measurement and QCD analysis of
double-differential inclusive jet cross sections in pp collisions at√s= 8TeV and cross
section ratios to 2.76 and 7 TeV,”JHEP03(2017) 156,arXiv:1609.05331 [hep-ex].
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
[74]CMSCollaboration, V. Khachatryanet al., “Measurement of the t-tbar production cross
section in the e-mu channel in proton-proton collisions at sqrt(s) = 7 and 8 TeV,”JHEP
08(2016) 029,arXiv:1603.02303 [hep-ex].
[75]CMSCollaboration, V. Khachatryanet al., “Measurement of the top quark pair
production cross section in proton-proton collisions at√s=13 TeV,”Phys. Rev. Lett.116
no. 5, (2016) 052002,arXiv:1510.05302 [hep-ex].
[76]CMSCollaboration, V. Khachatryanet al., “Measurement of the differential cross section
for top quark pair production in pp collisions at√s= 8TeV,”Eur. Phys. J. C75no. 11,
(2015) 542,arXiv:1505.04480 [hep-ex].
[77]CMSCollaboration, A. M. Sirunyanet al., “Measurement of the inclusivet tcross section
in pp collisions at√s= 5.02TeV using final states with at least one charged lepton,”
JHEP03(2018) 115,arXiv:1711.03143 [hep-ex].
[78]CMSCollaboration, A. M. Sirunyanet al., “Measurement of double-differential cross
sections for top quark pair production in pp collisions at√s= 8TeV and impact on
parton distribution functions,”Eur. Phys. J. C77no. 7, (2017) 459,arXiv:1703.01630
[hep-ex].
[79]CMSCollaboration, A. M. Sirunyanet al., “Measurements oft tdifferential cross sections
in proton-proton collisions at√s=13 TeV using events containing two leptons,”JHEP02
(2019) 149,arXiv:1811.06625 [hep-ex].
[80]CMSCollaboration, S. Chatrchyanet al., “Measurement of the Single-Top-Quark
t-Channel Cross Section inppCollisions at√s= 7TeV,”JHEP12(2012) 035,
arXiv:1209.4533 [hep-ex].
[81]CMSCollaboration, V. Khachatryanet al., “Measurement of the t-channel
single-top-quark production cross section and of the|Vtb|CKM matrix element in pp
collisions at√s= 8 TeV,”JHEP06(2014) 090,arXiv:1403.7366 [hep-ex].
[82]CMSCollaboration, A. M. Sirunyanet al., “Cross section measurement oft-channel single
top quark production in pp collisions at√s=13 TeV,”Phys. Lett. B772(2017) 752–776,
arXiv:1610.00678 [hep-ex].
[83]LHCbCollaboration, R. Aaijet al., “Measurement of the cross-section forZ→e +e−
production inppcollisions at √s= 7TeV,”JHEP02(2013) 106,arXiv:1212.4620
[hep-ex].
[84]LHCbCollaboration, R. Aaijet al., “Measurement of forwardZ→e +e− production at√s= 8TeV,”JHEP05(2015) 109,arXiv:1503.00963 [hep-ex].
[85]LHCbCollaboration, R. Aaijet al., “Measurement of the forwardZboson production
cross-section inppcollisions at √s= 7TeV,”JHEP08(2015) 039,arXiv:1505.07024
[hep-ex].
[86]LHCbCollaboration, R. Aaijet al., “Measurement of forward W and Z boson production
inppcollisions at √s= 8TeV,”JHEP01(2016) 155,arXiv:1511.08039 [hep-ex].
[87]LHCbCollaboration, R. Aaijet al., “Measurement of the forward Z boson production
cross-section in pp collisions at√s= 13TeV,”JHEP09(2016) 136,arXiv:1607.06495
[hep-ex].
37
