===== PAGE 1 =====
npj | complexity Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9
Assembly theory and its relationship with
computational complexity
Check for updates
Christopher P. Kempes1 , Michael Lachmann1,2 , Andrew Iannaccone3, G. Matthew Fricke3,
M. Redwan Chowdhury2,S a r aI .W a l k e r1,2,4 &L e r o yC r o n i n1,5
Assembly theory (AT) quanti ﬁes selection using the assembly equation, identifying complex objects
through the assembly index, the minimal steps required to build an object from basic parts, and copy
number, the observed instances of the object. These measure a quantity called Assembly, capturing
causation necessary to produce abundant objects, distinguishing selection-driven complexity from
random generation. Unlike computational complexity theory, which often emphasizes minimal
description length via compressibility, AT explicitly focuses on the causation captured by selection as
the mechanism behind complexity. We illustrate formal distinctions through mathematical examples
demonstrating that the assembly index is fundamentally distinct from complexity metrics like Shannon
entropy, Huffman encoding, and Lempel –Ziv–Welch compression. We provide proofs showing that
the assembly index belongs to a different computational complexity class compared to these
measures and compression algorithms. Additionally, we highlight AT ’s unique ontological grounding
as a physically measurable framework, setting it apart from abstract theoretical approaches to
formalizing life that lack empirical measurement foundations.
Understanding evolution in the most general terms, including how the
process of selection manifested before the genetic code, is of primary interest
for uncovering the origin of life and the prospects of other life in the
universe1–7. A major challenge is that current theories of evolution typically
begin from some intermediate, preexisting biological system and, as such,
can only describe the evolutionary dynamics within that system. Assembly
theory (AT) was developed to prov ide a more general framework for
understanding evolution and selection, allowing detection of the signatures
of any evolutionary process8, including probing stages of evolution on Earth
predating genomes. By combining a formal theoretical 8–10 and
experimental11,12 approach to determine whether or not observed objects are
the product of evolution, AT is opening new avenues of research for life
detection13–16, the design of synthetic life17,18, the design of experiments to
p r o b et h ed en o v oo r i g i no fl i f ei nt h el a b o r a t o r y19, and opportunities to look
deeper into the history of life on Earth (e.g., predating the evolution of the
genome)20. In its formalization, AT includes a new, empirically measurable
form of complexity, Assembly, t hat adds unique features to the ﬁeld of
complexity metrics and opens avenuesf o rh o wc o m p l e x i t yc a nb em e a s u r e d
as a physical quantity.
As with any theory that attempts to capture broad regularities in the
physical world, there is necessarily a large amount of abstraction in going
from measurement to theory in the development of AT21.T h i sh a sl e dt o
some confusion about whether what the theory proposes is genuinely new22–25
or is already captured by other theoretical metrics of complexity developed
over many decades26,27. Some researchers have claimed that AT is identical to
several other complexity measures22–24, but do so by pointing to mathematical
formalizations that are not formally equivalent to one another, and, as we
show here, are also not formally equivalent to AT. In this work, we hope to
clarify how AT differs formally and in practice from currently available
complexity measures. Providing clarity to the discussion requires demon-
strating formal uniqueness and understanding the connection between dif-
ferent theoretical concepts of complexity, and in the case of AT, the role of its
ontological basis in physical measurement. The assembly index (AI), a critical
component of AT, has been demonstrated to be measurable as an intrinsic
physical observable in molecules. Thisrequires being explicit about differ-
ences in the physical basis of computational complexity and AT, because the
latter was explicitly developed as an empirically-grounded theory of com-
plexity, not a purely theoretical one.
The theory of computation was not e xplicitly developed to solve the
problem of the origin of life28, nor was it even devised as a formal approach to
life or to physical systems. In fact, one of the central goals of theoretical
computer science is formal analysis without reference to particular
1The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA. 2BEYOND Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 3Computer
Science, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA. 4School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 5School of
Chemistry, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK. e-mail: ckempes@santafe.edu; mlachmann@gmail.com; sara.i.walker@asu.edu;
lee.cronin@glasgow.ac.uk
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

===== PAGE 2 =====
hardware or implementations. Nonetheless, the connection between com-
putation and living processes has beennoted by many researchers over the
years29–32. The key ideas of theoretical computer science were laid out in the
seminal work of Turing 33 and Church34. Early work by von Neumann
attempted to analogize the concept of universal computation to that of
universal construction35, providing a thought experiment of an abstract
machine that can construct any buildable physical object (rather than
compute any computable function as a universal Turing machine does).
This difference is important because one theory, that of computation, deals
with the inputs and outputs of programs, how to describe these, the com-
putational resources (time and spa ce) required, and the complexity of
algorithms for producing speciﬁc outputs. The other, that of construction,
was intended to deal with objects constructed by physical processes, not data
and algorithms. That is, in the latter, the constraints of physical law are
necessarily foundational36.W h i l ev o nN e u m a n n’s universal constructor was
primarily a theoretical concept, it was later implemented in computational
experiments with cellular automata35, and the distinction between compu-
tation and construction has, thus far, remained mostly abstract. Self-
replicating robotics has extended this idea to the physical world, but so far
requires prefabricated building blocks and are far from being universal
constructors37. Assembly theory (AT) makes the connection of these ideas to
physics and metrology38 concrete, thus providing the ﬁrst step toward a
testable theory of selection as a mechanism for constructing objects.
In what follows, weﬁrst introduce the foundations of AT as developed
to date. We subsequently establish why AT is not the same as computational
approaches to life. (1) We show with explicit examples how a key compo-
nent of AT, the assembly index (AI), is not formally equivalent to other
measures of complexity derived from computer science and information
theory. Speci ﬁcally, we show, with simple but rigorous mathematical
counterexamples, why AI yields quantitatively different results when
compared to compression algorithms like Huffman coding and
Lempel–Ziv–Welch (LZW) compression, which have been argued to be
identical to AI. (2) We provide formal proofs for the calculation of the
assembly index of strings, showing it is not in the same computational
complexity class as these compression algorithms, de ﬁnitively demon-
strating that no formal equivalence is possible. We demonstrate that com-
putation of the assembly index is NP- complete, so its computation is
mathematically in an equivalent class to other optimal compression algo-
rithms. However, this similarity does not undermine its ontological differ-
ences. We make this comparison not to equate assembly theory with
abstract computation, but to lay to rest certain claims made that the
assembly index is equivalent to metrics and algorithms in the complexity
class P, which it cannot be. We therefore (3) also discuss metrology, and how
assembly theory provides a rigorous approach to the physical measurement
of complexity and life detection, which has not been shown to be emulated
by computational complexity measures. We discuss how empirically, the
assembly index is developed as a physical observable, whereas Huffman
coding, LZW compression and Kolmogorov complexity are computed from
labeled data. (4) Because it is physically relevant, it should be expected that
assembly, when used to detect life and evolution, will have lower false
positive and false negative rates than purely algorithmic measures. Because it
is a context-free approach, it is also a standardized comparison across
experiments and planetary environments. Any of these points would be
sufﬁcient to distinguish AT from computational approaches to formalizing
life, but we also highlight how (5) AT is not based on AI alone and reem-
phasize the importance of the copy number in AT. Approximating any
feature of AT with a mathematical measure does not replace the physical
insights the theory aims to provide or invalidate the explanations it might
afford.
Any useful approach to quantifyingcomplexity relevant to life detec-
t i o n( i nt h el a bo ro no t h e rw o r l d s )m u s tb r i d g et h er e a l i t yg a pb e t w e e n
theory and empirical testing and validation. That is, it must engage with
metrology. This is a primary reason why AT was developed in the context of
a modern chemistry lab ’s capabilities, with its initial development as a
rigorous method for laboratory studies aiming to identify molecules as
biosignatures11.Ak e yc o n j e c t u r eo fA Ti st h a t“life” is the only mechanism
for producing highly complex identical objects in abundance, ranging from
molecules, to cells, to memes and beyond. This proposal leads to a key,
testable prediction of the theory that high AI objects with a high copy
number will not be found independently of evolutionary processes39 (see
e.g., ref. 40 for a broad discussion on abstracting the living process). While
many kinds of measures of molecularcomplexity computed on graphs have
been developed over the years41–43, the key advance offered by AT was to
propose and formalize a precise conjecture on the relationship between
molecular complexity and life and allow an experimental test. This obser-
vation necessarily and intentionally grounds AT in experimental science,
since the threshold of the copy numberand AI that constitute a biosignature
is an essentially empirical one. AT provides a physical measurement of how
much selective constraints have been applied to generate an object and,
therefore, how likely it is to be associated with a living process.
Assembly theory has the following observables: copy number,n,a n d
the assembly index,ai
8. The copy number,n, of an object refers to how many
identical objects are observed. Here, it is important to clarify what an object
is in AT, because the deﬁnition departs from most deﬁn i t i o n si np h y s i c sa n d
other ﬁelds, including as used in other approaches to formalize complexity
(we shall return to this point later). In AT, objects have the properties of
being ﬁnite, distinguishable, breakable (and therefore constructable), and
they must be able to persist in multiple identical copies. With this deﬁnition
of an object, the assembly index ai quantiﬁes the minimal number of
recursive, compositional joining operations necessary to construct an object
from its elementary parts. The exact de ﬁnition of assembly index is
restricted to the assembly space of physically meaningful operations, see
Fig. 1 for an example of the molecule adenosine. As AT is developed, we
expect it will ﬁnd applications beyond the initial focus on covalent chem-
istry, including more abstracted sp aces like minerals, gene/protein
sequences, language, and many types of technology.
For molecules, both the copy number, n (abundance of molecular
species) anda (minimal number of bond-making operations, allowing reuse
of parts) are measurable in the lab. Assembly index ai, referred to as the
molecular assembly index (MA) for molecules, can be measured using mass
spectrometry, NMR, and infrared techniques12. For an observed con ﬁg-
uration of complex matter (e.g., a system that can be broken apart to more
basic building blocks), taking acco unt of both the number of copies of
distinguishable objects and their assembly indices allows quantifying
Assembly, A, which we conjectured captures the total amount of selection
required to produce it. Formally, for an ensemble ofN total (non-unique)
objects, the Assembly is deﬁned8 as
A ¼
X
i
eai
ni /C0 1
N
/C18/C19
ð1Þ
where the terms of ni and ai are the copy number and assembly index,
respectively, of theith distinguishable object inthe ensemble. The assembly
equation, Eq. 1, represents a formalization of selection and evolution in a
very large combinatorial space, the assembly space, de ﬁned as the set of
recursive, physically implementable (and thus measurable) operations from
which objects can be constructed (Fig.1).
AT suggests that the combinatorial space of evolutionary objects is best
understood in terms of coordinates of assembly index and copy number
within the assembly space8. Finding objects with high assembly indices in
high copy number, yields large values of A, implying substantial selection
must have occurred 11,12. This is because it becomes super-exponentially
more difﬁcult to produce identical copies ofincreasingly assembled objects
with largeai by chance alone (i.e., there is a super-exponential expansion of
the combinatorial space for each po ssible joining operation). That is,
observingni≫1 for a complex object with sufﬁciently high ai is nontrivial,
and in AT is conjectured to be impossible to happen abiotically. In AT,
conﬁgurations of matter with large A are unreasonably unlikely to occur
outside of selective processes found in what we call“life”. Here, we are using
selection in a generalized sense: selection is the mechanism whereby a set of
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 2

===== PAGE 3 =====
constructive circumstances yields the formation of some subsets of objects
over others. This spans simple reaction rate differences to formal modern
genetics, where the strength of selection would also be larger for the latter,
thus yielding higher A. Laboratory measurements of molecular assembly
indices conﬁrm the conjecture that an observational threshold for the evi-
dence of selection and evolution exists. To date, experimental studies of
abiotic, biological, and blinded samples indicate that molecules withai >1 5
are found only in living samples11.
Results
Overview of complexity measures
The ontology underlying AT as a theory of physics is different than that of
the theory of computation, see Table1. In what follows, we compare AT to
computational and information-theoretic approaches to quantifying com-
plexity. For some comparisons, we give explicit examples, while for others
we do not because the differences in ontology and computability already
make clear the most salient distinctions between different approaches, and
in some cases these distinctions are so apparent as to make direct com-
parison not meaningful. For establishing mathematical uniqueness, we take
the simplest and most illustrative approach, in the form of basic counter-
examples. We consider cases where the assembly index is distinct for two
outputs, but those two outputs yield the same value in another complexity
measure; and we show cases where the assembly index is the same for two
outputs, but other complexity measuresyield distinct values. Either scenario
would be enough to show that the assembly index is not one-to-one with the
comparison complexity measure.
Before we dive into computational complexity, it is important to note
that there are different notions of equivalence. Computational complexity
employs a weak notion of equivalence that does not require a strict one-to-
one equality for metrics in the same broad complexity class. Physics and the
natural sciences often require a stronger notion of equivalence associated
with equality and one-to-one correspondence, often rooted in mechanism,
a n dt h i sn o t i o ni sw h a tw ew o u l dr e q uire for the assembly index. These
different disciplinary notions of equivalence have caused a lot of confusion.
The most widely discussed measure ofcomputational complexity is the
Kolmogorov–Chaitin complexity44,45, also known as algorithmic complex-
ity. Formally, the algorithmic complexityK(x) of a string x is deﬁned as the
length of the shortest computer program, which, when run, will output x
(assuming aﬁxed programming language). That is,K(x) is the length of the
minimum description ofx, found by searching over all programs that output
x in the language x is described in. The value of K(x) for a given string,
therefore, depends on the choice of description language (and, for example,
NN
N
N
O
HO
OH
HO
H2N
OH
NH2
NH
Building blocks
Assembly pool
Observed
NH
H
N
O
HO
OH
HO
H2N
NH
N
N
O
HO
OH
HO
H2N
N NH2
NH
HN
O
HO
OH
HO
NH
H
N
O
HO
OH
HO
HN
H
N
O
HO
OH
HO
HN NH2
H2N
O
HO
OH
HO
O
HO
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
OHHO
OH
Adenosine molecular assembly pathway
Fig. 1 | An illustration showing how a molecule can be cut into basic units, and recursively assembled from them to construct a minimum assembly path.The molecule’s
molecular assembly index is the number of steps on the path.
Table 1 | Comparative ontology of complexity measures
Complexity Theory Operands Measures Description/Details
Algorithmic complexity Classes of mathematical
problems
Computational complexity Kolmogorov
complexity;
Measures are concerned with optimal (minimal) descriptions of
products of computational procedures, or the computational
resources required for an algorithm that could produce the given
output
Compression and
statistical complexity
Data and its
representations
Huffman code; Lempel –Ziv–Welch
compression; Information theory
Measures provide data transformations to generate reduced
representations
Physical complexity States of physical
systems
Logical depth; Thermodynamic depth; Measures are concerned with the physical resource needed to
compute a minimum description, or the probabilities of observed
paths to produce a state
Assembly theory Physical objects Assembly index Measure is concerned with the minimum construction as an intrinsic
and measurable physical attribute
Examples of different kinds of complexity theories and measures, describing their operands, measures, and conceptual underpinnings.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
might be different if we wrote the program in C versus Python)46.F o u n -
dational results in the theory of computation establish there can be no
algorithm that determines whether an arbitrary program will produce a
g i v e no u t p u ta st h i sw o u l di n v o l v e ,a tl e a s t ,d e c i d i n gw h e t h e rt h ep r o g r a m
will halt, which is uncomputable 33 and therefore K(x) is also
uncomputable44,45. For the example above, the two strings have equivalent
size, but their complexity is not the same:Kx 1
/C0/C1
> Kx 2
/C0/C1
,a n dx2 would thus
be described as more compressible. However, there is no way to guaranteex1
does not have some hidden pattern in it that makes it just as compressible as
x2 (that is, although we have shown Kx 1
/C0/C1
> Kx 2
/C0/C1
for the two shortest
programs we were able to identify, it could still be possible that there exists
an algorithm K’ x1
/C0/C1
≤ Kx 2
/C0/C1
).
In Abrahão et al.22 and Ozelim et al.24, the authors make an argument
that since AT does not offer any innovations in approximating K,i ti s
rendered redundant by preexisting methods of lossless compression.
However, this represents a fundamental misunderstanding because
approximatingK is not, and was never, the goal of AT. It is our view thatK is
not as relevant as a physical measurement of complexity generated by
evolutionary processes. The assembly index comes to estimate a lower
bound on the chance of the random generation of the molecule from
molecular inﬂow into the system, by formalizing the minimum causation
necessary to make an observed conﬁguration. The algorithmic complexity,
on the other hand, is the minimal size of the program required to generate a
certain output— given a universal turing machine. The latter introduces a
deep philosophical challenge in that the construction of the molecule
requires construction of the molecule itself by the UTM (we ignore for a
second the fact that a UTM cannot co nstruct molecules), but also the
construction of the UTM itself (this in essence was von Neumann’sp o i n ti n
developing the idea of a universal c onstructor). Construction of such a
reliable computer will require many more steps than the construction of the
molecules that we are interested in when detecting life. Though it is true that
very simple physical systems can ex hibit universal computation when
properly encoded by human intervention47, there is no evidence of any non-
evolved system that exhibits universal computation, that can reliably control
molecular reactions, and can form itself within a small number of steps in
ﬁnite time. In fact, the only process that we know of anywhere in the
universe that can build such a machine isthe evolution of life itself. Until we
can ﬁnd such a process, or a reason for it to exist outside of evolution, the
assumption that before the origin of life, molecules form in large numbers
only through assembly processes in the absence of computers seems well-
founded. Thus, the assembly index does not come to approximate K,
insteadK is a poor approximation for the minimal chance of formation of
molecules, a task that the assembly index was speciﬁcally designed for. As an
e x a m p l e ,l e tu sl o o ka tap o l y m e rt h a tr e p r e s e n t st h eﬁrst 100 digits of the
number e in some base, that is present in an abundance such that it can be
unambiguously detected. This is a relatively simple computation, and
therefore, the program to compute it can be small. However, the length of
this program will not represent the chance for the formation of such a
molecule. Instead, it will form by assembly of the monomers plus assembly
of the 100 digits, very similar to the assembly index of any other random
polymer of length 100. Without a universal Turing machine, the fact that
there is a small program to generate the sequence is meaningless, and the
hard task in the evolution of lifeis building the machines in theﬁrst place.
Motivation for AT and the Assembly index
Assembly index was developed as an exact, objective measure that can be
probed by different experimental techniques, capturing symmetries and
reuse of fragments in the assembly pathway to construct a molecule (Fig.1).
This distinguishes it from statistical notions of complexity, which rely on
computed probabilities from the observed frequency of reuse of segments in
a data structure. Nonetheless, the assembly index has been critiqued as both
a restricted version of Huffman coding 22,23 and described as reducible to
Shannon entropy24.F o r m a l l y ,a“restricted version” or “reducible” should
imply that one formulation is a formal subset of another. For Huffman
coding, Shannon entropy and assembly index, it is easy to explicitly show
these are not equivalent and therefore that assembly index is by no formal
means a “restricted version” of Huffman coding or reducible to Shannon
entropy.
Information theory provides the theoretical underpinnings for
efﬁcient data compression and coding techniques, establishing limits on
to what degree data can be compressed without losing information
(lossless compression), and how information can be transmitted over a
noisy channel reliably. Concepts like algorithmic complexity 44,45, Huff-
man coding 48, arithmetic coding 49, and channel capacity 50 are all
grounded in information-theoretic principles. Information-theoretic
measures like Shannon entropy 50, mutual information 51, transfer
entropy52, and synergistic information 53, etc., are widely used to char-
acterize the complexity, dependencies, and similarities in data across
complex systems54,55.
Shannon entropy is a powerful tool due its generality, but this also
means one must exercise caution in itsinterpretation as it can be applied to
any data labeling scheme one might wish to de ﬁne56,57. Indeed, Shannon
entropy provides a good example of how being explicit about the ontology of
the abstract variables that appear in our different mathematical concepts of
information is critical to understand their utility (see Table1). For example,
if X labels the microstate of a physical system, the mathematical form for
Shannon entropy is nearly identi cal to the thermodynamic entropy 58
SXðÞ ¼ kTH XðÞ where here k is the Boltzmann constant and T the tem-
perature of the system. This allows a physical interpretation that has utility:
there are many reasons to think that many complex systems, from languages
to computer algorithms, would target distributions of states, and the ener-
getic costs of moving between states, as a key feature for re ﬁnement. The
formal equivalence of Boltzmann and Shannon entropies has therefore led
to interesting work on the connections between information theory, com-
putation, and thermodynamics59. Stemming from the work of Landauer60,
much of this effort has focused on the minimal energy required to perform a
computation by casting computations as entropy transformations, and on
showing that storing and erasing information comes with certain energetic
costs, which includes experimental veriﬁcation61. Such connections have
even been used to bound the thermodynamic efﬁciency of the ribosome as a
string writing device.
Huffman coding48 is among the most widely used lossless data com-
pression algorithms. A Huff man code is constructed by ﬁrst building a
frequency table of characters and their occurrence counts, see Fig. 2.T h e
compression efﬁcacy of Huffman encoding depends on the character fre-
quency skew, where data with highly frequent characters are compressed the
most, and data with uniform distributions of characters are compressed
the least.
As a simple illustrative example of formal differences between
assembly index, Shannon entropy and Huffman coding, we consider the
strings:
zbzbzca ¼ ao f 4
zzzbbca ¼ ao f 5
These strings are identical in length and composition (with the same
number of z’s, b’s, and c’s), and thus have the same string entropy and
Huffman coding. However, the two strings have different assembly indices
(4 and 5, respectively).
The Huffman tree is constructed by creating a node for each character
and repeatedly combining the two least frequent nodes/characters into a
new parent node, until only one parent node, the root node, remains, see
Fig. 2.F o rt h ee x a m p l ea b o v e ,t h et r e et h a tg e n e r a t e st h ec o d ea l p h a b e ti s
identical for the two strings (because they have the same character fre-
quencies) with the following code assignments
z ! 1
b ! 01
c ! 00
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 4

===== PAGE 5 =====
which results in the encoded output strings
zbzbzc ! 101101100
zzzbbc ! 111010100
There are several observations of note here. Two strings with different
assembly indices can produce identical Huffman trees and code alphabets.
The two representations, Huffmann coding and assembly index, are not
one-to-one because the Huffman trees are identical for strings that have
different assembly spaces, see Fig.2, providing a counterexample proof that
AT cannot be a subset of Huffman coding (contrary to the claims of ref.22)
because there can be no 1:1 map between the two applicable in every case.
This establishes that the assembly index is formally unique when compared
to Huffman coding.
Assembly index is not a statistical measure and does not rely on the
frequencies of characters; instead, itaims to capture features of the recursive
composition of objects as they are c onstructed from a base alphabet. By
contrast, Huffman trees are often highly degenerate because they map the
speciﬁc structure of strings onto character frequencies, which is a many-to-
one mapping. In general, the assembly index is more weakly dependent on
character frequencies than such statistical measures, and it will yield dif-
ferent values in many cases where Sh annon entropy or Huffman coding
would not resolve differences between strings.
Some have argued that lossless compression, like that involved in
generating a Huffman code, is relevant to evolution, particularly in
describing genomes62. However, genomes are highly constrained by the
evolutionary history of the ribosome, and physical constraints on protein
folding63. As such, compression might not yield the most accurate insights
into evolutionary reﬁnement of genomic architecture, especially as it does
not account for the physical and physio logical constraints present in all
cellular life64–66 (or viruses67). Given that compression-based measures are
sensitive to the choice of data representation, they must be applied with care
in a biological context: the labels hu mans use for data to describe living
things may not be the same labeling scheme those organisms implement
themselves, even if it were the case where an organism was indeed per-
forming data compression.
By contrast, the aim of AT is different because it does not presuppose
that a compressed description is necessary, and the theory is agnostic to
assumptions that cellular life is doing any kind of computation or algo-
rithmic compression. That is, AT doe sn o tr e l yo nah u m a no rc o m p u t e r -
based labeling scheme, or any kind of statistical description of data; instead,
it aims to identify the underlying structure of the physical space in which
selection operates (the assembly space).
The assembly index has also been criticized by the same group of
researchers as identical to other compression algorithms, including the
Lempel–Ziv compression scheme22–24. But again, we can establish formal
independence with basic worked examples for strings. We consider
Lempel–Ziv–Welch (LZW) for an explicit example 68. For LZW a string
sequence is read from left to right, and a lookup table is built for new
substrings. The longest matching substring is chosen, and a new substring
which includes that substring and the next letter in the input is added to the
lookup table along with a new index. Regular signals can be characterized by
a small number of patterns and hence have low LZW complexity. Irregular
signals require long dictionaries and hence have a high LZW complexity
(most schemes employ a maximum dictionary size based on the number of
available character bits). The easiest way to establish that LZW is not for-
mally equivalent to the assembly index is to look at the scaling of the simplest
string case, a repeated single letter (Fig. 3). If we use LZW compression,
string length,l, will grow following:
liþ1 ¼ li þ i þ 1
l1 ¼ 1
wherei counts the number of compression steps to build up to the next most
compressible string of a single letter. This yields a scaling of the longest string
length that can be reached by n compression steps (or dictionary
Fig. 2 | Two strings with different assembly index but identical Huffman trees. A single case such as this is sufﬁcient to demonstrate that the assembly index cannot be a
“restricted case” of Huffman coding, because it demonstrates that the assembly indices cannot be mapped one-to-one with Huffman trees.
Fig. 3 |The most compressible string of a single letter as represented inn steps of Lempel–Ziv–Welch (LZW) compared withn assembly steps, demonstrating that the scaling
of the two algorithms is not equivalent and by extension there can be no formal equivalence between the two.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 5

===== PAGE 6 =====
construction steps) as
ln ¼ nn þ 1ðÞ
2
/C18/C19
Assembly index looks for the shortest path using parts that have
already been constructed, and it has previously been shown that this string
will grow with assembly steps like8–10:
la ¼ 2a
where we have used the relation of assembly index to string length for single
character strings,a = n–1, for n assembly steps. It is clear that the scaling of
length versus steps for assembly index and LZW are not equivalent: for n
steps in LZW compression, string length scales likeln / n2 (in the limit of
large strings) compared to the much faster scaling ofla / 2a for a + 1s t e p s
along an assembly path. Inverting these weﬁnd the number of compression
steps scales with string length asn /
ﬃﬃ
l
p
for LZW schemes, and the number
of assembly steps scales likea / log2l:
For LZW compression to be implementable, it requires the develop-
ment of a rather sophisticated structure of reading, labeling, and storing
data68. It is not clear how many complex systems will emergently discover
such sophisticated algorithms for data processing. It also depends on how
sequences of data are read: data with similar character count, repetition of
structure etc., can have very different LZW compressions because these are
highly dependent on reading the data from left to right, what characters are
at the start of the sequence, and therefore are sensitive to how one chooses to
read the data69.
Comparison of AT with other complexity measures
O t h e rL Za l g o r i t h m ss u c ha sL Z 7 7h a v ea l s ob e e nc l a i m e db yt h es a m eg r o u p
of authors to be equivalent to, or outperform, assembly index22–24. However,
these algorithms are always constructedto read data with directionality (e.g.,
from left to right), with no look-ahead. This feature makes these algorithms
efﬁcient— they do not need many passes over theﬁle, or often just one. The
Assembly index, on the other hand, looks at global optima. It does not just
do a look-ahead; it goes much further and looks over all possible assembly
p a t h w a y s .T h i si sb e c a u s et h e r ei sn orequirement for speed, but instead to
reach an inherent, global, property of the molecule. Sacriﬁcing this feature to
make LZ algorithms look more like assembly index calculations therefore
removes a central feature of LZ compression schemes, making the direct
comparison of these algorithms more of a mathematical exercise in
approximating assembly index with a LZ like scheme, then a meaningful
statement of exact equivalences between LZ algorithms and assembly index.
In theﬁeld of computational complexity measures, differences of this degree
are sufﬁcient to categorize algorithms as distinct. Indeed, as we will show in
the next section, computation of the mathematical metric of the assembly
index is NP-complete, which puts it in a different computational complexity
class than most compression measures, including LZ, meaning it must be
formally distinct from them. We not e that for molecules, algorithms to
compute exact values of assembly index are nontrivial 70, and we do not
expect any of the approximate approaches presented in ref.22 to work in
many important cases (this again goesback to the issues of representation of
data and labeling, the algorithms the authors implement in ref.22 will not
yield the same results as assembly index in all cases, and would require
modiﬁcation for each new data type for encoding molecular data). The
mathematical relationships of assembly index to optimal compression are
indeed intriguing, but it is important to keep in mind the difference between
math and physics, and the assembly index is intended to be a mathematical
representation of a physical attribute of evolved objects.
Computational complexity class of AT
In theoretical computer science, a common way to classify algorithms is by
their computational complexity class27. If two algorithms are in the same
complexity class, they could be equivalent in the dif ﬁculty of their com-
putation, although the form of the metrics may not be one-to-one or
indicate the same things about the outputs. However, if two algorithms are
found to not be in the same complexity class, it is understood they will never
be shown to be formally equivalent (assuming P does not equal NP). In the
supplement, we show that the formal de ﬁnition of assembly spaces, as
originally stated by ref. 11 and expanded on in the supplement, is NP-
complete. It should be noted that, thus far in this paper, we have focused on
strings since they provide simple examples, and while they have not so far
been the primary focus of the developers of AT, these are the focus of several
works that are critical of the theory. Indeed, AT is more general than the
string structures discussed in these criticisms. AT was developed to deal with
molecules, and these are much more complicated structures with more
complicated attachment rules than strings; thus, we would not expect all
properties of string assembly to generalize to the more complex case of
molecules. AT, and within it the calculation of the assembly index, covers a
wide range of complexity classes. In the proof in the supplement, we give an
exact deﬁnition of assembly index and show that a set of string assembly
problems are NP-complete. The problem of tiling— whether a shape can be
fully covered using a set of tiles— can be included in assembly space and is
very similar to assembling a molecule using a set of input molecular
structures. Tiling of 2D and 3D shapes is known to be NP-complete 71.
Answering whether a molecule can be assembled out of a set of tiles is
simpler than answering what the minimal number of steps to do so;
therefore, we know that molecular assembly must be at least NP-complete.
Other assembly problems could be simpler. Thus, string assembly is
probably NP-hard, whereas the problemof assembling strings of different
lengths out of a single letter is equivalent to the shortest addition chain
problem, whose exact complexity is unknown, but possibly lower72.
It is signi ﬁcant to our discussion that the assembly index is NP-
complete because most compression problems can be solved in polynomial
time. Denoted P, this class is deﬁned as the space of all algorithms that can be
computed in time bounded by a polynomial function of the size of the input.
This makes sense for compression al gorithms, because the goal of com-
pression is providing data representations that are easy to compute. Another
widely studied class of algorithms lives in the class of non-deterministic
polynomial time problems, denoted NP, deﬁned as the space of algorithms
w h e r eak n o w no u t p u th a sap r o o ft h a tc a nb ev e r iﬁed in polynomial time by
a deterministic Turing machine, or solved in polynomial time by a non-
deterministic one. Non-deterministic Turing machines can be simulated by
deterministic Turing machines, but this simulation generally requires
exponential time in the worst case. After that, the next class of interest is
non-deterministic polynomial time complete problems, denoted NP-
complete. NP-complete problems form an equivalence class, deﬁned as the
space of algorithms where it is possible to reduce one NP problem to another
NP-complete problem in polynomial time. This is relevant because the class
of NP-complete problems cannot be mapped to problems in P. Problems in
P, however, can be trivially mapped toproblems in the NP-complete class,
since the problems in P are an easier subset of the NP-complete problems.
The result that computing the assembly index for strings is NP-
complete has several important consequences. First, NP-complete problems
are expected to have an exponential worst-case runtime27, and so algorithms
that ﬁnd the assembly index could have an exponential runtime. Second,
proving assembly index is NP-complete means it cannot be strictly
equivalent to LZ algorithms, Huffmann coding, or Shannon entropy
because these are all in the complexity class P and computing these scales
likeO(n)log(n), O(n), andO(n) respectively73,74 as opposed toexp(n). Indeed,
any complexity measure that lives in Pcannot be strictly equivalent to the
assembly index, which is NP-complete. There will be NP-complete problem
instances that cannot be mapped to problem instances in P. This result
implies our counterexamples are not just speciﬁc cases but represent general
and fundamental differences between the assembly index and these com-
pression algorithms. Comparisonsto Huffman coding, Shannon entropy,
LZW, and LZ77 can only be approximate comparisons to assembly index
and will never represent exact equivalences.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Purpose of AT and assembly index
A critical divergence between these compression algorithms and AT lies in
the interest in optimality. Compressi on algorithms, while theoretically
concerned withﬁnding the shortest possible representation, are more often
used in a context where one settles for“good enough”solutions that achieve
practical compression ratios quickly. The actual global minimum is not
essential for their primary function of efﬁcient data reduction. However, in
AT, the global minimum (assembly index) is of central interest because it
captures minimum causation as an intrinsic physical feature. Note we have
not ruled out that computation of the assembly index is equivalent to some
NP-complete compression algorithms; for example, optimal, i.e., minimal
output length, text-substitution, andrun-count compression algorithms are
NP-complete74,75. Shannon entropy is in O(n)w h e r en is the length of the
input string, since the algorithm only must iterate over the string once to
calculate the frequency of each character. Compression algorithms in the
computational complexity class P, suchas those reviewed herein, are useful
because they are efﬁcient, and in some cases, can be computed with a single
pass over the input. Compression algorithms in the NP-complete compu-
tation class are intractable for compression, and therefore, efﬁcient heuristic
compression is universally preferred. Assembly index might be considered
an optimal compression strategy in this sense since it returns the minimum
object reconstruction path, but it is important to recognize that the goal of
AT is not to provide a formal measu re of compression. One should not
confuse the mathematical representation of a theory with what it describes
about the physical world, and indeed,many mathematical theories of nature
can be expressed by equivalent but different representations simply due to
the nature of mathematical description. A trivial example is how many
mechanistic derivations will lead to a square root of time scaling, but not all
of these are a random walk. The assembly index, as far as what it is meant to
represent about the physical world, d oes not describe algorithmic com-
pression, even if its formal representation may be equivalent mathematically
to descriptions of some optimal compression algorithms. Finding a formal
equivalence with another algorithm that is likewise NP-complete would in
no way invalidate the theory, but could be useful in providing other ways to
compute the assembly index, which might in turn be useful in testing AT’s
theoretical predictions against experimental data. Compression algorithms
used in practice are heuristics that attempt to approximate optimal com-
pression while being computationally tractable. Similarly, AI requires
heuristic approximations for large p roblems. Heuristics often leverage
assumptions about the problem domain to improve their approximations.
In the domain of string AI, compression heuristics such as LZ compression
may indeed provide useful insights. However, in the case of approximating
molecular assembly, relevant to agnostic biosignature detection, the best
heuristics will likely leveragedomain chemistry knowledge.
Many complexity measures can be correlated while not being formally
identical. In fact, it should be expected that most computational complexity
measures will be correlated with output size, and indeed, all measures we
have discussed herein are (at least weakly) correlated for this reason. In
Ozelim et al.24, the authors claimed correlations between assembly index and
other complexity metrics invalidate the use of assembly index as a physical
observable. This represents a misconception about the differences between
correlation and metrology. It may be possible to correlate all sorts of vari-
ables, but only the assembly index has been shown to be reconstructable
from the physical properties of molecules as probed by mass spectrometry,
NMR, and infrared11,12. It is worth pointing out that the assembly index was
constructed exactly because the physical size of a molecule does not say
much about its complexity. There are many large molecules, e.g., polymers,
that easily occur in a chemical sample that are large and can form in the
absence of evolution because they are composed of repeating units or other
molecular symmetries. Therefore, size and all complexity measures whose
only empirical measurement is correlation size are unreliable methods for
life detection.
It is widely recognized that correlation neither implies causation nor
equivalence. As a simple illustrative example of the category error of con-
fusing correlation with mechanis m, consider the two physical laws
mathematically represented by the equationsT2
r3 ¼ 4π2
Gm and E ¼ mc2.B o t h
are functions of mass with one effective parameter, but each calculates a
different physical quantity and in a different context. They are built on
different mechanisms, one describes planetary motion and the other gives
the energy of a particle in its rest frame as derived from special relativity.
Superﬁcially, the two correlate perfectlybecause of their linear dependence
on m, but this in no way implies the two theories are equivalent or capture
the same physics. This is an absurd example aimed at highlighting that trivial
correlations are possible even for well-developed theories. Likewise, corre-
lation in complexity measures, especially when controlled by overall output
size, does not imply equivalence. For example, many efforts approximate
Kolmogorov complexity, which is formally uncomputable, with
Lempel–Ziv, or other compression schemes, which are in the class P. This
means that Lempel–Ziv will fail at the most interesting cases of Kolmogorov
complexity. Furthermore, the point of building measures and theories in
physics is to compactly capture mechanism, and so the other complexity
measures that do not share the same mechanistic foundations should not be
assumed equivalent because of correlations. There is a long history in the
physics of measurement about the challenges of developing measurement
schemes that accurately capture physics, see e.g., Chang38 for a history of the
measurement of temperature.
In Marshall et al.11, assembly index was shown to be reconstructed by
counting the number of MS/MS peaks,demonstrating a meaningful mea-
surement of assembly index using mass spectrometry. Fragmentation of
molecules via mass spectrometry is expected by the theory to reconstruct the
structure of the assembly space for molecules via recursive decomposition of
molecular fragments. Thus, the measurement using MS/MS maps directly
to the ontology of the theory, rendering the correspondence of assembly
index and MS/MS peaks physically meaningful. Subsequently, inference of
molecular assembly index was shown to lead to convergent results for mass
spectrometry, NMR and infrared measurements, again considering mole-
cules as physical objects in AT, where these techniques reconstruct features
of the assembly space12. This means that the assembly index is invariant with
respect to the measurement technique used to read it out, motivating the
interpretation that the molecular assembly index is an intrinsic molecular
property of a molecule.
The authors in Uthamacumaran et al. 23 and Ozelim et al. 24 show a
correlation of different compression measures to assembly index and mass
spectrometry data, but do so devoid of ontology and without an explanation
for why their reported correlations s hould be metrologically meaningful.
Speciﬁcally, they show how the length of string-based representations of
molecules (e.g., using SMILES) and compression values for these strings are
correlated with the MS/MS peaks in molecular data 24. These correlations
have no basis in chemistry, but they use these kinds of correlations to argue
for why the assembly index should notbe considered as measurable or any
better than any other complexity metri ct h a tc o u l db eu s e di nas i m i l a rw a y23.
However, their results should be trivially expected based on the scaling
cross-correlation of complexity measures with output size alone, and this
does not recover what assembly index is capturing. A simple example is to
consider oligomers, which by Ozelim et al.’s analyses would have values that
scale with their size, but the assembly index would yield much lower values
due to recursion in the use of monomer f ragments (this example is along
similar lines to the scaling differences noted above in our discussion on the
differences between assembly index and LZW). It is well documented that
assembly index has a weak correlati on with molecular weight, which is
progressively weaker with increasing molecular weight (e.g. see Fig.2bi n
Marshall et al.11 and Figure 5a in Jirasek et al.12 where it is shown that the
upper limit of assembly index scales roughly with molecular weight and the
lower limit with the logarithm of the molecular weight). The correlations in
Ozelim et al.24 with the size of the molecule do not recover what the assembly
index is capturing.
In general, if one is not careful to control for string length, correlations
across complexity measures will be artiﬁcially inﬂa t e d .T h i si st h ek i n do f
spurious correlation we pointed to in the example of mass above, where
correlations are apparent but only due to super ﬁcial similarity. Some
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
correlation is evidenced in ref.24, where the authors show a plot of corre-
lation between LZW and AI by plotti ng both scaling with size (Fig. 2 in
ref. 24). Such correlations are much weaker if one does account for size and
would get weaker with larger objects because the assembly index’s corre-
lation weakens with object size. As an explicit example, we consider LZW
compression and assembly index, comparing the ratio of the two values for
strings of ﬁxed length and composition. We considered 10,000 random
rearrangements of the string “aaaaaabbbbbbcccc” and took the ratio of
assembly index to the number of bytes in the compressed string as com-
puted using LZW, see Fig. 4.W e ﬁnd that this ratio roughly follows a
Gaussian distribution, showing assembly index and LZW are only weakly
correlated with each other when controlling for size. The Pearson correla-
tion between the two is very weak at 0.25. The set of permutations of
“aaaaaabbbbbbcccc”is a small subset of the strings of length 16 constructed
from the characters {a,b,c}. We have already shown for the simplest case of
strings composed of a single character how LZW scales with length l like
n /
ﬃﬃ
l
p
while the assembly index scales likea / log2l. This implies that the
worst mismatch between LZW and the assembly index will grow at least as
fast as
ﬃﬃ
l
p
=log2l,a p p r o x i m a t e da s
ﬃﬃ
l
p
for largel: that is, while both correlate
with size, the worst mismatch between the two increases with size. This is
also evident in ref.24, where the scatter correlating assembly index and LZW
increases with string length. Given that the assembly index is constructed
from the measurement scheme itself, its correlation is not due to averages
over size-correlated effects, which give a superﬁcial appearance of similarity
even though cases of signiﬁcant interest, particularly those for biosignature
science, should be expected to yield very different results.
Compression algorithms will assignvalues to molecules that depend on
the choice of representation of the data. Theoretical physics proceeds by
using speciﬁc language in which all statements are intended to carry a
physical meaning. In AT, this is done by selecting a measurement scheme
for system representation and specifying a set of operations that correspond
to physically realizable transformations. For molecular AT, this choice is
well-motivated by knowledge of covalent chemistry76. The frontier of the
theory is in developing metrology for new domains of application, where
work is to be done to ground equally well-motivated choices for construc-
tion of the assembly space in empirical measurement 77. Computational
c o m p l e x i t ym e t h o d sf a c es e r i o u sa m b i g u i t i e sa st o o l sf o rp h y s i c sb e c a u s e
they suffer from an arbitrary choic e of universal computer, whereas AT
resolves this ambiguity through metrology, constructing the assembly space
from laboratory-based measurement.
The measures the authors of refs. 22–24 introduce all suffer from
ambiguity in the choice of data representation, analogous to the ambiguity in
choosing a universal computer forK (see above). They will lack an absolute
ordering for complexity that would accurately delineate the boundary
between non-life and life, obfuscating the distinction that AT formalizes.
Indeed, different data representations of the same molecule, e.g., in the form
of SMILES78,o rI N C H I79, graph-based representations, or even mass spec-
trometry dataﬁles, should be expected to yield quantitatively different results
for the computed compressibility of the molecular data. Thus, a general
correlative trend might be established, but the values assigned to speci ﬁc
molecules will depend on how one chooses to represent the data (e.g., this
characterizes what is observed Fig. 7 in ref. 24). Using these correlations
would provide a very poor basis for life detection because it should be
expected that the same molecule will fall in different locations on such
correlation plots depending on choices made representing the molecular
data. That is, we should expect weak correlation to be possible, but the
structure underlying where speci ﬁc molecules lie to be representation
dependent. This is untenable for life detection, because as we have already
pointed out, one could choose any representation of the data and its com-
pression that would represent any claim one might wish to make about the
relative complexity of the molecules (Section 1.1), thus rendering the cor-
relations useless without an underlying ontology forcing a choice of repre-
sentation, which is a key difference between physics and computer science.
Many considerations about the phy sical nature of the process of
computation, as well as the physical instantiation of outputs of algorithmic
procedures, are not accounted for by the theory of computation27.T h i sh a s
motivated several researchers to develop related complexity measures that
might capture more physically relevant details. We now discuss these
measures, and why AT represents a signiﬁcant advance in the development
of a physics of complexity, measurable in the laboratory. Originally devel-
oped by Bennett80, logical depth was inspired by universal computation, but
with a goal to quantify achieved complexity rather than potential com-
plexity. Logical depth is distinct fr om algorithmic complexity because it
quantiﬁes complexity based on the work a computer must do to produce a
given output, rather than an abstracted notion of program size. Formally,
the logical depth of a string is deﬁned as the execution time, or number of
machine cycles, it takes a computer to calculate the output from the shortest
possible program. In general, these yield different results: random objects
have little depth despite having potentially long descriptions, while struc-
tured objects like repeating strings are expected to have a depth more
coincident with the difﬁculty of the process that generated them. Logical
depth has an advantage in applications where it is necessary to distinguish
complexity due to randomness as distinct from meaningful computational
work. However, like algorithmic complexity, it is dependent on the choice of
language to describe the output, and ingeneral, the shortest program is not
computable.
Thermodynamic depth was introduced by Lloyd and Pagels as a
measure of macroscopic complexity81 and is closely related to, but differs
ABLempel-Ziv-Welch (LZW)
Assembly Index
100 000
200 000
300 000
400 000
0681 0 12
8
9
10
11
12
13
Count
LZW-assembly index
100 000
200 000
300 000
400 000
500 000
600 000
0 -4 -2 0 2 4 6
Fig. 4 | Comparison of the assembly index, a, and the Lempel –Ziv–Welch com-
pression for every permutation of “aaaaaabbbbbbcccc”.A The density map of a
compared with LZW, where the two have a weak Pearson correlation of 0.25. B The
histogram of the difference between a and the length of LZW (given as LZW
–assembly index) showing an approximate Gaussian distribution. These results
conﬁrm that when controlling for size, assembly index and LZW compression are
weakly correlated.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 8

===== PAGE 9 =====
from, logical depth. Thermodynamic depth captures the number of steps a
system passes through to reach the current state. The goal of thermo-
dynamic depth is to quantify complexity as a physical property of a state,
noting that complexity should be a f unction of the process, or assembly
routine, that brought the state into existence (and not just a description of
the state)38.W eh a v en o wa r r i v e da tt h eﬁrst comparison complexity mea-
sure reviewed herein, which deals explicitly with physical states rather than
computational programs and their outputs. Thus, this is theﬁrst candidate,
besides the assembly index, that is explicitly about physics and what can be
experimentally determined. Lloyd and Pagels tried to empirically ground
their measure of physical complexity by deﬁning it as a continuous function
of the probabilities of the experimentally deﬁned trajectories that can result
in a macrostate, d, which might be observed in a lab. The thermodynamic
depth is thus deﬁned as DdðÞ ¼ /C0 kln p i
/C0/C1
,w h e r epi is the probability, the
system arrived at stated by the ith observed trajectory andk is an arbitrary
constant. Thermodynamic depth will depend on what experiment is done,
e.g., via empirically observed frequencies,pi, of the observed paths. Its value
can therefore differ for the same macrostate simply because the experiment
was prepared differently (or more experiments were done). This introduces
subjectivity in its deﬁnition82.
In a chemical system, the thermodynamic depth would depend on the
probability of the reaction pathways that produced it81.T h i si su n t e n a b l ea sa
complexity metric for life detection because the same molecules will have a
different thermodynamic depth in different contexts (where the reactions to
generate the molecule would differ). This measure is therefore not stan-
dardizable across different planeta ry environments or different experi-
ments. Also, one cannot infer thermodynamic depth from an observation of
a complex chemical system at just one point in time, as one needs to know
the full history of its formation: this information is almost never available for
many scientiﬁc questions of interest. These challenges are exacerbated by the
astronomical size of chemical space, where counting all possible reactions,
p a t h w a y s ,a n dm o l e c u l e si snot computationally possible83–85. The assembly
index, by contrast, is independent ofthe path that produced the object(s),
rather it depends only on the minimum path that could have produced the
object, and therefore can be measuredwithout knowing formation history.
It will yield the same value for the same physical object(s) anywhere in the
universe we might observe them. The length of the minimum recursively
constructed path to make an object is a unique value for every object (even in
cases where there may be degeneracy in minimum paths for the object ’s
construction, the minimum path size is still a measurable value).
Falsiﬁcation of any physical or chemical theory should come from
experimental and observational tests of the explanations it provides, and the
predictions it makes. AT was developed by critically addressing the question
of how complex a detectable molecule must be before we know it was not
formed by a random or undirected process. Exploring this idea in a
laboratory setting allowed the concept of causal or contingent control, at the
molecular level, to be formalized as the explanation of how highly complex
objects are produced in abundance. AT, as a theory, is still in its infancy, with
many open questions remaining about the mechanism for selection, and the
transition in Assembly from the abiotic world to the biotic world. What is
clear is that AT is poised to help uncover how selection, as a driving force,
allowed the evolution of evolution in a manner that is testable with stan-
dardized measurements. This is because AT provides a measure that can
detect the emergence of evolution in chemical experiments, as well as giving
a new approach on which the emergence of evolution can be theoretically
studied. As the theory develops, it will be important to explore its founda-
tions. In this regard, it is worth noting that any good scientiﬁc theory should
be “hard to vary”86, especially as concrete predictions are made that can be
experimentally or conceptually teste da n db u i l to n .T h i si so n er e a s o nt h e
assembly index having an exact value, not dependent on data representa-
tion, is critical in its role as a foundation of the theoretical framework of AT.
Critical to the conceptual shift presented by AT is the central role of
copy number, which so far, we have not addressed here. Criticisms of AT as
redundant or not new, have not addressed the bulk of the theory, including
the structure of the assembly equation and its role in formalizing selection
and the observed assembly space as a necessarily contingent structure22–25,87.
In AT, objects must be found in multiple copies. This means that in
applications of the theory, it is not meaningful to talk about the assembly
index of objects independent of any considerations of how to measure and
count identical copies of them (where “identical” is deﬁned within mea-
surement uncertainty). Whilst this may seem an ad hoc requirement, it is a
critical feature of AT ’s ability to uniquely identify objects as products of
selection and evolution: the conjecture of the theory is that high Assembly
conﬁgurations of matter (with abundant, large assembly index objects) only
occur via evolution and selection. Note in Eq. 1 if ni =1 , t h e n t h e c o n -
tribution of object i to the total value of A is 0. A recent hypothesized
falsiﬁcation of AT did not address the conceptual foundations of the theory
accurately87, because it applied the theory to idealized mathematical
representations of unit cells, where in real materials, these are not possible to
be observed in identical copies due to defects77.
Discussion
In a recent discussion of AT, it was stated that AT cannot account for
unanticipated biases, e.g., that AT c annot distinguish whether the bias is
natural selection or something else that might favor production of an object
given the“rule-based world” that AT is modeling25. However, this criticism
is made without looking at the empirical data and seemingly without
interacting with the ontology of the assembly index. AT is a link between the
abiotic world and the biological world and shows that a much more gen-
eralized mechanism of selection must have acted before genetic selection
appeared. That is, AT makes explicit that selection is a more general phe-
nomenon than that found just in biology. Our central claim is that the
combinatorial space is so large, that some conﬁgurations simply cannot exist
without “systematic bias” stored in a generic memory, what we call“selec-
tion,” which will include modern genetic evolution, but also many other
more general modes of selection. So far, the central claim holds up to
empirical tests, as presented previously 11 and those are not explored in
criticisms of AT. Also, critiques do not provide empirical evidence to sup-
port the argument that the mundane deviations from expected outcomes
they cite would falsify the central hypotheses of AT by producing arbitrarily
high Assembly conﬁgurations of matter in abiotic settings. To date, there
exists no empirical evidence that nat ural environments, outside of the
processes of life, can produce objects of arbitrarily high complexity.
An interesting critique is related to how AT does not explicitly address
function25. However, a goal of AT is to measure evolved complexity without
referencing function explicitly. Thisis intentional, as it avoids the issue of
predeﬁning all possible functions of a given object where there will always be
some unanticipated context in which the object might acquire a new
function88. There is some debate as to whether a relevant measure of
complexity should include explicit reference to context or be context-free.
For example, the environmental context or functional context might inform
how one quantiﬁes complexity89,90.T h i sp o i n ti ss i m i l a rt oe a r l yd e b a t e so n
measuring temperature, where standardization of measurement was chal-
lenged by different contexts for experimental protocols, such as material
structure of the vessel, pressure, purity of sample, etc38. However, ultimately,
a ﬁxed temperature scale was developed, which could provide standardized
comparison across all these differen t experimental protocols. It is our
contention that the most signiﬁcant advances in the science of measuring
complexity will come from similarly standardized measurements, and
assembly theory has been developed with this goal in mind. It is important to
note that there are two types of context dependence: Theﬁrst is whether a
mathematical or physical measure is context-dependent. The second is
whether the outcomes, possibilities, s tates, etc. of a particular physical
process are context-dependent, even if the measure describing those features
is not, which is the case for temperature. Temperature is a universal measure
that we use in diverse situations ranging from the surface temperature of the
sun to the internal temperature of the ocean: the scale we use to measure
these temperatures is the same and ﬁxed across all environments, but the
speciﬁc values we observe are context-dependent. The assembly index as a
measure is context-free; it is like temperature. However, the values
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
achievable or observed are context-d ependent. Planetary contexts will
determine how far selection can go in generating higher AI.
Another reason to focus on constructability rather than functionality is
that it is unclear if the possible uses of a complex object areﬁnite or (at least
asymptotically) inﬁnite91.I fo n eh a s N objects, there are potentially ~NN
possible combinatorial interactio ns, meaning the number of possible
interactions (functions) trends super-exponentially faster toward inﬁnity
than the number of objects does as the system size grows. However, while
the number of functions an object can perform is not pre-statable 92,t h e
number of functions that could have constructed any observed object is
always ﬁnite and well-deﬁned. This is exactly what underlies the deﬁnition
of the assembly index and the assembly space: AT explains how an object
found in high copy number is constructed by functions, rather than what
function it has, speciﬁcally because this isﬁnite and measurable, as opposed
to undeﬁned. As an explicit example of the utility of this approach, one can
consider the long-standing paradoxical question of how to tell if a given
sequence of DNA is“functional” or not, without referring to the context of
the cell93. AT would instead ask whether the abundant DNA found in the cell
was evidence of selection or not. A similar approach is taken in population
genetics, where functionality of a sequence can be detected byﬁnding many
copies of it across the genome— we can detect functional jumping elements
by ﬁnding those that have a large numb er of copies, vs. mutated non-
functional ones that will have only a single copy. We can alsoﬁnd functional
elements across different species by ﬁnding those that appear preserved
across the species. Thus, within an evolutionary context, copy number is an
indicator of function. In all these cases, the copying of the genome itself is a
given— non-functional parts of the genome will replicate just as well as
functional parts across generations. But where they fail is in theﬁrst to jump
across the genome, and in the second to resist mutations through selection
over the population.
Well-developed theories often lead to counterintuitive reformulations
of our understanding of phenomenon that depart from our colloquial
understanding of them, reframing the question being asked. It may be the
case that a formal theory of life will require abandoning our biases about the
role and nature of function, to learn something deeper by building
abstractions that tie more closely to what empirical data we can objectively
measure. Whether AT will continue to pass tests of its empirical validation
or be falsiﬁed will be determined by future work of the scientiﬁc community.
But one should not claim a theory invalid because it does not conform to
prior expectations of what explanations we should ﬁnd. Instead, we must
always be open as scientists to theories we can rigorously test, and the
explanations they provide.
We have shown that the assembly index is not identical to measures of
computational complexity and compression, and we have discussed how the
phenomenology of assembly theory as a theory of the physical world rooted
in measurement distinguishes it from computational complexity theory.
Assembly theory was designed to explore how the evolution of evolution
was possible before formalized genetics. That is, AT aims to elucidate how
selection produces the machinery of modern genetic evolution. One of the
challenges with traditional computational complexity theory as an approach
to physics and biology is that it has been applied to quantify the amount of
complexity found in the natural world using an ontology that may not be
meaningful in this context, using metrics that cannot be meaningfully
mapped directly to physical measurement. Whereas the other measures
described herein are in some cases undecidable, and in all cases dependent
on choices of data representation, AT provides a formalization constructed
from the physics that generated the object with a grounding in metrology.
Furthermore, AT makes predictions falsiﬁable through empirical observa-
tions. One prediction is that objects experimentally inferred to have high
assembly index and copy number are u niquely associated with life. Of
course, falsiﬁability is not unique to AT as a scientiﬁc theory. What is unique
is the ability to use readily available biochemistry lab equipment to obtain
fragmentation patterns and copy number data that map to the AT frame-
work, making it theﬁrst theory tailored to life detection that is amenable to
experimental validation.
Methods
Methods for computing the assembly indices of strings were implemented
using algorithms developed in Seet et al.70. The assembly indices of strings
were compared to Lempel–Ziv–Welch (LZW) compression and Huffman
coding using standard algorithms for implementing these compression
algorithms. For comparison across a larger sample, values of assembly index
and LZW were computed across all 1,681,680 permutations of
“aaaaaabbbbbbcccc”. For a proof of assembly index calculations being NP-
hard, we performed a Karp reduction of the vertex cover algorithm to the
calculation of assembly index (see supplement).
Data availability
All data is available in the SI.
Received: 17 November 2024; Accepted: 16 July 2025;
References
1. Eigen, M. Selforganization of matter and the evolution of biological
macromolecules. Naturwissenschaften 58, 465–523 (1971).
2. Morowitz, H. J., Heinz, B. & Deamer, D. W. The chemical logic of a
minimum protocell. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 18, 281–287 (1988).
3. Segré, D., Shenhav, B., Kafri, R. & Lancet, D. The molecular roots of
compositional inheritance. J. Theor. Biol. 213, 481–491 (2001).
4. Vasas, V., Fernando, C., Santos, M., Kauffman, S. & Szathmáry, E.
Evolution before genes. Biol. Direct 7, 1 (2012).
5. Goldenfeld, N. & Woese, C. Life is physics: evolution as a collective
phenomenon far from equilibrium. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys.
2, 375–399 (2011).
6. Smith, E. & Morowitz, H. The Origin and Nature of Life on Earth: The
Emergence of the Fourth Geosphere (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2016).
7. Munteanu, A., Attolini, C. S.-O., Rasmussen, S., Ziock, H. & Solé, R. V.
Generic Darwinian selection in catalytic protocell assemblies. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 362, 1847–1855 (2007).
8. Sharma, A. et al. Assembly theory explains and quanti ﬁes selection
and evolution. Nature 622, 321–328 (2023).
9. Marshall, S. M., Moore, D. G., Murray, A. R. G., Walker, S. I. & Cronin, L.
Formalising the pathways to life using assembly spaces. Entropy 24,
884 (2022).
10. Marshall, S. M., Murray, A. R. G. & Cronin, L. A probabilistic framework
for identifying biosignatures using pathway complexity. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 375, 20160342 (2017).
11. Marshall, S. M. et al. Identifying molecules as biosignatures with assembly
theory and mass spectrometry.Nat. Commun.12, 3033 (2021).
12. Jirasek, M. et al. Investigating and quantifying molecular complexity
using assembly theory and spectroscopy. ACS Cent. Sci. 10,
1054–1064 (2024).
13. Neveu, M., Hays, L. E., Voytek, M. A., New, M. H. & Schulte, M. D. The
ladder of life detection. Astrobiology 18, 1375–1402 (2018).
14. Barge, L. M., Rodriguez, L. E., Weber, J. M. & Theiling, B. P.
Determining the “biosignature threshold” for life detection on biotic,
abiotic, or prebiotic worlds. Astrobiology 22, 481–493 (2022).
15. Chou, L. et al. Planetary mass spectrometry for agnostic life detection
in the solar system. Front. Astron. Space Sci 8, 755100 (2021).
16. Wright, J. T. et al. The case for technosignatures: why they may be
abundant, long-lived, highly detectable, and unambiguous.
Astrophys. J. Lett. 927, L30 (2022).
17. Adamala, K. P. et al. Present and future of synthetic cell development.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 25, 162–167 (2024).
18. Basu, S., Gerchman, Y., Collins, C. H., Arnold, F. H. & Weiss, R. A
synthetic multicellular system for programmed pattern formation.
Nature 434, 1130–1134 (2005).
19. Asche, S., Cooper, G. J. T., Keenan, G., Mathis, C. & Cronin, L. A
robotic prebiotic chemist probes long term reactions of complexifying
mixtures. Nat. Commun. 12, 3547 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 10

===== PAGE 11 =====
20. Woese, C. R. On the evolution of cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99,
8742–8747 (2002).
21. Cartwright, N. The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of
Science(Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999).
22. Abrahão, F. S., Hernández-Orozco, S., Kiani, N. A., Tegnér, J. & Zenil,
H. Assembly theory is an approximation to algorithmic complexity
based on LZ compression that does not explain selection or evolution.
PLOS Complex Syst. 1, e0000014 (2024).
23. Uthamacumaran, A., Abrahão, F. S., Kiani, N. A. & Zenil, H. On the salient
limitations of the methods of assembly theory and their classiﬁcation of
molecular biosignatures.Npj Syst. Biol. Appl.10,1 –5 (2024).
24. Ozelim, L. et al. Assembly theory reduced to Shannon entropy and
rendered redundant by naive statistical algorithms. Preprint athttps://
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.15108 (2024).
25. Jaeger, J. Assembly theory: what it does and what it does not do. J.
Mol. Evol. 92,8 7–92 (2024).
26. Mitchell, M. Complexity: A Guided Tour (Oxford Univ. Press, 2009).
27. Moore, C. & Mertens, S. The Nature of Computation (Oxford Univ.
Press, 2011).
28. Walker, S. I. & Davies, P. C. W. The algorithmic origins of life. J. R. Soc.
Interface 10, 20120869 (2013).
29. Svahn, A. J. & Prokopenko, M. An ansatz for computational
undecidability in RNA automata. Artif. Life 29, 261–288 (2023).
30. Farnsworth, K. D., Nelson, J. & Gershenson, C. Living is information
processing: from molecules to global systems. Acta Biotheor. 61,
203–222 (2013).
31. Sayama, H. Construction theory, self-replication, and the halting
problem. Complexity 13,1 6–22 (2008).
32. Solé, R. et al. Fundamental constraints to the logic of living systems.
Interface Focus 14, 20240010 (2024).
33. Turing, A. M. On computable numbers, with an application to the
entscheidungsproblem.Proc. Lond. Math. Soc.s2-42,2 3 0–265 (1937).
34. Bernays, P. Alonzo church. an unsolvable problem of elementary
number theory. Am. J. Math. 58, 345–363 (1936).
35. Burks, A. W. Von Neumann'sSelf Reproducing Automata. https://doi.
org/10.21236/AD0688840 (1969).
36. Deutsch, D. Constructor theory. Synthese 190, 4331–4359 (2013).
37. Romanishin, J. W., Gilpin, K. & Rus, D. M-blocks: momentum-driven,
magnetic modular robots. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems 4288–4295 (IEEE, 2013).
38. Chang, H. Inventing Temperature: Measurement and Scienti ﬁc
Progress (Oxford Univ. Press, 2004).
39. Ellis, G. F. R. How purposeless physics underlies purposeful life.
Nature 622, 247–249 (2023).
40. Kempes, C. P. & Krakauer, D. C. The multiple paths to multiple life. J.
Mol. Evol. 89, 415–426 (2021).
41. Böttcher, T. An additive de ﬁnition of molecular complexity. J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 56, 462–470 (2016).
42. Méndez-Lucio, O. & Medina-Franco, J. L. The many roles of molecular
complexity in drug discovery.Drug Discov. Today22, 120–126 (2017).
43. Bertz, S. H. The ﬁrst general index of molecular complexity. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 103, 3599–3601 (1981).
44. Kolmogorov, A. N. Three approaches to the quantitative deﬁnition of
information.Int. J. Comput. Math. https://doi.org/10.1080/002071
66808803030(1968).
45. Chaitin, G. J. On the length of programs for computing ﬁnite binary
sequences. J. ACM 13, 547–569 (1966).
46. Solomonoff, R. J. A formal theory of inductive inference. Part I. Inf.
Control 7,1 –22 (1964).
47. Moore, C. Generalized shifts: unpredictability and undecidability in
dynamical systems. Nonlinearity 4, 199 (1991).
48. Huffman, D. A. A method for the construction of minimum-
redundancy codes. Proc. IRE 40, 1098–1101 (1952).
49. Rissanen, J. & Langdon, G. G. Arithmetic Coding. IBM J. Res. Dev.23,
149–162 (1979).
50. Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst.
Tech. J. 27, 379–423 (1948).
51. Duncan, T. E. On the calculation of mutual information. SIAM J. Appl.
Math. 19, 215–220 (1970).
52. Schreiber, T. Measuring information transfer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,
461–464 (2000).
53. Grif ﬁth, V. & Koch, C. In Guided Self-Organization: Inception (ed.
Prokopenko, M.) Ch. 6 (Springer, 2014).
54. Varley, T. F. Information theory for complex systems scientists.
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.12482 (2024).
55. Gershenson, C. & Fernández, N. Complexity and information:
measuring emergence, self-organization, and homeostasis at
multiple scales. Complexity 18,2 9–44 (2012).
56. Adami, C. What is information? † . Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Math. Phys.
Eng. Sci. 374, 20150230 (2016).
57. Jaynes, E. T. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science (Cambridge
Univ. Press, 2003).
58. Greven, A., Keller, G. & Warnecke, G. Entropy. (Princeton Univ. Press,
2014).
59. Wolpert, D. H. The stochastic thermodynamics of computation. J.
Phys. Math. Theor. 52, 193001 (2019).
60. Landauer, R. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing
process. IBM J. Res. Dev. 5, 183–191 (1961).
61. Bérut, A. et al. Experimental veri ﬁcation of Landauer’s principle linking
information and thermodynamics. Nature 483, 187–189 (2012).
62. Cilibrasi, R. & Vitanyi, P. M. B. Clustering by compression. IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory 51, 1523–1545 (2005).
63. Shakhnovich, E. Protein folding thermodynamics and dynamics:
where physics, chemistry, and biology meet. Chem. Rev. 106,
1559–1588 (2006).
64. Kempes, C. P., Wang, L., Amend, J. P., Doyle, J. & Hoehler, T.
Evolutionary tradeoffs in cellular composition across diverse bacteria.
ISME J 10, 2145–2157 (2016).
65. Kempes, C. P., Dutkiewicz, S. & Follows, M. J. Growth, metabolic
partitioning, and the size of microorganisms. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 109, 495–500 (2012).
66. Kempes, C. P., Wolpert, D., Cohen, Z. & Pérez-Mercader, J. The
thermodynamic efﬁciency of computations made in cells across the
range of life.P h i l o s .T r a n s .AM a t h .P h y s .E n g .S c i. 375, 20160343 (2017).
67. Jover, L. F., Ef ﬂer, T. C., Buchan, A., Wilhelm, S. W. & Weitz, J. S. The
elemental composition of virus particles: implications for marine
biogeochemical cycles. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 519–528 (2014).
68. Welch, T. A. A technique for high-performance data compression.
Computer 17,8 –19 (1984).
69. Salomon, D. A Concise Introduction to Data Compression (Springer
Science & Business Media, 2007).
70. Seet, I., Patarroyo, K. Y., Siebert, G., Walker, S. I. & Cronin, L. Rapid
computation of the assembly index of molecular graphs. Preprint at
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.09100 (2024).
71. Moore, C. & Robson, J. M. Hard tiling problems with simple tiles.
Discrete Comput. Geom. 26, 573–590 (2001).
72. Thurber, E. G. & Clift, N. M. Addition chains, vector chains, and
efﬁcient computation. Discrete Math. 344, 112200 (2021).
73. Milidiu, R. L., Pessoa, A. A. & Laber, E. S. Three space-economical
algorithms for calculating minimum-redundancy pre ﬁx codes. IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory 47, 2185–2198 (2001).
74. Storer, J. A. & Szymanski, T. G. Data compression via textual
substitution. J. ACM 29, 928–951 (1982).
75. Strasser, B., Botea, A. & Harabor, D. Compressing optimal paths with
run length encoding. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 54, 593–629 (2015).
76. Liu, Y. et al. Exploring and mapping chemical space with molecular
assembly trees. Sci. Adv. 7, eabj2465 (2021).
77. Walker, S. I., Mathis, C., Marshall, S. & Cronin, L. Experimental
measurement of assembly indices are required to determine the
threshold for life. J. R. Soc., Inferface 21, 20240367 (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 11

===== PAGE 12 =====
78. Weininger, D. SMILES, a chemical language and information system.
1. Introduction to methodology and encoding rules. J. Chem. Inf.
Comput. Sci. 28,3 1–36 (1988).
79. Heller, S., McNaught, A., Stein, S., Tchekhovskoi, D. & Pletnev, I. InChI -
the worldwide chemical structure identiﬁer standard. J. Cheminform.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/1758-2946-5-7(2013).
80. Bennett, C. H. in A half-century survey on The Universal Turing
Machine (Oxford Univ. Press, 1988).
81. Lloyd, S. & Pagels, H. Complexity as thermodynamic depth. Ann.
Phys. 188, 186–213 (1988).
82. Crutch ﬁeld, J. P. & Shalizi, C. R. Thermodynamic depth of causal
states: objective complexity via minimal representations.Phys. Rev. E
59, 275–283 (1999).
83. Bohacek, R. S., McMartin, C. & Guida, W. C. The art and practice of
structure-based drug design: a molecular modeling perspective.
Med. Res. Rev. 16,3 –50 (1996).
84. Polishchuk, P. G., Madzhidov, T. I. & Varnek, A. Estimation of the size
of drug-like chemical space based on GDB-17 data.J. Comput. Aided
Mol. Des. 27, 675–679 (2013).
85. Kirkpatrick, P. & Ellis, C. Chemical space. Nature 432, 823–823 (2004).
86. Deutsch, D. The Beginning of In ﬁnity: Explanations That Transform
The World (Penguin, 2011).
87. Hazen, R. et al. Molecular assembly indices of mineral
heteropolyanions: some abiotic molecules are as complex as large
biomolecules. J. R. Soc. Interface 21, 211 (2024).
88. Kauffman, S. A. At Home in the Universe: The Search for Laws of Self-
Organization and Complexity (Oxford Univ. Press, 1995).
89. Hazen, R. M., Grif ﬁn, P. L., Carothers, J. M. & Szostak, J. W. Functional
information and the emergence of biocomplexity. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 104, 8574–8581 (2007).
90. Adami, C. & LaBar, T. From entropy to information: biased typewriters
and the origin of life. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781316584200.007 pp. 130–154 (Cambridge University Press,
2017).
91. Kauffman, S. Is there a fourth law for non-ergodic systems that do work
to construct their expanding phase space?Entropy 24, 1383 (2022).
92. Kauffman, S. A. & Roli, A. A third transition in science? Interface Focus
13, 130–154 (2023).
93. Kellis, M. et al. De ﬁning functional DNA elements in the human
genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 6131–6138 (2014).
Acknowledgements
We thank Abhishek Sharma, Stuart Marshall, Keith Patarroyo, Gage Seibert
and Cole Mathis for ideas and comments, Ian Seet for efﬁcient algorithms to
compute string assembly, and Louie Slocombe for help making Fig. 1. We
thank the Santa Fe Institute and the NSF “RCN for Exploration of Life’s
Origins” (NSF grant no. 1745355) for supporting an ongoing set of working
groups that have facilitated this work. We also thank the John Templeton
Foundation (grant nos. 61184 and 62231), the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) (grant nos. EP/L023652/1, EP/
R01308X/1, EP/S019472/1, and EP/P00153X/1), the Breakthrough Prize
Foundation and NASA (Agnostic Biosignatures award no. 80NSSC18K
1140), MINECO (project CTQ2017-87392-P) and the European Research
Council (ERC) (project 670467 SMART-POM) forﬁnancial support.
Author contributions
C.P.K., M.L., S.I.W., and L.C. conceived of the project, performed numerical
analyses, developed mathematical counterexamples, and wrote the
manuscript. A.I., G.M.F., and M.R.C. did the complexity class proof for the
assembly index, edited the manuscript, and wrote the supplement.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Christopher P. Kempes, Michael Lachmann, Sara I. Walker or Leroy Cronin.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00049-9 Article
npj Complexity |            (2025) 2:27 12
