===== PAGE 1 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT
PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM
KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Abstract. Classically, the Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism asserts that the
multiplicative cohomology theory given by (structured) geometric cobordism
is isomorphic to the cohomology theory determined by an associated Thom
spectrum. We construct a presentably symmetric monoidal stable∞-category
of homotopy invariant sheaves with transfers on smooth manifolds whose unit
is precisely (structured) geometric cobordism. We show the endomorphism ring
of the unit can be canonically identified with the associatedE∞-Thom ring
spectrum, i.e., we provide anE∞-lift of the Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism.
Contents
1. Introduction 1
2. Derived smooth manifolds, after Pardon 9
3. Perfect complexes and virtual bundles 13
4. Structure functors and 6-functor formalisms 29
5. Tangentially structured correspondences 41
6. Tangentially structured Gysin sheaves 51
7. Homotopy coherent Pontryagin-Thom 72
Appendix A. Grothendieck topologies, new from old 78
References 80
1.Introduction
René Thom’s insight that the cobordism groups of smooth manifolds can be
described in terms of the homotopy groups of what are now called Thom spectra
created a bridge between geometry and homotopy theory which has profoundly
shaped the past and present of algebraic topology [Tho52, Tho54]. For example, the
pioneering work of Novikov [Nov62, Nov67] and Quillen [Qui69] clarified the central
role played by complex cobordism and the theory of formal groups in the study of
stable homotopy theory. The ingenious vision of Morava, heavily inspired by both
Novikov and Quillen, led to the development of modern chromatic homotopy theory.
Many of the Thom spectra encountered in practice from cobordisms of smooth
manifolds (e.g., MO, MSO, MU, etc.) can be regarded as E∞-ring spectra in a
canonical fashion. As Thom spectra arise by forming Thom spaces of a sequence of
bundles, these E∞-structures, in the view of the authors, are most simply produced
by endowing the relevant sequence of bundles with a multiplicative structure.
Even though this construction is quitehomotopicalin nature, the Pontryagin-
Thom isomorphism permits ageometricinterpretation of the graded homotopy ring
1
arXiv:2607.01482v2  [math.AT]  6 Jul 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
associated to such anE∞-Thom spectrum; the additive structure is given by the
disjoint union of smooth manifolds and the multiplicative structure is given by
the Cartesian product of smooth manifolds – both up to the relation of structured
cobordism.
It is a long-standing piece of folklore that the disjoint union and Cartesian product
of smooth manifolds can directly give rise to the canonicalE∞-ring structures
mentioned above. The starting point is a description of the infinite loop space
associated to a Thom spectrum, following Quinn’s thesis [Qui70]. Roughly, these
infinite loop spaces are weakly homotopy equivalent to the geometric realization
of a simplicial set whosen-simplices are corner transverse mapsM→ ∆n, where
M is an n-dimensional smooth manifold with corners equipped with a relevant
tangential structure, and whose face and degeneracy maps are induced by pullback
along∆ m→ ∆n. This construction, in the setting of topological manifolds, was
carefully developed by Quinn using the notion of an “ad theory” [Qui95]. Later,
using Quinn’s framework, Laures and McClure showed that the Quinn model for
oriented topological cobordism admits the structure of anE∞-ring spectrum which
is equivalent, as anE∞-ring, to theE∞-Thom spectrum MSTop [LM14, LM24]. It
is the understanding of the authors, based on discussions with Laures and McClure,
that similar results have not yet been established for general tangential structures
or the case of smooth manifolds.
Following Quillen’s universal characterization of the cohomology theoryMU∗
[Qui71], we produce, for an arbitrary stable tangential structure, anE∞-ring spec-
trum in the spirit of Quinn above which is canonically equivalent to the associated
E∞-Thom spectrum. We accomplish this by categorifying the problem, as we now
describe.
1.1.Main results.Let Sp denote the presentable stable∞-category of spectra
endowed with its usual symmetric monoidal. Fix a map of grouplikeE∞-monoids
φ:B→BO. We denote byMφthe associated Thom spectrum,
Mφ≡colim
(
B→BO→BGL 1(S)→Sp
)
,(1.1)
endowed with its canonicalE∞-ring structure [AB19]. As is now standard knowledge,
there are twoa prioridifferent multiplicative cohomology theories we may associate
toφ. LetXbe a smooth manifold.
(1) Geometric cobordism:The cohomology theory, denotedΩ∗
φ(X), consisting
of closed smooth manifoldsM equipped with properφ-structured maps
M→X modulo φ-structured cobordism. The additive structure is given
by disjoint union and the multiplicative structure is given by Cartesian
product.
(2)Homotopical cobordism:The cohomology theory
Ω∗,ho
φ (X)≡[Σ ∞
+X,Mφ]−∗ (1.2)
with the obvious additive and multiplicative structure induced fromMφ.
The celebrated Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism constructs an equivalence of multi-
plicative cohomology theories,
Ω∗
φ(X)
∼
− →Ω∗,ho
φ (X),(1.3)
via the Pontryagin-Thom construction. However, these multiplicative cohomology
theories possess a great deal more structure. It is a deep insight of Quillen that

===== PAGE 3 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 3
φ-structured homotopical cobordism is initial among lax symmetric monoidal,
homotopy invariant functors from smooth manifolds to graded abelian groups which
additionally admit transfers (i.e. Gysin/Umkehr maps) along properφ-structured
maps and satisfy a Beck-Chevalley condition for transverse pullback squares [Qui71]
– we refer to these as “φ-structured Quillen cohomology theories”. To organize
this structure in a homotopy coherent fashion, we produce a symmetric monoidal
∞-category of correspondences,TrCorex
φ (Sm), encoding the desired contravariant
and covariant functoriality considered by Quillen; due to the absence of pullbacks
in the category of smooth manifolds, our construction utilizes the theory of derived
smooth manifolds, following Pardon [Par25].
Theorem 1.1.There exists a presentably symmetric monoidal stable∞-category
GysR
φ(Sm; Sp),(1.4)
consisting of homotopy invariant sheaves onTrCorex
φ (Sm), whose unit object we
denote by 1Sp
φ . For any smooth manifold,X, there is an essentially tautological
isomorphism of graded commutative rings
π∗1Sp
φ (X)∼= Ω−∗
φ (X)(1.5)
which extends to an isomorphism ofφ-structured Quillen cohomology theories.
The E∞-ringMφ determines a contravariant functor from the category of smooth
manifolds toSpwhich is canonically lax symmetric monoidal:
F
(
Σ∞
+ (−),Mφ
)
: Smop→Sp.(1.6)
In light of Quillen’s work, it is natural to wonder whether homotopical cobordism
and the Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism admitE∞-refinements toGysR
φ(Sm; Sp), i.e.,
whether there is ahomotopy coherent Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism. Our next
result shows this is indeed the case.
Theorem 1.2.φ-structured homotopical cobordism refines to anE∞-algebra,Γ φ in
GysR
φ(Sm; Sp)and there is an essentially unique equivalence ofE∞-algebras
PTφ :1 Sp
φ
∼
− →Γφ (1.7)
inducing an equivalence ofE∞-ring spectra
End(1Sp
φ )
∼
− →Mφ(1.8)
which agrees with the Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism on homotopy groups.
Finally, we have the following recognition result which should be thought of as a
cobordism-theoretic version of Dugger’s result that a homotopy invariant differential
cohomology theory is uniquely determined by a spectrum [Dug01].
Theorem 1.3.The functor Hom(1Sp
φ ,− )induces an equivalence of presentably
symmetric monoidal stable∞-categories
GysR
φ(Sm; Sp)≃Mod End(1Sp
φ ).(1.9)
Combined with Theorem 1.2, this immediately yields the following corollary.
Corollary1.4.We have the following equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal
stable∞-categories:
GysR
φ(Sm; Sp)≃Mod Mφ.(1.10)

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
1.2.Other flavors of cobordism.All of our main results are stated for φ-
structured cobordism; however, there are slight variations one could take on the
definition to obtain slight variations of the aforementioned results. The first one is
a straightforward extension, and the last one would require considerable work.
Remark 1.5.Given φ : B→BO as before, we may construct a new geomet-
ric cobordism theory, namely, “spherical”φ-structured geometric cobordism, by
consideringM φ-oriented mapsM→X moduloM φ-oriented cobordism. E.g., an
example of anS-oriented closed smooth manifold which is not stably frameable is a
K3 surface. The initial draft of the present article contained two misconceptions
regarding sphericalφ-structured geometric cobordism, and we would like to thank
Noah Porcelli for dispelling them.
(1) There is indeed a purely homotopical construction of sphericalφ-structured
geometric cobordism (more precisely, it is a special case of the geometric
cobordism theories already considered in the present article, hence no
distinction is necessary): it arises via
Msφ≡colim
(
fib
(
BO→BGL 1(Mφ)
)
→BO→BGL 1(S)→Sp
)
.(1.11)
(2) There is indeed a retraction ofE∞-rings,
Msφ→Mφ,(1.12)
via [AB19, Corollary 3.17];
1.2.1.Periodic.In Section 3, we associate to any perfect complex on a derived
smooth manifold avirtualbundle; we then furthermore go to astablebundle.
Meanwhile, since we consider a map of grouplikeE∞-monoids φ : B→BO and
ask forφ-structured mapsM→X , we are asking for the stable relative tangent
bundle to lift toB. The point we are trying to make is that we could instead
ask for the virtual relative tangent bundle to lift toB, where we now consider a
map of grouplikeE∞-monoids B→ Ω∞ko, since our assignment naturally builds
a virtual bundle first.1 In particular, the multiplicative cohomology theoryΩ∗
φ,
φ:B→Ω ∞ko, could possibly be a “periodic” geometric cobordism theory.
Example 1.6.If we consider the natural mapφ : Ω∞ku→ Ω∞ko, thenΩ∗
φ is
periodic complex cobordism. Moreover,
MUP≡colim
(
Ω∞ku→Ω ∞ko→Pic(S)→Sp
)
(1.13)
is the periodic complex cobordism spectrum.
The upshot is that, essentially by repeating the present article using virtual
bundles instead of stable bundles, one can obtain a version of Theorem 1.2 relating
periodic geometric cobordism to periodic homotopical cobordism asE∞-rings.
1.2.2.(Derived) orbifold.Periodic geometric cobordism is more or less a straightfor-
ward extension of our work here. However, a major technical undertaking would be
to extend the ideas of the present article to accommodate replacing (derived) smooth
manifolds with (derived) orbifolds, i.e., relatingφ-structured geometric (derived)
orbifold cobordism toφ-structured homotopical (derived) orbifold cobordism.
1Here, ko denotes the real topologicalK-theory spectrum; in particular,Ω∞ko≃Z×BO is
only anE 1-splitting, cf. Recollection 3.54.

===== PAGE 5 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 5
1.3.Relationship to Floer homotopy theory.As already mentioned, although
the roots of cobordism theory are inherently geometric, the homotopical counterpart
has historically seen the most development. However, the recent resurgence of
Floer homotopy theory, a field at the intersection of symplectic geometry and stable
homotopy theory, has fostered interest in (1) developing the geometric story and
(2) relating the geometric to the homotopical. Briefly, Floer homotopy theory is an
idea, originally due to Cohen-Jones-Segal [CJS95], which lifts various Floer-type
(co)homology theories to stable homotopy theory. The idea is to input a geometric
setup in symplectic geometry (e.g., a symplectic manifold, Lagrangian submanifolds,
etc.), together with a homotopical assumption (e.g., a stableR-polarization, Maslov
data, etc.), and output a spectrum,2 referred to as a “Floer homotopy type”, which
refines the original (co)homological invariant.3
Of course, one has to actually construct an apparatus which turns geometric data
into algebraic data, as follows.
1.3.1.Abouzaid-Blumberg framework.The original apparatus is due to Cohen-Jones-
Segal [CJS95], however, we will first explain the recent Abouzaid-Blumberg [AB24]
framework and the relationship of the present article toloc. cit.
The main gadget is a flow categoryX, and flow categories may beφ-structured.
[AB24, Theorem 1.6] showsφ-structured flow categories are the objects of a stable
∞-category, denotedFlowφ, which is equivalent to the stable∞-category of modules
over endomorphisms of the unitφ-structured flow category1φ. We will denote by
Flowφ
Sm the stable∞-category ofφ-structured flow categories whosen-simplices are
enriched in smooth manifolds with corners. Analogously, we will denote byFlowφ
dOrb
the stable∞-category ofφ-structured flow categories whosen-simplces are enriched
in (orbifold) global Kuranishi charts with corners. We drop the subscript when we
refer to either.
So far, the following is in the literature. As already mentioned, [AB24, Theorem
1.6] shows End(1φ)is an E1-ring spectrum and Flowφ is ModEnd(1φ). [ AB24,
Proposition 1.10] shows End(1fr
Sm), where the superscript refers to framed flow
categories, is equivalent toS as E1-rings. Moreover, recent work of Hedenlund-
Oldervoll [HO26, Theorem 0.0.6], building on Abouzaid-Blumberg’s idea, shows
thatEnd(1 φ
Sm)is equivalent toMφasE 1-rings.
Now, here is what is expected.Flowφ should be a presentably symmetric monoidal
stable∞-category; inparticular, End(1φ)hasanatural E∞-ringstructure. Moreover,
End(1φ)should be equivalent to the appropriate Thom spectrum asE∞-rings.
Finally, here are two ideas on how to bridge the known to the expected. It is
essentially known how to endowFlowφ with the structure of a presentably symmetric
monoidal stable∞-category; so we will focus on the latter expectation with the
former as a jumping off point. We will stick to the case ofSm since the extension of
2In fact, one can refine the Fukaya category, anA∞-category linear over a discrete ring, to
the spectral Fukaya category, anA∞-category linear over a ring spectrum. (In general, the
A∞-structure is curved, but we digress.)
3A Floer homotopy type always canonically exists over some version ofMU (e.g., MU itself, or
MUP, or its derived orbifold variant). Trying to build a Floer homotopy type as a module over a
different ring spectra is what requires the homotopical assumption. Moreover, we should note that
the canonical MU Floer homotopy type may not be related to, say, anS Floer homotopy type,
even when both exist, cf. [BP26].

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
the present article to the (derived) orbifold case is conjectural; however, points (1)
and (2) below should also adapt to the case ofdOrb.
(1) First, one should be able to directly identifyEnd(1φ
Sm)with End(1Sp
φ )as
E∞-rings for the following reason. As already mentioned, there is an explicit
point-set model, originally due to Quinn [Qui95], for an infinite loop space
related to geometric cobordism obtained via taking the geometric realization
of an explicit simplicial set. Now,Ω∞End(1φ
Sm)is more or less tautologically
the Quinn model. Meanwhile,Ω∞End(1Sp
φ )is a slight perturbation of the
Quinn model – it is obtained via taking the geometric realization of a
simplicialspace. In particular, the simplicial set whose geometric realization
isΩ∞End(1φ
Sm), when endowed with the levelwise discrete topology, isnot
the simplicial space whose geometric realization isΩ∞End(1Sp
φ ); the latter
simplicial space, levelwise, has a slightly more involved topology due to the
fact that the category ofφ-structured correspondences we consider is an
∞-category, hence, already spatially-enriched. Nevertheless, the simplicial
spacesaresimilarenough, andthe E∞-ringstructuresbothgeometricenough,
that a direct comparison seems feasible.
(2) Second, there should be an explicit equivalence of presentably symmetric
monoidal stable∞-categories
F: Flow φ
Sm
∼
− →GysR
φ(Sm; Sp).(1.14)
Of course, this would imply the first point; however, constructing a sym-
metric monoidal functor of stable∞-categories would allow one to avoid
directlycomparing the two units. Instead, a symmetric monoidal functor
would have to send the unit to the unit, and it would remain to check it is
an equivalence. The functor should essentially be obtained by recognizing
that any morphism space in aφ-structured flown-simplex X is simply a
correspondence between two Euclidean spaces where the right leg can be
taken to beφ-structured. This would yield a diagram ofn-simplices in
GysR
φ(Sm; Sp), and the colimit should beF(X).
1.3.2.Cohen-Jones-Segal framework.As already mentioned, Cohen-Jones-Segal
[CJS95] constructed the original apparatus which yielded a spectrum from a flow
category. However, the construction was a bit too clunky to warrant further
development since it involved building a CW-spectrum cell-by-cell via repeated
applications of the Pontryagin-Thom construction. I.e., the Cohen-Jones-Segal
construction is “married” to the Pontraygin-Thom construction. However, one could
reasonably interpret GysR
φ(Sm; Sp)as the natural presentably symmetric monoidal
stable∞-category where aφ-structured flow category should live via interpreting
a φ-structured flow category as the homotopy colimit of a diagram of homotopy
invariant Yoneda sheaves. In particular, one should view the image of aφ-structured
flow category under the equivalence of Corollary 1.4 as the Cohen-Jones-Segal
construction.
1.4.Relationship to other work.The more geometrically-minded reader may
wonder why we have chosen to prove a homotopy coherent Pontraygin-Thom isomor-
phism in this way. As already mentioned, it is long-standing folklore that disjoint
union and Cartesian product can directly yield a canonicalE∞-ring lift of geometric
cobordism. Therefore, one expects to be able to directly build anE∞-ring structure

===== PAGE 7 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 7
using these operations by hand; moreover, one expects to be able to directly show the
Pontryagin-Thom construction respects the coherence by hand. One can view this
as a “bottom up” approach. In the present article, we take a “top down” approach
by building a significant amount of structure, essentially categorifying [Qui71], in
order to get both theE∞-ring lift of geometric cobordism and the Pontraygin-Thom
construction “for free”, i.e., via universal properties. The present authors take the
latter approach as they believed the former is too difficult to carry out – meanwhile,
the former approach is taken in upcoming work of Abouzaid–Bai. (In fact,loc. cit.
will additionally include a proof of the derived orbifold case; the present authors
plan to investigate generalizing the techniques of the present article to obtain the
derived orbifold case as well.) Of course, both approaches will yield the same
E∞-lifts by Pontryagin-Thom itself, but one can also show this directly by observing
Abouzaid-Bai’s lift is anE∞-algebra in GysR
φ(Sm; Sp). The present authors also
believe the present article’s approach, although requiring a bit more background to
set up, has additional offerings as it provides more structure (through e.g. Theorems
1.1 and 1.3) and a new perspective on Floer homotopy types (in particular, the
Cohen-Jones-Segal construction).
Also, the cobordism categories featured in the Baez–Dolan cobordism hypothesis
[Lur09b] and the work of Galatius–Madsen–Tillmann–Weiss [GTMW09] seem closely
related to the Quinn model for geometric cobordism. More specifically, ifCobφ
denotes an(∞,∞ )-category of stableφ-structured cobordisms, there is an expected
equivalenceB Cobφ≃ Ω∞Mφ. To produce such an equivalence, it seems simplest
to directly compareBCobφ withΩ∞End(1Sp
φ )(as they have seemingly identical
“formulae”) and then appeal to Theorem 1.2. The authors are grateful to Calle and
Chan for discussions around this point.
1.5.Outline.As the present article is quite lengthy, we briefly outline its contents.
In Section 2, we review the theory of derived smooth manifolds following Pardon’s
treatment [Par25]. The notion of a topological site is recalled, as is the notion of a
derived site – both of which are key for defining the∞-category of derived smooth
manifolds. Afterwards, the amplitude of a map between derived smooth manifolds
is defined, and we introduce the notion of a standard presentation of a map of
derived smooth manifolds. The section concludes by establishing some elementary
properties of standard presentations.
In Section 3, we begin by introducing the notion of a perfect complex on a derived
smooth manifoldX, the chief example of which is the tangent complex; such perfect
complexes can be organized into a stable∞-category PerfX. The remainder of the
section is devoted to producing a natural map from algebraic K-theory of perfect
complexes onX to the real topological K-theory of the underlying space ofX, forX
paracompact Hausdorff. To accomplish this, we introduce the notion of a continuous
perfect complex on a topological space; these can also be organized into a stable
∞-category CPerfX. We use the algebraic K-theory of continuous perfect complexes
to interpolate betweenK(PerfX)andKO(X).
We begin Section 4 by reviewing the basics of correspondence∞-categories and
abstract 6-functor formalisms. Following Dold’s treatment of geometric cobordism,
we introduce the notion of a structure functorF on an∞-category C; this allows us
to “twist” the morphisms inC by the functorF. In the case whereF is related to
an abstract 6-functor formalismD, we show thatD can also be twisted byF to
produce a new 6-functor formalismDF.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Section 5 begins by reviewing the basics of Thom spectra and orientation theory
following [ABG+14]. The results of Section 4 are applied to construct an∞-category
of tangentially structured correspondences between derived smooth manifolds, and
an associated 6-functor formalism. Using this 6-functor formalism, we construct the
already mentioned∞-categoryTrCor ex
φ (Sm)and establish its basic properties.
Section 6 is concerned withGysR
φ(Sm; Sp), the∞-category of homotopy invariant
spectral sheaves onTrCorex
φ (Sm). We prove thatGysR
φ(Sm; Sp)is stable, presentably
symmetric monoidal, and equivalent to modules over the endomorphismE∞-ring
spectrum of 1Sp
φ . We then prove that the unit has levelwise homotopy groups
tautologically isomorphic toφ-structured geometric cobordism.
In Section 7, we prove thatMφ admits a canonical lift to anE∞-algebraΓ φ in
GysR
φ(Sm; Sp), thereby receiving an essentially uniqueE∞-map from 1Sp
φ . Using
a straightforward generalization of [Qui71, Proposition 1.10] (which relies on the
classical Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism), we show this essentially unique map is an
equivalence ofφ-Gysin sheaves and agrees with the Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism
on homotopy groups.
1.6.Notation and terminology.We freely use the language of ∞-categories
and higher algebra throughout this article, following [Lur09a], [Lur17], and [Lur26].
We consider∞-categories of varying sizes throughout this article, following the
set-theoretic conventions in [Lur09a] and [Lur26]. Throughout the present article,
we make repeated use the following notation.
•Cat ∞ denotes the large∞-category of small∞-categories.
•Sdenotes the large∞-category of small spaces/∞-groupoids.
• ˆCat∞ denotes the very large∞-category of large∞-categories.
•CAlg (C)denotes the ∞-category of E∞-algebras in a symmetric monoidal
∞-categoryC.
•C ≃ denotes the groupoid core of an∞-categoryC.
•Pic (C)⊂C≃ denotes the full subgroupoid spanned by invertible objects in
a symmetric monoidal∞-categoryC.
•Pr L denotes the very large∞-category of presentable∞-categories and
left adjoint functors; this is a closed symmetric monoidal∞-category with
respect to the Lurie tensor product.
•Pr St denotes the full subcategory ofPrL spanned by the presentable stable
∞-categories; this is a closed symmetric monoidal subcategory ofPrL.
•Sp denotes the∞-category of spectra, andF (X,Y )denotes the internal
hom.
•Mod R denotes the∞-category ofR-module spectra forR∈CAlg(Sp).
•CMondenotes the∞-category ofE ∞-monoids, i.e.,E∞-algebras in the∞-
category of Sp with respect to the Cartesian symmetric monoidal structure.
•CMon gp ⊂CMon denotes the full subcategory spanned by those E∞-
monoids which are group-complete (alias grouplike).
•
∫c
SopF and
∫cc
S F denote the Cartesian and coCartesian unstraightening of
aF:S→Cat ∞, respectively.
•P Σ(C)denotes the nonabelian derived∞-category of C, given by product-
preserving presheaves onC.
Acknowledgments.The authors are especially grateful to John Pardon for pa-
tiently explaining his approach to derived smooth manifolds and for his interest in

===== PAGE 9 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 9
our work. The authors would like to thank Maxine Calle, Tyler Lawson, and John
Pardon for feedback on an early draft. Finally, the present work also benefited from
correspondence with Thomas Blom, David Chan, Tom Goodwillie, Rune Haugseng,
Gerd Laures, Jim McClure, Haynes Miller, Noah Porcelli, and Marco Volpe. The
first author was partially supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship award
during this work.
2.Derived smooth manifolds, after Pardon
2.1.(Derived) topological sites.We begin by briefly introducing one of the main
players: derived smooth manifolds. We denote byTop the1-category of topological
spaces and continuous functions.
Definition 2.1.LetCbe an∞-category equipped with a functor
|−|:C→Top.(2.1)
• Anopen embeddingin C is a morphismU→X∈C which is Cartesian over
an open embedding|U|→|X|∈Top.
• Anopen coveringof X∈C is a collection of open embeddings{Ui→X} i∈I
such that
{
|Ui|→|X|
}
i∈I is an open covering of|X|.
Definition 2.2.Atopological siteis a pair
(
C,|−|
)
, where C is an∞-category and
|−|:C→Top(2.2)
is a functor, called therealization, which has all open embeddings, i.e., for every
X∈C, every open subset|U|⊂|X|is realized by an open embeddingU→X.
Example 2.3.Let Sm be the1-category whose objects are smooth manifolds
(assumed second countable and Hausdorff) and whose morphisms are smooth maps;
the forgetful functorSm→Topdetermines a topological site.
Remark 2.4.It is straightforward to see that open embeddings endowC with
a Grothendieck topology in which a sieveS⊂C /X is covering if and only if
it is generated by an open covering{Ui →X} i∈I. We will implicitly use this
Grothendieck topology to consider sheaves on a topological site.
So far, morphisms in topological sites are not of a “local nature”. The following
definition, which most topological sites of interest satisfy, remedies this.
Definition 2.5.A topological siteC issubcanonicalif, for everyX∈C , the presheaf
MapC(−,X) :C op→Sis a sheaf.
Let Copemb⊂C be the wide subcategory where we only allow morphisms which
are open embeddings; we analogously defineTopopemb⊂Top.
Definition 2.6.Let C be a subcanonical topological site. We sayC isperfectif
every lifting problem of the form
S Copemb
S▷ Topopemb
(2.3)
has a solution wheneverS▷→Top opemb is a covering sieve.

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
In fact, given any topological site, it admits a “perfection” satisfying a suitable
universal property. To precisely formulate this, we need to discuss functors between
topological sites.
Definition 2.7.Let C and D be topological sites. Atopological functorfrom C to
Dis a pair(F,π), where
F:C→D(2.4)
is a functor which preserves open embeddings and
π:|F(−)| D→|−| C (2.5)
is a natural transformation sending open embeddings to pullbacks. We say(F,π )is
strictifπis a natural isomorphism.
Definition 2.8.Let( F,π ) : C→D be a strict topological functor. Given any
X∈C, we may consider the induced map of presheaves
MapC(−,X)→Map D
(
F(−),F(X)
)
.(2.6)
We say(F,π )istopologically fully faithfulif, for every X∈C , the aforementioned
induced map of presheaves is an isomorphism after sheafification.
Definition 2.9.Let( F,π ) : C→D be a topological functor. We say(F,π )is
topologically essentially surjectiveif every object in D admits an open cover by
objects in the image ofF.
Proposition 2.10(Theorem 2.8.60 in [Par25]).Let C be a topological site. There
exists a topologically fully faithful and topologically essentially surjective strict
topological functor
(F,π) :C→C P,(2.7)
where CP is perfect, and satisfies the following universal property: for any perfect
topological siteD, precomposition by(F,π)induces an equivalence of∞-categories
between topological functors fromCP toDand topological functors fromCtoD.
We will need the following notion shortly.
Definition 2.11.Let K be a simplicial set. We sayK iscosiftedif it is non-empty
and its diagonal is final. Acosifted limitinCis a limit over a cosifted diagram.
Remark 2.12.Unfortunately, a “final functor” in the language of [Lur09a] is a
“cofinal functor” in the languge of [Par25]; we adopt the former convention as it is
more standard in the literature.
Now, given a perfect topological site which admits finite productsC, we may
associate a derived (topological) siteDC by “formally adjoining” (1) finite cosifted
limits and (2) finite limits modulo finite products – the derived site satisfies a
suitable universal property, cf. [Par25, Theorem 2.8.88], which we now recall in the
case ofSm.
Definition 2.13(Definition 2.9.3 in [Par25]).The topological site DSm ofderived
smooth manifoldstogether with the functorSm→DSm is defined by the following
properties.
•Sm→DSm is a strict topological functor between perfect topological sites.
•Sm→DSmis fully faithful and preserves finite products.
•DSm admits all finite limits; moreover, everyX∈DSm is locally isomorphic
to a finite limit of smooth manifolds.

===== PAGE 11 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 11
• |−|: DSm→Toppreserves finite limits.
• For anyY∈Sm , the Yoneda sheafMapDSm(−,Y )∈Shv (DSm)topologi-
cally preserves finite cosifted limits (cf. [Par25, Definition 2.9.2]).
• Foranycompleteperfecttopologicalsite D, precompositionwith Sm→DSm
induces an equivalence of∞-categories between topological functorsDSm
toDpreserving finite cosifted limits and topological functorsSmtoD.
Remark 2.14.In fact, the functorSm→DSm preserves all finite transverse limits
(in particular, transverse pullbacks), cf. [Par25, Definition 2.9.8 & Corollary 2.9.22].
Remark 2.15.In fact, every X∈DSm is locally isomorphic to the limit of a
truncated cosimplical smooth manifold, cf. [Par25, Lemma 2.9.11]. As a consequence,
|X| is locally homeomorphic to a subspace of a smooth manifold [Par25, 2.9.12].
Consequently,|X|is locally metrizable.
2.2.Amplitude.The following is a reformulation of Pardon’s notion of amplitude
at most1maps [ Par25, Definition 2.9.23]; this is possible by Pardon’s minimal
amplitude factorization result [Par25, Proposition 2.9.32].
Definition 2.16.Letf:X→Y∈DSm.
•f is said to haveamplitude0(or is asubmersion) if, for every x∈X , there
exists an open neighborhoodU∋xsuch thatf| U is of the form
U=R k×Y Y
Rk ∗.
f|U
⌟ (2.8)
•f is said to haveamplitude1(or is animmersion) if, for everyx∈X , there
exists an open neighborhoodU∋xsuch thatf| U is of the form
U=∗× Rk Y Y
∗ Rk.
f|U
⌟ (2.9)
•f is said to haveamplitude at most1if, for everyx∈X , there exists an
open neighborhood U∋x such thatf|U is equivalent to an immersion
followed by a submersion.
Lemma 2.17.Being an immersion, submersion, or amplitude at most 1 is preserved
under composition and pullback.
Proof.Cf. [Par25, Exercise 2.9.24].□
Remark 2.18.We say X∈DSm isamplitude0,amplitude1, oramplitude at
most1if X→∗ is, respectively. Observe, the subcategory of amplitude 0 derived
smooth manifolds with amplitude at most 1 maps between them is preciselySm.
An amplitude at most 1 derived smooth manifold is also known in the literature as
a (non-orbifold)global Kuranishi chart.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Definition 2.19.Let f :X→Y∈DSm . We sayf is of standard presentationif
there exists a diagram inDSmof the form
X=∗× Rk
(
Y×R N)
Y×R N Y
∗ Rk,
f
⌟ (2.10)
where the second morphism in the first row is the obvious projection. We call such a
diagram astandard presentation off. We sayf is locally of standard presentationif,
locally on the source,f is of standard presentation. By alocal standard presentation
off, we mean an open subset|U|⊂|X|and a standard presentation off| U.
Lemma 2.20.If f :X→Y∈DSm is amplitude at most 1, thenf is locally of
standard presentation.
Proof.By definition,fis locally of the form
U ↪→~U→V,(2.11)
where the first morphism is an immersion and the second morphism is a submersion.
Since the first morphism is an immersion, by shrinkingU, we may assume the first
morphism is of the form(2.9). Since the second morphism is a submersion, by
shrinking ~U, we may assume the second morphism is of the form(2.8). Finally, by
further shrinkingU, we may assume the image of the first morphism is contained in
RN×V, whence the claim.□
Remark 2.21.[ Par25, Definition 2.9.23] defines a notion of amplitude at most
I⊂Z ≥0; moreover, any morphism inDSm admits a so called “minimal amplitude
factorization” by [Par25, Proposition 2.9.32]. Our definitions of immersion and
submersion are special cases of Pardon’s amplitude definition; however, our definition
of amplitude at most 1 is equivalent to Pardon’s by the aforementioned minimal
amplitude factorization result.
The following lemmata amount to the “calculus” of standard presentations; they
will be required in the sequel.
Lemma 2.22.Consider f :X→Y,g :Y→Z∈DSm which are amplitude at most
1. A local standard presentation off and g induces a local standard presentation of
g◦f.
Proof. As the claim is local, it is enough to prove it whenf and g are (globally) of
standard presentation. By considering a standard presentation off and g, we have
thatg◦fis of the following form:
X Y×R N Y Z×R M Z
∗ Rk ∗ Rℓ.
⌟
h
⌟
h′ (2.12)
Observe, we may define an immersion
Y×R N ↪→(Z×RM)×R N =Z×R N+M (2.13)

===== PAGE 13 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 13
which exhibitsY×R N as a closed subset. By using a smooth bump function, we
may extendhto a function
h:Z×R N+M→R k (2.14)
satisfyingh−1(0) =X. Meanwhile, we may extendh′ to a function
h′ :Z×R N+M→R ℓ (2.15)
satisfying(h′)−1(0) =Y×R N. Therefore, the diagram
X Z×R N+M Z
∗ Rk+ℓ,
⌟
(h,h′) (2.16)
is a standard presentation ofg◦f, whence the claim.□
The proofs of the remaining lemmata are straightforward.
Lemma 2.23.Consider the following pullback inDSm:
X Y
X Y,
f
⌟
f
(2.17)
wheref is amplitude at most 1. A local standard presentation off induces a local
standard presentation off.
Lemma 2.24.Consider f :X→Y,f ′ :X′→Y ′∈DSm which are amplitude at
most 1. We have thatf×f ′ is amplitude at most 1; moreover, a local standard
presentation offandf ′ induces a local standard presentation off×f′.
Lemma 2.25.Consider f :X→Y,f ′ :X′→Y ′∈DSm which are amplitude at
most 1. We have thatf⊔f ′ is amplitude at most 1; moreover, a local standard
presentation offandf ′ induces a local standard presentation off⊔f′.
3.Perfect complexes and virtual bundles
In this section, we introduce the notion, due to John Pardon, of a perfect complex
on a derived smooth manifoldX. We show that any such perfect complex canonically
determines a virtual bundle on|X|, whenever|X| is paracompact Hausdorff. This
will permit us to make sense of stable (and virtual) tangential structures on derived
smooth manifolds.
3.1.Perfect complexes on derived smooth manifolds.
Definition 3.1.Let E be an∞-category which admits finite products. Acommu-
tative ring object inEis a product preserving functor
R: Poly fin,op→E,(3.1)
where Polyfin is the full subcategory of commutative rings spanned by objects of
the formZ[x 1,...,x n],n≥0. We denote by
Ring(E)≡Fun ×(Polyfin,op,E)(3.2)
the∞-category of such objects.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Remark 3.2.Note that for E = Set, we recover the1-category of commutative
rings: Ring≃Ring (Set). Moreover, there is a fully faithful functorRing→Ring (S)
whose essential image consists of the commtuative ring objects inS with R≃π 0R.
Example 3.3.The real lineRis a commutative ring object inSm(and therefore,
also inDSmandTop).
Remark 3.4.The objects of the∞-category Ring(S)are often called “animated
rings” in the literature. We prefer the the phrasecommutative ring objectas it
makes sense for other∞-categories of coefficients such asSmorDSm.
Definition 3.5.Given X∈DSm , we define thering of smooth functionsonX to
be the commutative ring object
C∞(X)≡Map DSm(X,R)∈Ring(S).(3.3)
In fact, there is a functor
C∞(−)≡Map DSm(−,R) : DSm op→Ring(S).(3.4)
Definition 3.6.Given X∈Top , we define thering of continuous functionsonX
to be the commutative ring
C(X)≡Map Top(X,R)∈Ring.(3.5)
In fact, there is a functor
C(−)≡Map Top(−,R) : Topop→Ring.(3.6)
Remark 3.7.Observe, given X∈DSm , the functor|−| : DSm→Top determines
a canonical map
C∞(X)→C(|X|)(3.7)
which is natural inX. Furthermore, becauseC(|X|)is discrete, this morphism must
factor uniquely throughπ0C∞(X). In the case whereX∈Sm , we already have
π0C∞(X) =C∞(X), and the map above is given by viewing a smooth function as
a continuous one.
AnyR∈Ring (S)canonically determines a connective E∞-ring spectrum which
we also denote byR, cf. [Lur18, Construction 25.1.2.1].
Notation 3.8.For R∈Ring (S), let ModR≡Mod R(Sp)denote the stable pre-
sentably symmetric monoidal∞-category ofR-module spectra. Furthermore, let:
•Perf R⊂Mod R denote the idempotent complete stably symmetric monoidal
subcategory of compactR-modules;
•Stab R⊂Mod R denote the smallest stable subcategory containingR (note,
stably symmetric monoidal); and
•Free ω
R denote the full subcategory of finitely generated free4 R modules
(note, this is additive and symmetric monoidal).
We have the following relations:
Freeω
R⊂Stab R⊂Perf R.(3.8)
Remark 3.9.If R an ordinary commutative ring, we can identifyStabR with
Db(Freeω
R), where the latter is the bounded derived∞-category of finitely generated
freeR-modules. For instance, we have
StabC(X)≃D b(Freeω
C(X) ), X∈Top.(3.9)
4Here, by “free” we mean a direct sum of copies ofR. Notably, we do not allow suspension.

===== PAGE 15 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 15
Remark 3.10.Observe, the inclusion Freeω
R→Stab R is natural inR; therefore,
we can viewR↦→Freeω
R as a subfunctor ofR↦→StabR, where we view both of these
as functors fromRing(S)toCat ∞.
Let Catex
∞ denote the∞-category of stable∞-categories and exact functors
between them which, by [BGT13, Theorem 4.22], is a compactly generated∞-cat-
egory. This is equipped with a forgetful functorCatex
∞→Cat∞ which preserves
small limits and filtered colimits, cf. Lemma 3.27 below.
Before continuing, we recall that, for any functorF : Topop→E , where E is
a presentable∞-category, we may define its sheafificationFsh via a transfinite
iteration of the dagger construction:
F↦→F†,(3.10)
cf. [Lur09a, Remark 6.2.2.12] and the proof of [Lur09a, Proposition 6.2.2.7]. (Of
course, we can more generally define sheafification for anyE-valued presheaf on a
Grothendieck site; again, cf.loc. cit.)
Definition 3.11(Pardon).Let
Perf : DSmop→Cat ex
∞ (3.11)
denote the sheafification of the functor
StabC∞(−) : DSmop→Cat ex
∞.(3.12)
GivenX∈DSm, the∞-category of perfect complexesonXis
PerfX≡Γ(X; Perf).(3.13)
Analogously, let
Vectsm
(−) : DSmop→Cat∞ (3.14)
denote the sheafification of the functor
Freeω
C∞(−) : DSmop→Cat∞.(3.15)
The∞-category of smooth vector bundlesonXis
Vectsm
X ≡Γ(X; Vect sm).(3.16)
Remark 3.12.For X∈Sm , it is not hard to see thatVectsm
X is equivalent to the
nerve of the1-category of smooth vector bundles onX.
Now, we will explain how to construct the tangent complex of a derived smooth
manifold and the relative tangent/normal complex of a map of derived smooth
manifolds; these are our main examples of perfect complexes on derived smooth
manifolds. Consider the following commutative diagram:
∫c
X∈Sm Vectsm
X
∫c
X∈DSm PerfX
Sm DSm.
(3.17)
Assigning to a smooth manifold its tangent bundle determines a section
T: Sm→
∫c
X∈Sm
Vectsm
X ;(3.18)

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
by composing, we obtain a functor
T: Sm→
∫c
X∈DSm
PerfX.(3.19)
Definition 3.13.Thetangent complexof X∈DSm isTX∈Perf X, whereT is the
relative right Kan extension of(3.19) determined by the universal property ofDSm:
T: DSm→
∫c
X∈DSm
PerfX.(3.20)
Remark 3.14.Givenf:X→YinDSm, we obtain a morphism
(X,TX)→(Y,T Y );(3.21)
this amounts to the specification of a map
Df:T X→f∗TY ∈Perf X.(3.22)
Definition 3.15.Letf:X→Y∈DSm.
(1) Therelative tangent complexof f is the homotopy fiberTf∈Perf X of Df.
(2) Thenormal complexoffis the homotopy cofiberN f∈Perf X ofDf.
The proof of the following two results is straightforward.
Lemma 3.16.If
X≡X× Y Y Y
X Y
g
f
⌟ g
f
(3.23)
is a pullback diagram inDSm, then there is an induced pullback diagram inPerfX:
TX f
∗
TY
g∗TX g∗f∗TY =f
∗
g∗TY.
Dg
Df
⌟
f
∗
Dg
g∗Df
(3.24)
In particular, we have the following two equivalences:
g∗Tf≃T f and g∗Nf≃N f.(3.25)
Lemma 3.17.If f :X→Y,g :Y→Z∈DSm , then we have the following two
cofiber sequences:
Tf→T g◦f→f∗Tg andN f→N g◦f→f∗Ng.(3.26)
To make sense of tangential structures on derived smooth manifolds, we need a
means to convert (relative) tangent complexes into virtual bundles.
Notation 3.18.Let Sing : Top→S denote the singular complex functor. If
X∈DSm, we writeSing(X)≡Sing(|X|).
Definition 3.19.ForX∈Top, thetopological K-theory ofXis defined to be
KO(X)≡Map S
(
Sing(X),Ω∞ko
)
,(3.27)

===== PAGE 17 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 17
where ko denotes the connective real topological K-theory spectrum. We refer to
the points ofKO(X)asvirtual bundles on X. AsΩ∞ko is a grouplikeE∞-monoid,
the above formula determines a functor
KO : Topop→CMon gp.(3.28)
Warning 3.20.By real Bott periodicity,Ω∞ko = Z×BO as E∞-monoids. How-
ever, the spaceZ×BO can be equipped with adifferentE∞-monoid structure by
forming theproductof the E∞-monoids Z and BO; this will be discussed later in
Recollection 3.54. As is hopefully now apparent, the notationZ×BO can suggest
that the “Bott periodic” E∞-monoid structure is split. To avoid any potential
confusion, we have opted for the notationΩ∞koin place ofZ×BO.
Lemma 3.21.KO : Top op→CMon gp is a sheaf; so is its restriction toDSm.
Our desired association
TX⇝T vir
X ∈KO(X)(3.29)
should also split cofiber sequences; this will yield the familiar formula
T vir
f ≃T vir
X −f∗T vir
Y .(3.30)
We are therefore lead to consider the algebraic K-theory space of a derived smooth
manifoldX:
K(X)≡K(Perf X).(3.31)
By the universal property of algebraic K-theory, there is a natural map ofE∞-
monoids,
Perf≃
X→K(X),(3.32)
which splits cofiber sequences inPerfX. The remainder of the present section is
devoted to constructing a natural map
K(X)→KO(X)(3.33)
wheneverX∈DSmis paracompact and Hausdorff.
3.2.Continuous perfect complexes and amplitude.In order to construct
the map in(3.33), we must pass through the stable∞-category of “continuous
perfect complexes” on a topological space; we investigate this stable∞-category
and some of its natural subcategories in this subsection. Note, much of the work in
this subsection can be adapted to study the∞-category of perfect complexes on a
derived smooth manifold.
Definition 3.22.Let
CPerf : Topop→Cat ex
∞ (3.34)
denote the sheafification of the functor
StabC(−) : Topop→Cat ex
∞.(3.35)
Thestable∞-category of continuous perfect complexesonXis
CPerfX≡Γ(X; CPerf).(3.36)
To define subcategories ofCPerfX, we proceed by sheafifying subfunctors of
R↦→StabR. Therefore, we need to recall some basic properties of modules over ring
spectra. Throughout, we will work withR∈Ring (S), though all the definitions can
be phrased for connectiveE1-rings, cf. [Lur17, Subsection 7.2].

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Notation 3.23.For any k∈Z , let( StabR)≥k resp.( StabR)≤k denote the full
subcategories ofk-connective resp.k-coconnective objects inStabR. The former is
closed under finite colimits; the latter is closed under finite limits; both are closed
under extensions. Moreover, let Stabcn
R ⊂Stab R denote the full subcategory of
connective objects.
Definition 3.24.We have the following two similar definitions.
(1) We sayM∈Mod R hasTor-amplitude ≤b provided that, for every discrete
R-moduleN,
πi(M⊗ RN) = 0, i>b.(3.37)
We denote byStab≤b
R ⊂Stab R the full subcategory of such objects.
(2) Analogously, we sayM∈Mod R hasTor-amplitude in[ a,b ]provided that,
for every discreteR-moduleN,
πi(M⊗ RN) = 0, i /∈[a,b].(3.38)
We denote byStab[a,b]
R ⊂Stab R the full subcategory of such objects.
Remark 3.25.Since any M∈Stab R is a-connective for somea∈Z and has
Tor-amplitude≤bfor somea≤b, we seeM∈Stab [a,b]
R , i.e.,
colim
a≤b
Stab[a,b]
R ≃Stab R.(3.39)
We require the following lemma in the sequel; its proof is straighforward.
Lemma 3.26.Let R be an ordinary commutative ring andM∈Stab [a,b]
R . There
exists a morphismΣaF→M , whereF is a finitely generated freeR-module, whose
cofiber has Tor-amplitude in[a+ 1,b].
With these subcategories prescribed, we turn to the sheafification construction;
this requires some preliminary work. LetCatrex
∞ denote the∞-category of (small)
∞-categories which admit finite colimits and functors which preserve finite colimits.
Similarly, let Catlex
∞ denote the∞-category of (small)∞-categories which admit
finite limits and functors which preserve finite limits. The equivalence of∞-cat-
egories(−)op : Cat∞≃Cat∞ exhibits these subcategories as “dual” in the sense
that the essential image ofCatrex
∞ is given byCatlex
∞ , and vice versa. The following
lemma is standard; the proof is virtually identical to [Lur09a, Proposition 5.5.7.11].
Lemma 3.27.The forgetful functors
Catrex
∞ →Cat∞,Cat lex
∞ →Cat∞,andCat ex
∞→Cat∞ (3.40)
preserve small limits and filtered colimits.
In the sequel, we typically denote by
Φ : StabS→Stab∈Fun
(
Ring(S),Cat∞
)
(3.41)
an arbitrary subfunctor ofStab.
Lemma 3.28.If
Φ : StabS→Stab∈Fun
(
Ring(S),Cat∞
)
(3.42)
is levelwise fully faithful, then
Φsh : CPerfS
C(−)→CPerf C(−)∈Shv(Top; Cat∞),(3.43)
obtained by sheafification and restriction, is levelwise fully faithful.

===== PAGE 19 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 19
Proof. After restricting alongC : Topop→Ring (S), we see the induced natural
transformation of functors fromTopop toCat∞,
StabS
C(−)→Stab C(−),(3.44)
is levelwise fully faithful. Now, since the formation of mapping spaces commutes
with both limits and filtered colimits of∞-categories, we see that the induced
transformation( StabS
C(−))†→Stab†
C(−) is also levelwise fully faithful. Finally, as
sheafification is a transfinite iteration of(−)†, we find that, for anyX∈Top , the
induced functor
CPerfS
X→CPerf X (3.45)
is fully faithful.□
Given anyX∈Toptogether with a pointx∈X, we denote by
CPerfS
X,x resp.CPerf X,x (3.46)
the stalk atx. The next result concerns “gluing” continuous perfect complexes.
Lemma 3.29.LetΦ : StabS→Stab∈Fun
(
Ring(S),Cat∞
)
and X∈Top together
with a pointx∈X. We abuse notation and denote byxthe inclusion{x}→X.
(1) For anyV∈CPerf X, ifx∗V belongs to the essential image ofCPerfS
X,x,
then there exists an open neighborhoodUx ofxsuch thatV| Ux∈CPerf S
Ux.
(2) For anyV∈CPerf X, if{Ui}i∈I is an open cover ofX such thatV|Ui∈
CPerfS
Ui for alli∈I, thenV∈CPerf S
X.
(3) The functor
(x∗)x∈X : CPerfX→
∏
x∈X
CPerfX,x (3.47)
is conservative.
Proof. Consider (1). Given any F∈PShv (X; Cat∞), since Cat∞ is compactly
generated,
Fsh
x ≃colim
U∈Openx(X) op
Fsh(U)≃colim
U∈Openx(X) op
F(U)≃F x,(3.48)
where Openx(X)denotes the subcategory of open sets containingx. Hence, by the
compactness of[0]∈Cat∞, ifx∗V∈CPerf S
X,x, then we can liftx∗V to CPerfS
Ux for
some open neighborhoodUx. Meanwhile, both (2) and (3) are simple applications
of the sheaf condition.□
The following result shows that certain properties ofΦare inherited byΦsh.
Proposition 3.30.LetΦ : StabS→Stab∈Fun
(
Ring(S),Cat∞
)
be levelwise fully
faithful.
(1) IfΦfactors through Catrex
∞ levelwise, then, for anyX∈Top , the∞-category
CPerfS
X admits finite colimits and the functorΦsh
X preserves them.
(2) IfΦfactors through Catlex
∞ levelwise, then, for anyX∈Top , the∞-category
CPerfS
X admits finite limits and the functorΦsh
X preserves them.
(3) If, for anyX∈Top , the essential image ofΦX is closed under extensions,
thenCPerf S
X is closed under extensions inCPerfX for allX∈Top.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Proof. For (1), it is clear from Lemma 3.27 thatCPerfS
X admits finite colimits
and that CPerfS
X→CPerf X preserves these; the argument for (2) is similar. For
(3), assume we are given a cofiber sequenceV0 →V 1 →V 2 ∈CPerf X, where
V0,V 2∈CPerf S
X. This induces, for all x∈X , a cofiber sequence in CPerfX,x;
moreover, our assumption onΦX implies the essential image ofΦX,x is closed under
extensions. Hence, we may liftx∗V1 to CPerfS
Ux for some open neighborhoodUx;
we conclude via the previous lemma.□
Definition 3.31.For anyk∈Z, let
(CPerf)≥k : Topop→Cat rex
∞ (3.49)
denote the sheafification of the functor
(StabC(−))≥k : Topop→Cat rex
∞ .(3.50)
The∞-category ofk-connective perfect complexesonXis
(CPerfX)≥k≡Γ
(
X; (CPerf)≥k
)
;(3.51)
whenk= 0, we writeCPerf cn
X≡(CPerf X)≥0.
Remark 3.32.For any X∈DSm , we can analogously define the∞-category of
connective perfect complexesonX, which we denote byPerfcn
X; this subcategory of
PerfX is closed under finite colimits and extensions. Observe, for anyX∈DSm ,
we haveTX∈Perf cn
X and, for anyf:X→Y∈DSm, we haveN f∈Perf cn
X.
Definition 3.33.Let
CPerf≤b : Topop→Cat lex
∞ resp.CPerf [a,b] : Topop→Cat∞ (3.52)
denote the sheafification of the functor
Stab≤b
C(−) : Topop→Cat lex
∞ resp.Stab [a,b]
C(−) : Topop→Cat∞.(3.53)
The∞-category of perfect complexes of Tor-amplitude≤b on X resp.∞-category
of perfect complexes of Tor-amplitude in[a,b]is
CPerf≤b
X ≡Γ(X; CPerf≤b) resp.CPerf [a,b]
X ≡Γ(X; CPerf [a,b]).(3.54)
Remark 3.34.By Proposition 3.30, each subcategory ofCPerfX in the previous
definition is closed under extensions.
Lemma 3.35.LetX∈Topanda≤b.
(1) If V∈CPerf ≤b
X resp. V∈CPerf [a,b]
X , then, for any k∈Z , we have
ΣkV∈CPerf ≤b+k
X resp.Σ kV∈CPerf [a+k,b+k]
X .
(2) If V0→V 1→V 2∈CPerf X is a cofiber sequence such thatV0 has Tor-
amplitude≤b 0 and V1 has Tor-amplitude≤b 1, thenV2 has Tor-amplitude
≤max{b 0,b 1}+ 1.
(3) IfV∈CPerf ≤b
X isa-connective, thenV∈CPerf [a,b]
X .
Proof. The properties of Tor-amplitude for module spectra (cf. [AG14, Proposition
2.13]) combined with Lemma 3.29 yield (1) and (2). For (3), by shifting, we may
assume thata = 0≤b . By Lemma 3.29, it is enough to check on stalks, and the
result follows asM⊗ RN is connective wheneverR, M, andN are connective. □

===== PAGE 21 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 21
Remark 3.36.For anyX∈Top, it is not difficult to see that
CPerf[0,0]
X ≃VectX,(3.55)
where VectX denotes the nerve of the1-category of real vector bundles on X.
Consequently, for anya∈Z, we see
Σ−a : CPerf[a,a]
X
∼
− →CPerf[0,0]
X ≃VectX.(3.56)
Proposition 3.37.Let X∈Top andV∈CPerf X. For eachx∈X , there exists an
open neighborhoodUx∋x such thatV|Ux has bounded Tor-amplitude. Consequently,
ifXis compact, we have an equivalence of∞-categories:
colim
a≤b
CPerf[a,b]
X ≃CPerf X.(3.57)
Proof. Let CPerf|X∈Shv (X; Cat∞)denote the restriction of CPerf to a sheaf on
Xand note that
Γ(U; CPerf|X)≃CPerf U (3.58)
for anyU⊂X open. Because Cat∞ is compactly generated, there is an equivalence
(CPerf|X)x≃colim
U∈Openx(X) op
CPerfU.(3.59)
However, we see that
(CPerf|X)x≃(Stab C(−)|X)x≃colim
U∈Openx(X) op
StabC(U) ;(3.60)
this implies
(CPerf|X)x≃colim
a≤b
(Stab[a,b]
C(−)|X)x≃colim
a≤b
(CPerf[a,b]|X)x.(3.61)
In particular, we can choose some open neighborhoodUx∋x such thatV|Ux∈
CPerf[a,b]
Ux , whence the first claim. Now, suppose in additionX is compact; it will
be enough to show every perfect complex has bounded Tor-amplitude. Let{Ui}i∈I
be a covering such thatV|Ui has bounded Tor-amplitude. By compactness, we may
choose a finite subcover and therefore integersa≤b such thatV has Tor-amplitude
[a,b]on each open, whence the second claim.□
3.3.Finiteness properties.For X∈Top , we consider the sheaf of continuous
functions which determines a commutative ring object:
CX∈Ring
(
Shv(X; Ab)
)
.(3.62)
By forming Eilenberg-MacLane spectra, we may viewCX as a commutative ring
object inShv(X; Sp), which in turn determines anE∞-algebra. We define
ModX≡Mod CX
(
Shv(X; Sp)
)
,(3.63)
and, by [Lur18, Proposition 2.1.1.1 & Remark 2.1.2.1],ModX admits a t-structure
whereF∈Mod X is:
•n-connective if, for anyk <n, the homotopy sheafπkFvanishes;
•orn-truncated if, for any openU⊂X, the spectrumF(U)isn-truncated.
Furthermore, we have
Mod♡
X≃Mod CX
(
Shv(X; Ab)
)
.(3.64)
There is a fully-faithful additive functorVectX→Mod♡
X which sends a vector bundle
to its sheaf of continuous sections; this identifiesVectX with the full subcategory of

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
ModX consisting of locally freeCX-modules of finite rank. Furthermore, we can
identify Freeω
C(X) with the smallest additive subcategory ofModX containingCX,
and, ifX is additionally compact Hausdorff,VectX is equivalent to the smallest
idempotent complete additive subcategory containingCX.
Proposition 3.38.The presheaf Mod : Topop→ˆCat∞, given byX↦→ModX, is a
sheaf; consequently, we have subfunctors
StabC(−)→CPerf→Mod.(3.65)
Proof.By universal descent for∞-topoi [Lur09a, Lemma 6.1.3.7] it follows that
Shv(−;S) : Topop→ˆCat∞ (3.66)
is a sheaf of symmetric monoidal∞-categories. Because CX∈CAlg
(
Shv(X; S)
)
,
under the equivalence of∞-categories
CAlg
(
lim
C(U) op
Shv(U;S)
)
≃lim
C(U) op
CAlg(Shv(U;S)),(3.67)
we may identifyCX with the family ofE∞-algebras(CU)U∈C(U) op sinceCX|U =CU.
Therefore, by [LNP25, Theorem 5.10], we have an equivalence
ModX
∼
− →lim
U∈C(U) op
ModU,(3.68)
so thatX↦→ModX is a sheaf as claimed. The fully faithful functor
Freeω
C(X)→Mod X (3.69)
extends to a morphism of presheaves
StabC(−)→Mod(3.70)
which is levelwise fully faithful. Sheafifying the source yields the claim.□
We now prove a smattering of lemmata.
Lemma 3.39.For any X∈Top , we denote byVecttriv
X the nerve of the 1-category
of trivial vector bundles onX. Any F∈Mod X is in the essential image ofCPerfX
if and only if, for eachx∈X , there exists an open neighborhoodUx∋x such that
F|Ux∈Stab(Vect triv
Ux ).
Proof. Locally, every perfect complex has this form. On the other hand, if we are
given such anF, then it locally belongs toCPerfUx; now, by descent, this implies it
belongs toCPerfX.□
Lemma 3.40.Any E∈Stab (Vecttriv
X )which is connective as a CX-module is
equivalent in ModX to a geometric realization of finitely generated freeCX-modules.
Proof. Let Pfin
Σ (Vecttriv
X )denote the smallest subcategory of PΣ(Vecttriv
X )which
contains the representable objects and is closed under finite colimits. By definition,
there is a fully faithful functor
Pfin
Σ (Vecttriv
X )→Mod X (3.71)
which preserves finite sifted colimits and an equivalence
SW
(
Pfin
Σ (Vecttriv
X )
)
≃Stab(Vect triv
X ),(3.72)
where SW denotes the Spainer-Whitehead category [Lur18, C.1.1.1]. Therefore,
up to desuspension, any objectE∈Stab (Vecttriv
X )can be written as a finite sifted

===== PAGE 23 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 23
colimit of trivial vector bundles; in particular, ifE is connective no desuspensions
are necessary. Finally, by [Par25, 1.4.239] and the Bousfield-Kan formula, we see
that any such connectiveE is equivalent to the geometric realization of a simplicial
diagram whose terms are trivial vector bundles, proving the claim.□
Lemma 3.41.For any E∈CPerf cn
X, π0E∈Mod ♡
X is locally of finite presentation.
Proof. The functorπ0 : Modcn
X →Mod ♡
X is given byτ≤0 which is a localization
and hence a left adjoint. Choose a coveringU of X such thatE|U∈Stab (Vecttriv
U )
for all U∈ U. By the previous lemma, there exists a simplicial object EU
• ∈
Fun(∆op,Vecttriv
U )such thatE| U≃colim ∆op(EU
• ). Thus,
π0(E|U)∼=π0
(
colim
∆op
(EU
• )
)
∼= colim
(
π0EU
1 ⇒π 0EU
0
)
(3.73)
showsπ0(E|U)is of finite presentation, and the claim follows from the isomorphism
π0(E|U)∼=π0(E)|U.□
Lemma 3.42.If X∈Top is compact Hausdorff, then then theCX-module asso-
ciated toE∈Vect X is a projective object inModcn
X. Consequently, for any vector
bundleVandF∈Mod cn
X, there is a surjection
π0MapCPerfX (V,F)→π 0MapModX
(
V,π 0(F)
)
.(3.74)
Proof. Vector bundles on compact Hausdorff spaces are summands of freeCX-
modules; moreover, projective objects are closed under retracts, whence the first
claim. The second claim is immediate from [Lur17, Proposition 7.2.2.6].□
Recall, a sheaf on a topological space issoftif, for any closed subset, every
section over it can be extended to the entirety of the space. Morever, recall that,
for any paracompact Hausdorff spaceX, anyCX-module is soft, cf. [Bre97, 9.4
Example]. Roughly speaking, this means the ringed space(X,CX)satisfies Serre’s
cohomological criterion for affineness.
Lemma 3.43.LetX∈Topbe compact Hausdorff andF∈Mod ♡
X locally of finite
presentation. There exists a surjective map ofCX-modules,
V→F∈Mod X,(3.75)
whereV∈Mod X is locally free of finite rank.
Proof. Choose a coveringU ofX on whichF is locally the cokernel of a map between
free finite rankCX. By compactness, there is a natural numberm∈N such that,
for anyx∈X , Fx is generated as aCX,x-module by at mostm elements. By
the softness ofF and the compactness ofX, there is a finite set of global sections
T⊂ Γ(X; F)which restrict to the stalkwise generators at every pointx∈X , i.e.,
we have a surjective map
V≡(C X)⊕|T|→F,(3.76)
as desired.□
We have now arrived at the upshot of the present subsection.
Proposition 3.44.Let X∈Top be compact Hausdorff andE∈CPerf X be k-
connective. There exists a cofiber sequence
V[k]→E→E ′∈CPerf X,(3.77)
whereVa vector bundle andE ′ is(k+ 1)-connective.

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Proof. By shifting, it suffices to considerk = 0. By Lemma 3.42, we can choose a
surjection of sheavesV→π 0(E)which lifts to a mapV [0]→E . IfE′ denotes the
cofiber of this lift, then the long exact sequence of homotopy sheaves shows thatE′
is1-connective, whence the claim.□
3.4.Topological K-theory.Given a topological space X, there at least four
“topological K-theory spaces” one can consider.
(1) K(CPerfX), the algebraic K-theory of the stable∞-category of perfect
complexes onX;
(2) K(VectX), the algebraic K-theory of the exact 1-category of real vector
bundles onX;
(3) Kadd(VectX) = (Vect≃
X)gp, the algebraic K-theory of the additive 1-category
of real vector bundles onX; and
(4)KO (X) = MapS
(
Sing(X), Ω∞ko
)
, the space represented by the grouplike
E∞-monoidΩ∞ko.
In general, these will yield different grouplikeE∞-monoids inS. WhenX is compact
Hausdorff, the first three are equivalent and moreover
Kadd
0 (VectX)∼=π0KO(X) = [X,Ω∞ko].(3.78)
The goal of this subsection is to carefully explain the relationships between these
four different topological K-theory spaces.
The following lemma is a well-known consequence of Quillen’s group-completion
theorem; see for instance [Wei13, Chapter IV, Theorem 7.1].
Lemma 3.45.For X paracompact Hausdorff, the exact structure onVectX is split,
thereby inducing an equivalence
(Vect≃
X)gp ∼
− →K(VectX)(3.79)
which is natural inX.
The next proposition uses Saunier’s notion of aheart structure[Sau23, Definition
2.3], a weaker version of a weight structure, which permits a comparison between
the algebraic K-theory of stable∞-categories and exact∞-categories. As we will
not use heart structures outside of the following proposition, we direct the reader to
[Sau23] for details.
Proposition3.46.Let X∈Top be compact Hausdorff. The pair(CPerf≤0
X ,CPerf cn
X )
determines a bounded heart structure onCPerfX with
VectX≃CPerf♡
X.(3.80)
Consequently, the induced map
K(VectX)→K(CPerf X)(3.81)
is an equivalence.
Proof. To see the pair(CPerf≤0
X ,CPerf cn
X )determines a heart structure, it remains
to verify that, for anyE∈CPerf X, there is a cofiber sequence
A→E→ΣB(3.82)

===== PAGE 25 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 25
withA∈CPerf ≤0
X andB∈CPerf cn
X. We prove thatfor eachE thereis ad-connective
map φd :A→E where A has Tor-amplitude≤d , and we argue by induction ond.
By the compactness ofX, we may assume thatE is k-connective for somek∈Z ,
so we may takeA = 0when k < d. Now assume we are givenφd : A≤d→E
d-connective, whereA has Tor-amplitude≤d . By Proposition 3.44, we may choose
a d-connective mapψ :V [d]→fib (φd), where cofib(ψ)is d-connective. LetA≤d+1
denote the cofiber of the compositeV [d]→fib (φd)→A≤d and note thatφd factors
as
A≤d→A≤d+1
φd+1
−−−→E.(3.83)
Using the cofiber sequence associated to a composite, it followsφd+1 has( d + 1)-
connective cofiber. Furthermore, the closure of Tor-amplitude under extensions
showsA≤d+1 has Tor-amplitude≤(d+ 1).
By Lemma 3.35 we have
CPerf[a,b]
X = CPerf≤b
X ∩(CPerf X)≥a (3.84)
which, combined with Proposition 3.37, shows the heart structure is bounded.
Finally, we have
CPerf♡
X = CPerf≤0
X ∩CPerf cn
X = CPerf[0,0]
X ≃VectX,(3.85)
and the equivalence on K-theory spaces follows from [Sau23, Theorem 0.6].□
Remark 3.47.Observe, VectR0 is equivalent to the1-category of finite-dimensional
real vector spaces. Consequently, the groupoid core is given by
Vect≃
R0≃
⨆
n
BGLn(R),(3.86)
where BGLn(R)denotes the category with one object∗ and space of endomorphisms
GLn(R)with thediscretetopology. As VectR0 is an additive1-category, Vect≃
R0 is
a E∞-monoid in S. On the other hand, the compact-open topology provides an
enrichment ofVectR0 whose groupoid core is anE∞-monoid equivalent to
⨆
n
BO(n).(3.87)
Group-completing thisE∞-monoid, we have an equivalence
(⨆
n
BO(n)
)gp
≃Ω∞ko,(3.88)
and therefore a map of grouplikeE∞-monoids
(Vect≃
R0)gp→Ω∞ko.(3.89)
Proposition 3.48.ForX∈Top, there is a natural map
(Vect≃
X)gp→KO(X).(3.90)
IfXis additionally compact Hausdorff, this map is an isomorphism onπ0.
Proof.Recall thatVect∈Shv(Top; Cat ∞)is obtained by sheafifying
X↦→Freeω
C(X).(3.91)
It follows thatVect≃∈Shv(Top)is obtained by sheafifying
X↦→(Freeω
C(X) )≃≃
⨆
n
BGLn
(
C(X)
)
,(3.92)

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
where BGLn
(
C(X)
)
is the classifying space of the (discrete) groupGLn
(
C(X)
)
≃
MapTop
(
X,GLn(R)
)
. The collection of groups{GLn(R)}n≥0 with block sum deter-
mines a Z≥0-graded commutative monoid in the category of topological groups with
the Cartesian symmetric monoidal structure. By colimit interchange, we obtain a
nautral transformation of functors
⨆
n
B
(
MapTop
(
−,GLn(R)
))
→Map S
(
Sing(−),
⨆
n
BO(n)
)
;(3.93)
here, we have used the identificationSing
(
GLn(R)
)
≃ O(n)to describe the target
above. Furthermore, because Sing : Top→S is symmetric monoidal, a routine
verification shows this natural transformation is one ofE∞-space valued presheaves.
Post-composing with the map toΩ∞ko, we obtain a natural transformation of
E∞-space valued presheaves
(Freeω
C(−))≃→KO.(3.94)
As the target is already a sheaf, this induces a natural transformation of sheaves
valued inE∞-spaces:
Vect≃→KO;(3.95)
but the target is levelwise group-complete, so we obtain the desired natural trans-
formation:
(Vect≃)gp→KO.(3.96)
IfXis compact Hausdorff, the isomorphism onπ 0 is classical.□
In summary, we have produced a diagram of presheaves onTopvalued in grouplike
E∞-spaces:
K(CPerf) K(Vect) Kadd(Vect) KO. (3.97)
Furthermore, we have also seen that, for anyX∈Top which is compact Hausdorff,
the left-facing arrows are equivalences; hence, we have a map
K(CPerfX)→KO(X).(3.98)
Let CH⊂kTop⊂Top denote the full subcategories of compact Hausdorff spaces
and of k-spaces, respectively, and letj : CH→kTop denote the inclusion. Recall,
essentially by definition, any k-spaceX can be written as a small colimit of compact
Hausdorff spaces inTop.
Proposition 3.49.There is a natural transformation of functors fromkTopop to
CMongp(S):
K(CPerf)→KO.(3.99)
Consequently, we have a natural transformation ofCMon(S)-valued sheaves onkTop,
[−] : CPerf≃→KO,(3.100)
which splits cofiber sequences.
Proof. By restricting and right Kan extending the zig-zag of natural transformations
in (3.97) along j, we obtain the following diagram of presheaves onkTop valued in

===== PAGE 27 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 27
grouplikeE∞-spaces:
K(CPerf) K(Vect) Kadd(Vect) KO
j∗j∗K(CPerf) j∗j∗K(Vect) j∗j∗Kadd(Vect) j∗j∗KO.
(3.101)
By our work above, all the left-facing arrows in the bottom rows are equivalences.
Furthermore, because any k-space is a colimit of compact spaces andSing preserves
small colimits, the rightmost vertical arrow is also an equivalence. Therefore, we
obtain the claimed natural transformations:
CPerf≃→K(CPerf)→KO.(3.102)
□
Remark 3.50.The transformation[−]admits a convenient informal description.
GivenV∈CPerf X forXa k-space, this determines a point in the space
Γ
(
X;j∗j∗K(CPerf)
)
≃lim
f∈(CH/X)op
K(CPerfK),(3.103)
where f : K→X ranges over all maps from compact Hausdorff spaces into
X. Informally, this point is given by the system([f∗V ])f∈(CH/X)op which can be
explicitly encoded as a section of a fibration. Identifying each algebraic K-theory
class[f ∗V]with a point inK add(VectK), we can produce a system
(
[f∗V] : Sing(K)→Ω ∞ko
)
f∈(CH/X)op∈lim
f∈(CH/X)op
KO(K)(3.104)
which can be glued to give a point inKO(X).
3.5.Virtual and stable tangent bundles.Having better understood the rela-
tionship between perfect complexes and topological K-theory, we can now establish
the main results of the present subsection.
Assumption 3.51.Throughout the rest of the present article, we assume all derived
smooth manifoldsX have underlying topological space|X| which is paracompact
Hausdorff. Consequently, by Remark 2.15, we learn|X| is also metrizable. By abuse
of notation, we writeDSm for the full subcategory of derived smooth manifolds
which are paracompact Hausdorff. It is not hard to see this∞-category remains a
perfect topological site closed under finite limits.
The following proposition summarizes our previous technical work.
Proposition 3.52.There is a natural transformation of functors fromDSmop to
CMongp:
(−)vir : K(Perf)→KO.(3.105)
In particular, given any perfect complexE∈Perf X, there is a canonical virtual
bundle Evir∈KO (X). Givenf :X→Y in DSm, we say thatT vir
X is thevirtual
tangent bundle ofX and thatT vir
f is thevirtual relative tangent bundle off. As
algebraic K-theory splits cofiber sequences, we obtain the following formal properties
of the virtual relative tangent bundle.
Lemma 3.53.(1) Given f :X→Y in DSm, there are canonical equivalences
T vir
f ≃T vir
X −f∗T vir
Y andN vir
f ≃−T vir
f .(3.106)

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
(2) Given a compositeX
f
− →Y
g
− →Z∈DSm, there is a canonical equivalence
T vir
g◦f≃T vir
f +f∗T vir
g .(3.107)
(3) Given a pullback sqaure
X≡X× Y Y Y
X Y
g
f
⌟ g
f
(3.108)
inDSm, there is a canonical equivalence
T vir
f ≃g∗T vir
f .(3.109)
To study various flavors of cobordism, we must also contend withstable vector
bundles.
Recollection 3.54.The Postnikov truncationko→τ ≤0ko≃ HZ induces a pullback
square of grouplikeE∞-monoids:
BO Ω∞ko
∗ Z.
⌟
π
0
(3.110)
By looping the compositeU(1)→ U→ U/Oand applying real Bott periodicity, we
obtain anE 1-section ofπ
s:Z→Ω ∞ko;(3.111)
observe,s is not E∞, otherwise the firstk-invariant ofko would be trivial. Writing
rk≡s◦π, there is an induced map
id−rk : Ω ∞ko→BO(3.112)
furnishing an equivalence ofE1-monoids:
(π,id−rk) : Ω ∞ko
∼
− →Z×BO,(3.113)
where the latterE∞-monoid now carries the splitE∞-monoid structure rather than
the Bott periodic one.
Definition 3.55.Given X∈DSm and ξ∈KO (X), thevirtual rank function ofξ
is defined to be
rkξ≡rk◦ξ: Sing(X)→Ω ∞ko,(3.114)
which we may view as a function|X|→Z . We say thatξ∈KO (X)has virtual
rankn∈Z provided rkξ is constant with valuen; equivalently, this meansξ factors
through the subspace{n}×BO→Ω ∞ko.
Remark 3.56.Given twoξ,ζ∈KO(X), we haverk(ξ+ζ) = rkξ+ rkζ.
Notation 3.57.Given E∈Perf X, we definerkE≡rkE vir, and in the special
cases whereE =TX or E =Tf, we simply writerkX≡rkT vir
X and rkf≡rkT vir
f ,
respectively.
Example 3.58.Whenf:X→Y∈Smit is not difficult to see
rkX(x) = dim(T X,x)andrkf(x) = dim(T X,x)−dim(T Y,f(x) ),(3.115)
whereT X,x denotes the tangent space atx∈X.

===== PAGE 29 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 29
Definition 3.59.We denote by~KOthe functor
MapS
(
Sing(−),BO
)
: DSmop→CMon gp.(3.116)
By Recollection 3.54, we have a splitting of functors fromDSmop toMon gp:
KO≃Map S
(
Sing(−),Z
)
×~KO.(3.117)
In particular, we can viewξ∈KO(X)as a pair
(rkξ,ξ−rkξ)∈Map S
(
Sing(X),Z
)
×~KO(X).(3.118)
Definition 3.60.Letf:X→Y∈DSm. Thestable tangent bundle ofXis
τX≡T vir
X −rkX∈ ~KO(X).(3.119)
Thestable relative tangent bundle offis
τf≡T vir
f −rkf∈ ~KO(X).(3.120)
Remark 3.61.The properties established in Lemma 3.53 also hold for the stable
relative tangent bundle.
4.Structure functors and 6-functor formalisms
4.1.Correspondences and 6-functor formalisms.
Definition 4.1.Anadequate tripleis a triple( C; CL,CR)with C an∞-category and
CL,CR⊂C wide subcategories, such that, for everyX→Y∈C R andY′→Y∈C L,
there exists a pullback square inC
X′ Y′
X Y
⌟ (4.1)
and, for any such pullback,X′→Y ′∈C R and X′→X∈C L. Such pullback
squares are calledambigressivein [Bar17, HHLN23]. Amorphism of adequate triples,
F: (C;C L,CR)→(D;D L,DR),(4.2)
is a functorF : C→D which preserves ambigressive pullbacks. There is an∞-
category of adequate triples, denoted byAdTrip, which is Cartesian symmetric
monoidal, cf. [HHLN23, Lemma 2.4].
Every adequate triple determines an∞-category of correspondences (or spans)
Cor(C; CL,CR). Informally, this∞-category has the same objects asC, its morphisms
are diagrams of the form
X
f
← −W
g
− →Y,(4.3)
withf∈C L andg∈C R, and composition is given by forming pullbacks of correspon-
dences. The assignment of an adequate triple to its∞-category of correspondences
determines a functor
Cor : AdTrip→Cat ∞,(4.4)
and there are canonical inclusions of subcategories
Cop
L →Cor(C;C L,CR)←C R (4.5)
which refine to natural transformations of functors fromAdTriptoCat∞.

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
When C has a symmetric monoidal structure compatible with the adequate
triple structure, the∞-category of correspondences inherits a symmetric monoidal
structure.
Lemma 4.2.Let C⊗ be a symmetric monoidal∞-category and( C; CL,CR) ∈
AdTrip. If CL,CR⊂C are symmetric monoidal subcategories and⊗ : C×C→C
preserves ambigressive pullback squares, then there exists a canonical symmetric
monoidal∞-categoryCor(C;C L,CR)⊗ and symmetric monoidal functors
(Cop
L )⊗→Cor(C;C L,CR)⊗←C⊗
R.(4.6)
Proof. The hypotheses above easily imply(C; CL,CR)is a commutative monoid in
AdTrip; the forgetful functorAdTrip→Fun (Λ2
2,Cat∞)is symmetric monoidal. By
[HHLN23, Theorem 2.18], the functorCor preserves E∞-monoids. Furthermore, the
hypotheses easily implyCop
L andC R are symmetric monoidal subcategories.□
Remark 4.3.See [BGS20, 2.10, 2.14], [CLL26, Section 5], and [HM24, 2.3.3] for
results of a similar flavor.
One special kind of adequate triple, called a geometric setup, plays a key role in
the study of abstract 6-functor formalisms [HM24, Sch26].
Definition 4.4.Ageometric setupconsists of a pair( C;E), where C is an∞-cate-
gory which admits finite limits andEis a homotopy class of edges inCwhich:
(1) contains all equivalences,
(2) is closed under composition and pullbacks along edges inC,
(3) and, for everyf:X→Y∈E, the (relative) diagonal,
∆f :X→X× Y X,(4.7)
also lies inE.
Remark 4.5.If( C,E )is a geometric setup, it is routine to verify that(C; C,E )is
an adequate triple. In this case, we writeCor(C;E)≡Cor(C;C,E).
The following definition is extremely useful for constructing 6-functor formalisms
[HM24, Sch26, CLL26].
Definition 4.6.Let C be an∞-category with two wide subcategoriesI,P⊆C ,
and denote byE the collection of mapse in C which factor ase≃p◦i fori∈I and
p∈P . The pair(I,P )is asuitable decomposition of( C,E )provided the following
conditions are satisfied:
(1) bothIandPare left cancellative and closed under base change,
(2)Eis closed under composition,
(3) and every map inI∩Pisn-truncated for somen≥−2. 5
Remark 4.7.If E is a wide subcategory that is left cancellative and closed under
base change, the pair(C≃,E )forms a suitable decomposition of(C,E ). It is also
easy to see that(C,E)is a geometric setup.
Remark 4.8.Given a geometric setup( C,E ), we may endowC with the Cartesian
symmetric monoidal structureC×. It is not difficult to verify that(C; C,E )deter-
mines a commutative monoid inAdTrip. Therefore, Cor(C;E)admits a canonical
symmetric monoidal structureCor(C;E)⊗ by Lemma 4.2.
5Recall, a morphismf :X→Y is n-truncated if composition withf induces ann-truncated
map of spacesMapC(Z,X)→Map C(Z,Y)for allZ∈C.

===== PAGE 31 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 31
Definition 4.9.A3-functor formalismis a lax symmetric monoidal functor
D: Cor(C;E)→ ˆCat∞ (4.8)
which, in particular, encodes the following functors.
(1) Letf:X→Y∈Eand consider the correspondence
X
id
←−X
f
− →Y.(4.9)
We refer to the induced map
f! :D(X)→D(Y)(4.10)
as anexceptional pushforward.
(2) Letf:X→Y∈Cand consider the correspondence
Y
f
← −X=X.(4.11)
We refer to the induced map
f∗ :D(Y)→D(X)(4.12)
as apullback.
(3) Given∆ :X→X×X∈C, we refer to the induced map
D(X)⊗D(X)→D(X×X)
∆∗
−−→D(X)(4.13)
as aninternal tensor product. Thus, for everyA∈D (X), we have a functor
(−)⊗A:D(X)→D(X).(4.14)
We say thatD is a6-functor formalismprovided that the functorsf!,f∗, and−⊗A
admit right adjoints. We denote the right adjoints off! and f∗ byf! and f∗, which
we refer to as anexceptional pullbackandpushforward, respectively.
Remark 4.10.In the sequel, we will consider lax symmetric monoidal functors
D : Cor(C; CL,CR)→ˆCat∞, where( C; CL,CR)is an adequate triple. Furthermore,
these functors will behave similarly to abstract 6-functor formalisms, but do not
quite fit the definition above.
In the present article, we will be chiefly concerned with the 6-functor formalism
on locally compact Hausdorff spaces constructed by Volpe [Vol25] (which was
previously studied in great depth by Kashiwara-Schapira [KS90]). We denote by
LCH⊂Top the full subcategory of locally compact Hausdorff spaces. Recall, we
sayf :X→Y∈LCH isproperif, for any compact subset K⊂Y , f−1(K)⊂X
is compact; this notion is left cancelative and stable under composition and base
change, and we denote byP the collection of proper maps inLCH. Therefore,
we obtain an∞-category of correspondences Cor(LCH;P)which forms a wide
subcategory of the symmetric monoidal∞-categoryCor(LCH).
Theorem 4.11(Volpe).LetR∈CAlg(Sp). There is a 6-functor formalism
Shv(−;R)≡Shv(−; Mod R) : Cor(LCH)→ ˆCat∞ (4.15)
with the following properties.
(1) For anyX∈LCH , the∞-category Shv(X;R)is stable presentably symmet-
ric monoidal.

===== PAGE 32 =====
32 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
(2) For anyf:W→X∈LCH, the induced functor
f∗ : Shv(X;R)→Shv(W;R)(4.16)
is given by pullback of sheaves. In fact,f∗ is colimit-preserving and sym-
metric monoidal, thereby admitting a right adjointf∗.
(3) For anyg:W→Y, the induced functor
g! : Shv(W;R)→Shv(Y;R)(4.17)
is given by direct image with compact support, which admits a right adjoint
g! given by exceptional inverse image. Furthermore, ifg∈P , there is a
natural equivalenceg!≃g∗
Remark 4.12.We would like to emphasize that the results from Volpe’s thesis
[Vol25] are considerably more general than the theorem stated above.
4.2.Structure functors and correspondences.The following definition is
heavily inspired by Dold [Dol78].
Definition 4.13.Let C be an∞-category which admits finite limits and finite
coproducts. By astructure functor onCwe mean a product-preserving functor
F:C op→CMon gp.(4.18)
Amorphism of structure functors onCis a natural transformationη:F→G.
Given a structure functorF : Cop →CMon gp, we can deloop it to produce
another structure functor
BF:C op→CMon gp (4.19)
and, as∗∈CMon gp is initial, there is an essentially unique morphism of structure
functors
const(∗)→BF.(4.20)
Post-composing with the forgetful functor toS, we obtain
BF:C op→S.(4.21)
Definition 4.14.We define theF-structuring ofCto be
πF :C F≡
∫c
C
BF→C.(4.22)
Note thatconst(∗)→BFinduces a sectionσ F :C→C F ofπ F.
Remark 4.15.We can describeC F informally as follows.
(1) The objects ofCF are pairs
(X,∗X),(4.23)
where∗X denotes the (essentially) unique object inBF (X); in particular,
we can simply view objects ofCF as objects inC.
(2) A morphism inCF,
(X,∗X)→(Y,∗ X),(4.24)
consists of a morphismf : X→Y∈C together with a morphism∗X→
BF(f)(∗Y ) =∗ X; the latter is simply a point in
α∈F(X)≃End BF(X) (∗X).(4.25)

===== PAGE 33 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 33
In particular, we can view a morphism inCF as a pair
(
f:X→Y∈C,α∈F(X)
)
.(4.26)
(3) Composition inCF is given by
(
X
(f,α)
−−−→Y
(g,β)
−−−→Z
)
↦→
(
X
(
g◦f,α+f∗(β)
)
−−−−−−−−−−→Z
)
;(4.27)
the identity morphism is(idX,0) :X→X.
Remark 4.16.The essential image ofσF consists of the wide subcategory spanned
by morphisms inCF of the form(f, 0) :X→Y . By abuse of notation, we will write
Cfor this wide subcategory ofCF.
The mapping spaces in CF are simple to compute, and the following lemma
justifies the informal description above.
Lemma 4.17.For anyX,Y∈C, there is a canonical equivalence
MapCF (X,Y)
∼
− →MapC(X,Y)×F(X).(4.28)
Proof.There is a fiber sequence
F(X)→Map CF (X,Y)→Map C(X,Y)(4.29)
via [Lur09a, Proposition 2.4.4.2]. Moreover, there is a section C→C F of πF
by the discussion above; this provides a splitting of the map on the right of the
aforementioned fiber sequence, whence the claim.□
Lemma 4.18.Let F be a structure functor onC. The ∞-category CF admits
pullbacks and finite coproducts.
Proof. The first claim follows immediately from [Lur26, Tag 02KT]. To see thatCF
admits finite coproducts, consider the cocone
X
(iX,0)
−−−−→X⊔Y
(iY,0)
←−−−−Y(4.30)
which induces a map
MapCF (X⊔Y,Z)→Map CF (X,Z)×Map CF (Y,Z)(4.31)
natural inZ∈C F. It is easy to see this map is an equivalence by Lemma 4.17.□
Remark 4.19.Note, CF does not necessarily have a terminal object. This is
because EndCF (∗C)≃F (∗C), where∗C∈C is terminal. However,CF does have an
initial object∅ C as any objectXreceives an essentially unique morphism
∅C
(i,0)
−−−→X,(4.32)
where0∈F(∅ C)≃∗.
For Cas above, there is a canonical Cartesian symmetric monoidal structureC×→
Fin∗, in the sense of [Lur17, 2.4.1], as well as a canonical coCartesian symmetric
monoidal structure Cop,⊔→Fin∗ in the sense of [Lur17, 2.4.3]. Furthermore, by
[Lur26, Tag 04D0], there is an equivalence betweenCop,⊔→Fin ∗ and the dual
coCartesian fibration obtained fromC×→Fin∗:
C×,∨→Fin∗.(4.33)

===== PAGE 34 =====
34 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
By the discussion in [KP25, Subsection 6.1], the∞-category of lax symmetric
monoidal functors C×,∨ →D ⊗ is canonically equivalent to the∞-category of
functors Cop→CAlg (D). Viewing CMongp as a symmetric monoidal∞-category
under the Cartesian product, the equivalenceCAlg(CMongp)≃CMon gp implies
the following lemma.
Lemma 4.20.Any structure functor F : Cop→CMon gp admits an essentially
unique extension to a lax symmetric monoidal functor
F× :C×,∨→(CMon gp)×.(4.34)
Remark 4.21.Informally,F × encodes the pairing
F(X)×F(Y)→F(X×Y)(4.35)
given by(α,β)↦→pr∗
1α+ pr∗
2β, and we writeα×βfor this point inF(X×Y).
Proposition 4.22.If F is a structure functor onC, then CF admits a canonical
symmetric monoidal structureC⊗
F→Fin∗ together with a symmetric monoidal lifts
ofπ F andσ F:
π⊗
F :C⊗
F→C× andσ ⊗
F :C×→C⊗
F.(4.36)
Furthermore, ifη :F→G is a morphism of structure functors onC, there is an
induced symmetric monoidal functor
C⊗
F→C⊗
G (4.37)
whose underlying functor preserves pullbacks and finite coproducts.
Proof. First, recall that, sinceS is a Cartesian symmetric monoidal∞-category,
there is a Cartesian structureΠ :S×→S in the sense of [Lur17, Proposition 2.4.1.5].
AsFis multiplicative, so too isBF, and this yields a functor
Π◦BF × :C×,∨→S×→S.(4.38)
By unstraightening, we obtain a commutative diagram of coCartesian fibrations
∫cc
C×,∨(Π◦BF ×) C×,∨
Fin∗,
π⊗,∨
F
(4.39)
where the underlying functor ofπ⊗,∨
F is given by
πop
F :C op
F ≃
∫cc
Cop
BF→C op.(4.40)
Dualizing the two symmetric monoidal∞-categories and the functorπ⊗,∨
F yields a
symmetric monoidal functor of∞-categories
C⊗
F≡
(∫cc
C×,∨
p◦BF ×
)∨
→C× (4.41)
whose underlying functor is clearly the Cartesian fibrationπF. Given a morphism of
multiplicative structure functors,η, a similar argument yields the desired symmetric
monoidal functorC⊗
F→C⊗
G. This also establishes the claim regardingσF.

===== PAGE 35 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 35
The functor
∫c
C Bη : CF→C G preserves pullbacks immediately by [Lur26, Tag
02KT]. Furthermore, becauseηX :F (X)→G (X)is a map of grouplike commutative
monoids, it is clear that the colimit cocone
X
(iX,0)
−−−−→X⊔Y
(iY,0)
←−−−−Y(4.42)
inC F is sent to a colimit cocone inCG.□
Remark 4.23.While C⊗
F andπF are symmetric monoidal, we stress thatC⊗
F isnot
the Cartesian symmetric monoidal structure by Remark 4.19. In spite of this, the
monoidal product is harmonious with the coproduct as we now explain. LetX∈C F,{
(fi,αi) :Yi→Z i
}
i∈I a finite set of morphisms inCF, andα = (αi)i∈I∈F (⊔i∈IYi).
There is a commutative square
⨆
i∈I(X⊗Y i) X⊗
(⨆
i∈IYi
)
⨆
i∈I(X⊗Z i) X⊗
(⨆
i∈IZi
)
,
∼
⨆
i∈I(idX⊗fi,pr∗
2α) (idX⊗f,pr∗
2α)
∼
(4.43)
where the horizontal arrows are the equivalences inCF determined by the interchange
equivalence inCtogether with0∈F( ⨆
i∈IX×Y i).
4.3.Structured correspondences and 6-functor formalisms.In this technical
subsection, we explain how to construct 6-functor formalisms which arise from
twisting by a structure functor.
Convention 4.24.Throughout this subsection, we fix an∞-category C and a wide
subcategoryE⊂Csatisfying the following properties:
(a)C admits finite limits, finite coproducts, and products distribute over finite
coproducts;
(b) andE⊂Cpreserves pullbacks and coproducts
The following are immediate consequences:
(1) (C,E )is a geometric setup (in particular, the pair( C≃,E )is a suitable
decomposition forE),
(2) and C admits a Cartesian symmetric monoidal structure withE⊂C a
symmetric monoidal subcategory.
Example 4.25.Let P⊂DSm denote the wide subcategory spanned by morphisms
p :X→Y∈ whose realization|p| is proper. A routine verification showsP⊂DSm
satisfies Convention 4.24.
Notation 4.26.Let F be a structure functor onC. We denote byEF⊂C F the
wide subcategory of morphisms(f,α ) :X→Y such thatf∈E . Also, recall that,
as above, we can viewCas a wide subcategory ofCF.
Lemma 4.27.LetFbe a structure functor onC.
(1)(C F,EF )is a geometric setup.
(2)(C ≃,EF )is a suitable decomposition for(CF,EF ).
(3)Cor(C F ;EF )is a semiadditive∞-category.
Proof. (1) follows from Lemma 4.18 combined with our assumptions in Conven-
tion 4.24, and (2) is a routine check of the definitions.

===== PAGE 36 =====
36 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Semi-additivity proceeds as follows. By (1) combined with [HM24, Proposition
2.2.9], Cor(CF ;EF )is an ∞-category. By [ GGN15, Proposition 2.3] it suffices
to show the homotopy category ofCor(CF,EF )is semiadditive; this is a routine
argument.□
Lemma 4.28. EF ⊂C F is a symmetric monoidal subcategory and the tensor
product⊗:C F×CF→C F preserves pullbacks along morphisms inEF×EF.
Proof. Both claims follow easily from the fact thatE is closed under Cartesian
products inC.□
Definition 4.29.We define
Cor(CF,EF )⊗ (4.44)
to be the symmetric monoidal∞-category obtained from Lemmas 4.2 and 4.28. By
construction, there are symmetric monoidal functors
(Cop
F )⊗→Cor(C F,EF )⊗←E⊗
F.(4.45)
Remark 4.30.Informally, the tensor product⊗ : Cor(CF ;EF )×2→Cor (CF ;EF )
sends a pair of objects(X,Y)toX×Yand a pair of correspondences to
W0×W 1
X0×X 1 Y0×Y 1.
(f0×f1,α0×α1) (g0×g1,β0×β1) (4.46)
The terminal object of C is the unit for the monoidal product onCor(CF ;EF ).
Furthermore, this monoidal product preserves direct sums by Remark 4.23.
Definition 4.31.We say a 3-functor formalismD : Cor(C;E)→ˆCat∞ isadditive
provided the canonical map
D(X⊔Y)→D(X)×D(Y)(4.47)
is an equivalence for allX,Y∈C.
Let Pic(D) : Cop→CMon gp denote the functor given byX↦→Pic
(
D(X)
)
. The
following lemma is immediate.
Lemma 4.32.If D : Cor(C;E)→ˆCat∞ is an additive 3-functor formalism, then
Pic(D)is a structure functor.
Let D be an additive 3-functor formalism onCor(C;E)and η : F→Pic (D)
a morphism of structure functors. From this data, we will construct a 3-functor
formalism
DF : Cor(CF ;EF )→ ˆCat∞ (4.48)
which “twists” the pullback and pushforward functors ofD by invertible objects in
the essential image ofη :F→Pic (D). We first construct the contravariant portion
of this putative 3-functor formalism; this will require some technical results from
higher category theory.
Recollection 4.33.Viewing ˆCat∞ as a Cartesian symmetric monoidal∞-category,
we let Mod(ˆCat∞)denote the (very large)∞-category of pairs(A,M ), where A is
a symmetric monoidal∞-category and M is a module overA [Lur17, Definition

===== PAGE 37 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 37
3.3.3.8, Definition 4.5.1.1]; this is itself a symmetric monoidal∞-category with
respect to the product
(A,M)⊠(B,N) = (A×B,M×N).(4.49)
By [Lur17, Corollary 3.4.1.5] we have a canonical identification
CAlg
(
Mod(ˆCat∞)
)
≃CAlg(ˆCat∞)[1].(4.50)
Remark 4.34.Because ˆCat∞ is Cartesian symmetric monoidal,CAlg(ˆCat∞)has
a terminal object given by∗∈ ˆCat∞. This implies there is an essentially unique
symmetric monoidal functor
CAlg(ˆCat∞)→CAlg( ˆCat∞)[1] (4.51)
which sends A↦→(A→∗ ); under the identification above, this determines a functor
A↦→(A,∗).
Construction 4.35.Given( A,M )∈Mod (ˆCat∞), we can consider its bar con-
struction:
M/ /A= colim
∆op
Bar(∗,A,M)∈ ˆCat∞.(4.52)
We will show this can be refined to a symmetric monoidal functor
−/ /−: Mod(ˆCat∞)→ ˆCat∞.(4.53)
By [Lur17, Theorem 4.4.2.8, Remark 4.6.3.4], the relative tensor product
ModR,L(ˆCat∞)≡RMod( ˆCat∞)× Alg(ˆCat∞) LMod(ˆCat∞)→ ˆCat∞ (4.54)
is symmetric monoidal because the Cartesian product onˆCat∞ is compatible with
sifted colimits. Therefore, it will be enough to produce a symmetric monoidal
functor
Mod(ˆCat∞)→Mod R,L(ˆCat∞)(4.55)
sending a pair(A,M )to the triple(∗,A,M ). By [Lur17, Proposition 4.5.1.4] and
the theory in [Lur17, 3.2.4], there is a pullback diagram of symmetric monoidal
∞-categories:
Mod(ˆCat∞) LMod(ˆCat∞)
CAlg(ˆCat∞) Alg(ˆCat∞).
⌟ (4.56)
Note that the same holds forRMod in place ofLMod. By Remark 4.34, there is a
symmetric monoidal section
CAlg(ˆCat∞)→Mod( ˆCat∞)(4.57)
sending A↦→(A,∗ ); pre-composing with the forgetful functor, we obtain a symmetric
monoidal functor
Mod(ˆCat∞)→CAlg( ˆCat∞)→Mod( ˆCat∞)→RMod( ˆCat∞).(4.58)
By the definition ofModR,L(ˆCat∞), we obtain our desired symmetric monoidal
functor which sends(A,M)toM/ /A.

===== PAGE 38 =====
38 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Remark 4.36.If A is an E∞-monoid in S, then∗/ /Acan be identified withBA,
the∞-category with a single object and space of endomorphismsA. Similarly, if
M∈Mod A(ˆCat∞), the essentially unique map(A,M)→(A,∗)induces a functor
M/ /A→∗/ /A.(4.59)
This is a coCartesian fibration classifying the left action ofA on M. Therefore, we
may informally viewM/ /Aas the∞-category where:
(1) the objects are the same as those ofM,
(2) and a morphismM→N consists of an objectα∈A together with a
morphism θ :α⊗M→N . (Given such a pair(α,θ ), it is a coCartesian lift
ofαjust in the caseθis an equivalence.)
IfAis grouplike, thenM/ /A→∗/ /Ais also a Cartesian fibration.
Construction 4.37(Contravariant functoriality).The map of structure functors
η :F→Pic (D)induces a natural transformationF→D in Fun
(
Cop,CAlg (ˆCat∞)
)
.
By reasoning similar to that in Remark 4.34, there is a morphism inCAlg(ˆCat∞)[1],
fromF→DtoF→∗, given by the square
F D
F ∗.
id (4.60)
By Recollection 4.33, we obtain an essentially unique lax symmetric monoidal functor
(F,D)⊗ :C op,⊔→Mod(ˆCat∞)⊗ (4.61)
and an essentially unique lax symmetric monoidal transformation
(F,D)⊗→(F,∗) ⊗.(4.62)
Post-composing with the bar construction yields another lax symmetric monoidal
natural transformation
(D/ /F)⊗→(∗/ /F)⊗ (4.63)
of functors from Cop to ˆCat∞. After coCartesian unstraightening, we obtain a
functor
Φ⊗
F :
(∫cc
Cop
D/ /F
)⊗
≡
∫cc
Cop,⊔
(D/ /F)⊗→
∫cc
Cop,⊔
(∗/ /F)⊗ =C⊗,∨
F (4.64)
between coCartesian fibrations over Cop,⊔ (and thus over Fin∗); we denote the
underlying functor by
ΦF :
∫cc
Cop
D/ /F→Cop
F .(4.65)
Lemma 4.38.The functorΦ ⊗
F is a coCartesian fibration of∞-operads.
Proof. Byawell-knownlemmaregardingcoCartesianfibrations(see[ Ram26, Lemma
2.10]) it is enough to establish the following two claims.
(1) For each{Xi}i∈I∈C op,⊔, the functor
∏
i∈I
D(Xi)/ /F(Xi)→
∏
i∈I
∗/ /F(Xi)(4.66)
is a coCartesian fibration.

===== PAGE 39 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 39
(2) For each active morphism(X,Y )→Z in Cop,⊔ (given by a pair of maps
(f,g) :Z→X×Y), the functor⊠ f,g in the diagram below,
D(X)/ /F(X)×D(Y)/ /F(Y) D(Z)/ /F(Z)
∗/ /F(X)×∗/ /F(Y) ∗/ /F(Z),
⊠f,g
(ΦX,ΦY ) ΦZ (4.67)
carries(Φ X,ΦY )-coCartesian arrows toΦZ-coCartesian arrows.
The first claim is immediate from Remark 4.36. For the second claim, fix a(ΦX, ΦY )-
coCartesian morphism
(
(α,θX),(β,θ Y )
)
: (FX,FY )→(G X,GY )(4.68)
and note this is sent to the morphism
(f∗α+g ∗β,f∗θX⊠g∗θY ) :f∗FX⊠g∗FY →f∗GX⊠g∗GY,(4.69)
wheref ∗θX⊠g∗θY is the equivalence
(
f∗FX⊗η(f∗α)
)
⊠
(
g∗FY⊗η(g∗β)
)
≃f∗GX⊠g∗GY.(4.70)
However, as we have
(
f∗FX⊗η(f∗α)
)
⊠
(
g∗FY⊗η(g∗β)
)
≃η(f ∗α+g ∗β)⊗(f ∗FX⊠g∗FY ),(4.71)
the claim follows. To complete the proof, we observe thatΦ⊗
F satisfies [Lur17,
Proposition 2.1.2.12 (b)] essentially by construction.□
Definition 4.39.We define
DF :C op
F →ˆCat∞ andD ⊗
F :C⊗,∨
F →ˆCat
×
∞ (4.72)
to be the coCartesian straightenings of the functorsΦF andΦ⊗
F, the latter of which
is lax symmetric monoidal by Lemma 4.38.
Remark 4.40.Informally, the lax symmetric monoidal functorDF is given by
DF (X) =D(X)and( f,α )∗ =η(α)⊗f∗(−) :D(Y )→D (X). Note thatDF really
depends on bothFandη.
Let η :F→Pic (D)be a map of structure functors onC. As Pic
(
D(X)
)
acts on
D(X), we obtain an action ofF(X)onD(X), whereα∈F(X)acts onD(X)via
η(α)⊗(−) :D(X)→D(X).(4.73)
Proposition 4.41.There is an essentially unique additive 3-functor formalism
DF : Cor(CF ;EF )→ ˆCat∞ (4.74)
such that:
(1)D F (X) =D(X);
(2) for any(f,α) :X→Y∈C F, we have
(f,α)∗ =f∗(−)⊗η(α) :D(Y)→D(X);(4.75)
(3) and for any(g,β) :X→Y∈E F, we have
(g,β) ! =g !
(
−⊗η(−β)
)
:D(X)→D(Y).(4.76)

===== PAGE 40 =====
40 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Furthermore, there is a canonical isomorphism of 3-functor formalisms
DF≃η∗DPic,(4.77)
whereη∗DPic denotes the pullback ofDPic along
Cor(CF ;EF )→Cor(C Pic;E Pic).(4.78)
Finally, ifDis a 6-functor formalism, then so isDF.
Proof. By [CLL26, Theorem 5.14] we only need to verify that(C⊗
F,E⊗
F )and D⊗
F
satisfy [CLL26, Definition 5.13, (1) and (2b)]. We will repeatedly use the fact that
whenever(f,α)∈E F, the functor(f,α)∗ admits a right adjoint given by:
(f,α) !≡f !
(
−⊗η(−α)
)
.(4.79)
We begin by showingDF is(C≃,EF )-biadjointable. Given a pullback square
X Y
X Y
⌟
(f,g∗α)
(g,f
∗
β) (g,β)
(f,α)
(4.80)
inC F with(g,β)∈E F, we must show that
D(X) D(Y)
D(X) D(Y)
(f,g∗α)∗
(g,f
∗
β)∗ (g,β)∗
(f,α)∗
(4.81)
is vertically right adjointable, i.e., the induced exchange transformation
(f,α)∗(g,β) !→(g,f
∗
β)!(f,g∗α)∗ (4.82)
is an equivalence. Unraveling the definitions, this amounts to the claim that, for
eachF∈D( Y), the induced map
f∗g!
(
F⊗η(−β)
)
⊗η(α)→ g!
(
f
∗
F⊗ g∗η(α)⊗ f
∗
η(−β)
)
(4.83)
is an equivalence; this follows from the projection formula and the equivalence
f∗g!≃g!f
∗
. Next, we establish thatD⊗
F satisfies a multiplicative right adjointability
condition. To this end, letX∈C F and( f,α ) : Y→Y ′∈E F. We claim the
following square is vertically right adjointable:
DF (X)×D F (Y′) DF (X×Y ′)
DF (X)×D F (Y) DF (X×Y);
⊠
id×(f,α)∗ (id×f,pr∗
2α)∗
⊠
(4.84)
that is, the induced transformation
(−)⊠f !
(
−⊗η(−α)
)
→(id×f) !
(
(−⊠−)⊗η(−pr ∗
2α)
)
(4.85)
is an equivalence, but this is merely a consequence of the definitions. This completes
the construction of the desired 3-functor formalism. It is easy to see thatDF must
be additive and that, ifDis a 6-functor formalism, then so isDF.□

===== PAGE 41 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 41
5.Tangentially structured correspondences
In the remainder of the present article we fix a pair(B,φ ), whereB is a grouplike
E∞-monoid andφ:B→BOis a map ofE ∞-monoids.
Definition 5.1.Letf:X→Y∈DSm.
(1) Givenv∈ ~KO(X), aφ-structureonvis choice of lift inS:
B
Sing(X) BO.
φ
v
(5.1)
(2) Astable (tangential)φ-structureonfis defined to be aφ-structure onτ f.
Recall, the(stable) J-homomorphism, denotedJ, is the composition of maps of
E∞-monoids
⨆
n
BO(n)
S(−)
−−−→S∗
Σ∞
−−→Sp(5.2)
which sends a real vector spaceV to SV ≡ Σ∞SV; note, SV is an invertible
spectrum. Moreover, since the target is group-complete, we obtain a symmetric
monoidal functor
J: Ω∞ko→Pic(S).(5.3)
The restriction ofJ along the inclusionBO ={0}×BO→ Ω∞ko factors through
{0}×BGL 1(S)→Pic(S); this yields another map ofE∞-monoids,
BO→BGL 1(S),(5.4)
which we still denote byJ.
Definition 5.2.TheThom spectrumassociated toφis the colimit
Mφ≡colim
(
B→BO→BGL 1(S)→Sp
)
;(5.5)
this admits a canonicalE∞-ring structure by [AB19].
Construction 5.3.Let PH⊂LCH denote the full subcategory of paracompact
Hausdorff topological spaces. By the discussion in [Vol25, Section 7], there is a
natural transformation of functors fromPHop toCMon gp:
Th : KO→Pic
(
Shv(−;S)
)
.(5.6)
Meanwhile, there is a natural transformation of functors fromPHop to the∞-cate-
gory of symmetric monoidal∞-categories:
Fun(Sing(−),Sp)→Shv(−;S);(5.7)
this converts local systems into their sheaves of sections, and the natural transfor-
mationThcan be factored as
KO→Fun
(
Sing(−),Pic(S)
)
→Pic
(
Shv(−;S)
)
.6 (5.8)
6Note, Volpe crucially uses paracompactness since they appeal to [Lur09a, 7.1.4.3].

===== PAGE 42 =====
42 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
By restricting along the inclusion~KO→KO, we obtain a commutative diagram
~KO Fun
(
Sing(−),BGL 1(S)
)
KO Fun
(
Sing(−),Pic(S)
)
(5.9)
and, by abuse of notation, we also writeThfor
~KO→Fun
(
Sing(−),BGL 1(S)
)
→Pic
(
Shv(−;S)
)
.(5.10)
Definition 5.4.Given X∈DSm and ξ∈KO (X), theThom local systemof ξ,
denotedTh X(ξ), is the composition
Sing(X)
ξ
− →Ω∞ko
J
− →Pic(S).(5.11)
By the previous discussion, this local system determines an invertible sheaf which
we call theThom sheafassociated to ξ; by an abuse of notation, we denote this
sheaf also byThX(ξ). IfU⊂Xis an open embedding, we writeTh X(ξ)|U for the
restriction of ThX(ξ)along Sing(U)→Sing (X), or for the restriction of the Thom
sheaf toU.
Definition 5.5.LetRbe anE ∞-ring andX∈DSm.
(1) Let L : Sing(X)→BGL 1(S). An R-orientationof L is a choice of null-
homotopy of the composite
Sing(X)
L
− →BGL1(S)→BGL 1(R).(5.12)
Equivalently, this is a choice of equivalence
θ:R⊗ SL
∼
− →RX,(5.13)
whereR⊗ SL denotes the local system obtained by base change alongS→R
andR X denotes theR-valued constant local system onSing(X).
(2) LetL∈Pic
(
Shv(X;S)
)
. AnR-orientationofLis a choice of equivalence
ϑ:R⊗ SL
∼
− →RX,(5.14)
where R⊗ SL denotes the sheaf ofR-modules obtained by extension of
scalars alongS→RandR X denotes the constant sheaf ofR-modules.
Notation 5.6.Given a morphism dX : Sing(X)→Z , we may viewdX as a
virtual bundle by post-composing with theE1-section s : Z→ Ω∞ko, and this
point dX∈KO (X)determines the similarly named element ofπ0KO(X). Given an
E∞-ringR, we obtain aPic(R)-valued local system
RX{dX}≡R⊗ S ThX(dX) : Sing(X)→Pic(R).(5.15)
IfC⊂X denotes a path-component ofX, then the induced local system onSing(C)
is equivalent to the constant local systemΣdX(C)RX, wheredX(C)∈Z denotes
the unique integer attained bydX after restricting to Sing(C). Additionally, if
L∈Pic(Shv(X;R)), we write
L{dX}≡L⊗ RX RX{dX}.(5.16)
Remark 5.7.We would like to emphasize that the equivalence
RX{dX}⊗RRX{dX′}≃R X{dX′}⊗RRX{dX}(5.17)
may carry an implicit sign as it is a path in the spacePic
(
Shv(X;R)
)
.

===== PAGE 43 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 43
Remark 5.8(UniversalM φ-orientation).Consider ThB(φ)over B. By [AB19,
Corollary 3.17], there is a canonicalMφ-orientation
canφ : ThB(φ)⊗ S Mφ
∼
− →MφB (5.18)
arising from the identity mapMφ→Mφ.
The following result is immediate from the previous remark.
Corollary 5.9(Thom isomorphism).Let X∈DSm and v∈ ~KO(X). Supposev
has aφ-structureα, thencan φ induces a canonicalMφ-orientation ofThX(v):
ThX(v)⊗ S Mφ≃Th X(φ◦α)⊗ S Mφ
∼
− →MφX.(5.19)
In particular,canφ induces an equivalence
Γ
(
X; ThX(v)⊗ S Mφ
)∼
− →F
(
Σ∞
+ Sing(X),Mφ
)
.(5.20)
Remark 5.10.Let ξ∈KO (X)and α a φ-structure onξ−rkξ . In this case, the
Thom isomorphism above takes the form
MφX≃Th X(φ◦α)⊗ S Mφ≃Th X(ξ)⊗ S MφX{−rkξ}.(5.21)
5.1.Tangentially structured correspondences.Recall, by ~KO, we mean the
functor
~KO(−)≡Map S
(
Sing(−),BO
)
: DSmop→CMon gp.(5.22)
We denote byDSm~KO the~KO-structuring of DSm. Meanwhile, we have the functor
B(−)≡Map S
(
Sing(−),B
)
: DSmop→CMon gp;(5.23)
this is a structure functor. We denote byDSmB the B-structuring of DSm. Of
course,φinduces a symmetric monoidal functor
DSmB→DSm ~KO.(5.24)
Remark 5.11.Recall, DSm determines a wide subcategory ofDSm~KO spanned by
thetrivially structuredmorphisms, i.e., morphisms of the form(f,0) :X→Y.
The following result is immediate.
Lemma 5.12.Morphisms in DSm~KO of the form(f,τf) :X→Y are closed under
composition.
In particular, we may define the wide subcategoryDSmτ⊂DSm ~KO spanned by
thetangentially structuredmorphisms. The following two results are immediate
consequences of our prior work on the stable relative tangent bundle.
Lemma 5.13.The pullback of a tangentially structured morphism along a trivially
structured morphism is tangentially structured.
Lemma 5.14.The wide subcategory DSmτ⊂DSm ~KO is a symmetric monoidal
subcategory which is also closed under coproducts.
Definition 5.15.We define the wide subcategory ofproper, tangentially φ-
structured morphismsto be
Pφ≡P B×P~KO
Pτ⊂DSm B.(5.25)
Proposition 5.16.The triple( DSmB; DSm,Pφ)determines a commutative monoid
inAdTrip.

===== PAGE 44 =====
44 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Proof. The triple( DSmB; DSm,Pφ)is easily seen to be adequate by combining
Lemma 5.13 with the fact thatDSmB is closed under pullbacks. It is not difficult
to see thatDSm,Pφ⊂DSm B are symmetric monoidal subcategories, and similar
reasoning shows that ambigressive pullback squares are closed under the symmetric
monoidal product inDSmB.□
Definition 5.17.Define
Corφ(DSm)≡Cor(DSm B; DSm,Pφ);(5.26)
this admits a canonical symmetric monoidal structure,Corφ(DSm)⊗, by Proposi-
tion 5.16.
Remark 5.18.Informally, the∞-category Corφ(DSm)has objects derived smooth
manifolds and morphisms given by structured correspondences
X
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α)
−−−→Y,(5.27)
whereα is a choice ofφ-structure onτg. The monoidal structure is entirely analogous
to the one described in Remark 4.30. Furthermore,Corφ(DSm)is a semiadditive
∞-category, where the direct sum of two derived smooth manifolds is given by
X⊔Y. The direct sum of twoφ-structured correspondences is given by
X0⊔X 1
(f0⊔f1,0)
←−−−−−−W0⊔W 1
(g0⊔g1,α)
−−−−−−→Y0⊔Y 1,(5.28)
whereα∈B (W0⊔W 1)is identified with the pair(α0,α 1)∈B (W0)×B (W1); note,
τf0⊔f1 corresponds to the tuple(τf0,τf1).
5.2.Structured correspondences and transfers.
Construction 5.19.Using the E∞-map S→ Mφ together with Construction 5.3,
we obtain a morphism of structure functors
Thφ≡(Th◦φ)⊗ S Mφ:B→Pic
(
Shv(−; Mφ)
)
,(5.29)
where Shv(−; Mφ) : Cor(DSm;P)→ˆCat∞ denotes the 6-functor formalism from
Theorem 4.11.
Remark 5.20.The reader familiar with orientation theory may have noticedThφ
admits a canonical trivialization. We will return to this point in Section 7.
Definition 5.21.We let
Shvφ : Cor(DSmB;P B)→ ˆCat∞ (5.30)
denote the 6-functor formalism obtained by twistingShv(−; Mφ)along Thφ. We
define
Dφ : Corφ(DSm)→ ˆCat∞ (5.31)
to be the restriction ofShvφ along the symmetric monoidal inclusionCorφ(DSm)→
Cor(DSmB;P B).
Definition 5.22.Define
TrCorφ(DSm)⊂
∫cc
Corφ(DSm)
Dφ≡Un(D φ)(5.32)
to be the full subcategory spanned by objects of the form(X,dX)≡ (X, MφX{dX}),
whered X : Sing(X)→Z.

===== PAGE 45 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 45
Remark 5.23.We would like toreallyemphasize that the symbol(X,dX)issimply
a stand in for(X,MφX{dX}), i.e., the equivalence
(X,dX +d′
X)≃(X,d ′
X +dX)(5.33)
utilizes Remark 5.7.
Remark 5.24.Informally, a morphism( X,dX)→ (Y,dY )is the data of a φ-
structured correspondence
X
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α)
−−−→Y(5.34)
together with a morphism inShv
(
Y; Mφ
)
:
θ:g !
(
ThW (τg)⊗ S MφW{f∗dX}
)
→Mφ Y{dY}.(5.35)
Therefore, a morphism inTrCorφ(DSm)can be viewed as aφ-structured correspon-
dence together with a choice oftransfer classθ as above. Often, we will denote the
data of a morphism(X,dX)→(Y,d Y )as
(X,dX)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(Y,dY ).(5.36)
Lemma 5.25.TrCorφ(DSm)⊂Un(D φ)is a symmetric monoidal subcategory.
Proof. Certainly( R0, 0)∈TrCorφ(DSm), so it is enough to show(X,dX)⊠ (Y,dY )
belongs toTrCorφ(DSm). However, this follows from the equivalence
pr∗
1MφX{dX}⊗ MφX×Y pr∗
1MφY{dY}≃Mφ X×Y{pr∗
1dX + pr∗
2dY}.(5.37)
□
Lemma 5.26. Un(Dφ)is semiadditive; moreover, TrCorφ(DSm)is a semiadditive
subcategory.
Proof.By [GHN17, Lemma 10.7],Un(Dφ)admits finite coproducts. Given
(Y0,G 0),(Y 1,G 1)∈Un(D φ),(5.38)
let us describe their binary coproduct; to do so, first set
G≡(G 0,G 1)∈D φ(Y0)×D φ(Y1)≃D φ(Y0⊔Y 1).(5.39)
Fork= 0,1, theφ-structured correspondence
Y0⊔Y 1
(ik,0)
←−−−Yk
(id,0)
−−−→Yk (5.40)
induces a morphism
(Y0⊔Y 1,G)→(Y k,i∗
kG)≃(Y k,Gk).(5.41)
In turn, this induces a natural transformation
MapUn(Dφ)
(
−,(Y 0⊔Y 1,G)
)
→Map Un(Dφ)
(
−,(Y 0,G 0)
)
×Map Un(Dφ)
(
−,(Y 1,G 1)
)
(5.42)
which is easily seen to be an equivalence by [Lur09a, 2.4.4.2] combined with the
semiadditivity of Corφ(DSm)and the additivity of Dφ. A similar argument shows
that the initial object(∅, 0)is also terminal. The closure ofTrCorφ(DSm)under
direct sums is clear.□

===== PAGE 46 =====
46 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
5.3.Extended transfer yoga.Unfortunately, but as expected, we see that
TrCorφ(DSm)has too many morphisms; for instance, if we consider
(X,dX)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(Y,dY )∈TrCor φ(DSm),(5.43)
then θ is allowed, at the moment, to be quite arbitrary. In particular, we do not
have a handle on when a map of derived smooth manifolds admits a transfer class.
The following two subsections are dedicated to remedying this issue.
Construction 5.27.Let f :X→Y∈DSm be an amplitude at most 1 map which
is of standard presentation:
X Y×R N Y
∗ Rk.
e
πX
π
h
i
(5.44)
Observe,iandπare canonicallyφ-structured, andfis of rank−k+N. Consider
the morphismθgiven by the adjoint of
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}≃Mφ X{rkf}→f !MφY,(5.45)
where the previous morphism is given by the interchange map:
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{−k+N}≃Mφ X{−k+N}≃π ∗
XMφ∗{−k+N}≃
π∗
Xi!MφRk{N}→e !h∗MφRk{N}≃e !MφY×RN{N}≃e !π!MφY ≃f !MφY ;(5.46)
note, the equivalenceMφY×RN{N}≃π !MφY utilizes [Vol25, Proposition 6.21]. We
refer toθ, constructed as above, as thestandard transferassociated to the standard
presentation off. 7
Definition 5.28.Letf:X→Y∈DSmbe of amplitude at most 1. We say
θ:f !
(
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}
)
→Mφ Y (5.47)
is anextended transferif, for any x∈X , there exists an open neighborhoodU∋x
such that f|U is of standard presentation andθ|U is equivalent to the transfer
induced by this standard presentation.
The following lemmata amount to the “calculus” of extended transfers; the proofs
utilize the calculus of standard presentations from Subsection 2.2.
Lemma 5.29.Let f :X→Y,g :Y→Z∈DSm be of amplitude at most 1 together
with extended transfers given by the adjoints of
θ: Th X(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}→f !MφY,(5.48)
θ′ : ThY (τg)⊗ S MφY{rkg}→g !MφZ,(5.49)
respectively. We have that the adjoint of the composite
ThX(τg◦f )⊗ S MφX{rk(g◦f)}≃
(
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}
)
⊗Mφ
(
f∗ThY (τg)⊗ S MφX{f∗ rkg}
)θ⊗f∗θ′
− −−−− →f!MφY⊗Mφf∗g!MφZ→(g◦f) !MφZ,
(5.50)
where the second morphism is the projection morphism, is an extended transfer.
7Often, we will denote both a standard transfer and its adjoint byθ; which we consider will be
clear from context.

===== PAGE 47 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 47
Proof. As the claim is local, it is enough to prove it whenf and g are (globally) of
standard presentation. We consider a standard presentation of bothfandg:
X Y×R N Y
∗ Rk
⌟ ,
Y Z×R M Z
∗ Rℓ.
⌟ (5.51)
Moreover, we recall the diagram producing the induced standard presentation of
g◦ffrom the proof of Lemma 2.22:
X Y×R N Z×R N+M Z
∗ Rk Rk+ℓ.
⌟
h
⌟
(h,h′) (5.52)
Some remarks are in order regarding the previous diagram.
(1) Recall, by using a smooth bump function, we may extendhto a function
h:Z×R N+M→R k (5.53)
satisfyingh−1(0) =X.
(2) Recall, we may extendh′ to a function
h′ :Z×R N+M→R ℓ (5.54)
satisfying(h′)−1(0) =Y×R N.
(3) Every square is a pullback.
(4) The outer square is the induced standard presentation ofg◦f.
(5) The left square is the standard presentation off.
(6) Every horizontal morphism, except the last, is an immersion.
Observe, in the previous remarks, we did not say how the right square is related to
the standard presentation ofg; we must remedy this. We will consider the following
“moves” of pullbacks. First, we may perform the move
Y Y×R M
∗ Rℓ
⌟
h′ ↭
Y×R N Y×R N+M
Y Y×R M
∗ Rℓ
⌟
⌟
h′
(5.55)
by appending the top pullback in the right diagram to the left pullback. Now, the
first key thing to observe is that we may immediately relate the interchange map of
the left pullback to the pasting of the interchange maps of the right pullback since
the interchange map of the top pullback in the right diagram contains essentially no
information as it is canonically an equivalence; the relation is given by suspension.

===== PAGE 48 =====
48 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Second, we may perform the move
Y×R N Y×R N+M
Y Y×R M
∗ Rℓ
⌟
⌟
h′
↭
Y×R N Y×R N+M
Rk Rk+ℓ
∗ Rℓ
⌟
(h,h′)
h′
⌟
(5.56)
since the outer squares of both diagrams are the same pullback. Now, the second key
thing to observe is that we may immediately relate the pasting of the interchange
maps of the left diagram to the interchange map of the top pullback in the right
diagram since the interchange map of the bottom pullback in the right diagram
contains essentially no information as it is canonically an equivalence; the relation
is given by suspension. Finally, we may perform the move
Y×R N Y×R N+M
Rk Rk+ℓ
∗ Rℓ
⌟
(h,h′)
h′
⌟
↭
Y×R N Y×R N+M
Rk Rk+ℓ
⌟
(h,h′) (5.57)
by appending the bottom pullback in the left diagram to the right pullback. Now,
the final key thing to observe is that the interchange map of the top pullback in the
left diagram is precisely the interchange map of the right pullback. In particular, we
have now shown how to relate the interchange map of the right pullback of(5.52) to
the interchange map used to define the standard transfer associated to the standard
presentation ofg. Meanwhile, the interchange map of the left pullback of(5.52) is
already the interchange map used to define the standard transfer associated to the
standard presentation off.
Since the hard work of relating the interchange maps is now done, the lemma
follows by unwinding the definition ofθ,θ′, and their composite.□
The proofs of the remaining lemmata are straightforward.
Lemma 5.30.Consider the following pullback inDSm:
X Y
X Y,
f
⌟
f
(5.58)
wherefis amplitude at most 1, together with an extended transfer given by
f!
(
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}
)
→Mφ Y.(5.59)
We have that the adjoint of the morphism induced by the interchange map,
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX
{
rkf
}
→f
!
MφY,(5.60)
is an extended transfer.

===== PAGE 49 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 49
Lemma 5.31.Let f : X→Y,f ′ : X′→Y ′∈DSm be of amplitude at most 1
together with extended transfers
f!
(
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}
)
→Mφ Y,(5.61)
f′
!
(
ThX′(τf′)⊗ S MφX′{rkf′}
)
→Mφ Y′,(5.62)
respectively. We have that the morphism induced by the external product,
(f×f ′)!
(
ThX×X′(τf×f′)⊗ S MφX×X′
{
rk(f×f ′)
})
→Mφ Y×Y ′,(5.63)
is an extended transfer.
Lemma 5.32.Let f : X→Y,f ′ : X′→Y ′∈DSm be of amplitude at most 1
together with extended transfers
f!
(
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}
)
→Mφ Y,(5.64)
f′
!
(
ThX′(τf′)⊗ S MφX′{rkf′}
)
→Mφ Y′,(5.65)
respectively. We have the the morphism induced by the direct sum,
(f⊔f ′)!
(
ThX⊔X′(τf⊔f′)⊗ S MφX⊔X′
{
rk(f⊔f ′)
})
→Mφ Y⊔Y ′,(5.66)
is an extended transfer.
Of course, when considering maps of smooth manifolds, the situation is signifi-
cantly simpler.
Construction 5.33.Let f :X→Y∈Sm . Sincef is a map of smooth manifolds,
we may factor it as an embedding followed by an obvious projection:
X
e
↪− →Y×RN π
− →Y.(5.67)
Utilizing [Vol25, Proposition 6.21 & Corollary 7.12], we see
f!MφY ≃e !π!MφY ≃e !MφY×RN [N]≃Th X(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}. 8 (5.68)
Now, we may takeθto be the adjoint of the previous expression:
θ:f !
(
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}
)
→Mφ Y.(5.69)
It is straightforward to seeθ is independent of the factorization off intoe and π as
any two smooth embeddings will become isotopic after stabilization. We refer to
θ, constructed as above, as theclassical transferassociated tof. Moreover, it is
immediate thatθis indeed an extended transfer.
In fact, the only extended transfers associated to maps of smooth manifolds are
the classical transfers.
Lemma 5.34.Letf:X→Y∈Sm. Suppose
θ:f !
(
ThX(τf)⊗ S MφX{rkf}
)
→Mφ Y (5.70)
is an extended transfer, then in factθis the classical transfer associated tof.
Proof. Given any open subsetU⊂X , θ|U agrees with the classical transfer associ-
ated tofessentially by definition, whence the claim.□
8This computationcruciallyrelies on choosing a tubular neighborhood of e; note, derived
smooth manifoldsdo not, in general, admit tubular neighborhoods in any reasonable sense.

===== PAGE 50 =====
50 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
5.4.Extendedφ-structured correspondences.
Definition 5.35.Let
(X,dX)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(Y,dY )∈TrCor φ(DSm),(5.71)
where g :W→Y∈DSm is amplitude at most 1 andY∈Sm (in particular,W∈
DSm is necessarily amplitude at most 1). We say the aforementioned correspondence
is anextended (tangentially)φ-structured correspondenceif:
•rkg=f ∗dX−g∗dY; and
•θ, which isa prioria map
g!
(
ThW (τg)⊗ S MφW{f∗dX}
)
→Mφ Y{dY},(5.72)
is an extended transfer after twisting by−dY.
Notation 5.36.In particular, whenever we consider
(X,dX)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(Y,dY )∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm),(5.73)
such thatg :W→Y∈Sm , θ will always denote the classical transfer associated to
gby virtue of Lemma 5.34.
By Lemmas 5.29 and 5.30, extendedφ-structured correspondences are closed
under composition inTrCorφ(DSm).
Definition 5.37.We denote by
TrCorex
φ (Sm)⊂TrCor φ(DSm)(5.74)
the subcategory whose objects consist only of objects inSm and whose morphisms
consist only of extendedφ-structured correspondences.
Lemma 5.38. TrCorex
φ (Sm)is a symmetric monoidal and semiadditive subcategory
ofTrCor φ(DSm).
Proof.Follows from Lemmas 5.31 and 5.32.□
Definition 5.39.Let
Corφ(Sm)⊂Cor φ(DSm)(5.75)
be the subcategory whose objects consist only of objects inSm and whose morphisms
consist only ofφ-structured correspondences
X
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α)
−−−→Y,(5.76)
wherefandgare of amplitude at most1.
By construction, there is a forgetful functor
TrCorex
φ (Sm)→Cor φ(Sm)(5.77)
which forgets the extended transfer class. And, fortunately, the mapping spaces of
TrCorex
φ (Sm)are closely related to those ofCorφ(Sm).
Lemma 5.40.Let
(f,g,α)≡X
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α)
−−−→Y∈Corφ(Sm).(5.78)
The fiber of
MapTrCorφ(Sm)
(
(X,dX),(Y,d Y )
)
→Map Corφ(Sm)(X,Y)(5.79)

===== PAGE 51 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 51
over(f,g,α)can be identified with
MapDφ(W)
(
ThW (τg)⊗ S MφW{rkg},g !MφY
)
.(5.80)
Furthermore, the fiber of
MapTrCorex
φ (Sm)
(
(X,dX),(Y,d Y )
)
→Map Corφ(Sm)(X,Y)(5.81)
over(f,g,α)can be identified with the subspace of
MapDφ(W)
(
ThW (τg)⊗ S MφW{f∗dX−g∗dY},g !MφY
)
.(5.82)
spanned by the extended transfer classes.
Proof. Note, TrCorφ(Sm)is a full subcategory of Corφ(Sm)×Corφ(DSm) Un(Dφ),
i.e., they have equivalent mapping spaces. By [Lur09a, Proposition 2.4.4.2], the
descriptionoftheclaimedfibersequenceholdsfor Corφ(Sm)×Corφ(DSm)Un(Dφ), asit
is a coCartesian fibration overCorφ(Sm), and therefore it also holds forTrCorφ(Sm).
Because TrCorex
φ (Sm)is a wide subcategory ofTrCorφ(Sm), its mapping spaces can
be identified with subspaces of the mapping spaces ofTrCorφ(Sm); these subspaces
are exactly those spanned by the extended transfer classes.□
Proposition 5.41. Corφ(Sm)is a symmetric monoidal and semiadditive subcate-
gory. Moreover, the forgetful functor
TrCorex
φ (Sm)→Cor φ(Sm)(5.83)
is symmetric monoidal, semiadditive, and admits coCartesian lifts over
X
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,0)
−−−→Y,(5.84)
whereg:W→Yis an equivalence inDSm.
Proof. It is clear thatCorφ(Sm)is closed under the monoidal product and direct
sums, and that the forgetful functor preserves these. For the claim regarding
coCartesian lifts, let(X,dX)∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)and consider the morphism
X
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,0,id)
−−−−→Y(5.85)
from( X,dX)to( Y,dY ), where dY ≡f ∗dX : Sing(Y )≃Sing (W )→Z . Using
the description of the mapping spaces from Lemma 5.40 combined with [Lur09a,
Proposition 2.4.4.3], it follows the morphism constructed above is coCartesian,
whence the claim.□
6.Tangentially structured Gysin sheaves
6.1.Gysin (pre)sheaves.
Definition 6.1.Let Ebe an∞-category. Atangentially φ-structured Gysin presheaf
(or simply,φ-Gysin presheaf), valued inE, is a functor
F: TrCor ex
φ (Sm)→E.(6.1)
The∞-category ofE-valuedφ-Gysin presheaves is denoted by
GysPφ(Sm;E)≡Fun
(
TrCorex
φ (Sm),E
)
.(6.2)
Remark 6.2.When E = S, we simply writeGysPφ(Sm)≡GysP φ(Sm; S)and refer
to these objects as spatialφ-Gysin presheaves. Additionally, we refer to objects in
GysPφ(Sm; Sp)as spectralφ-Gysin presheaves.

===== PAGE 52 =====
52 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Example 6.3.The most important spatialφ-Gysin presheaf is the one represented
by the unit:
Trφ≡Map TrCorex
φ (Sm)
(
(R0,0),−
)
: TrCorex
φ (Sm)→S.(6.3)
Informally,Trφ(X,dX)is the space of properφ-structured maps
(f,α) :W→X(6.4)
and extended transfers
θ: Th W (τf)⊗ S MφW{−f∗dX}→f !MφX.(6.5)
Bythesemiadditivityof TrCorex
φ (Sm), thespatialφ-Gysinpresheaf Trφ iscanonically
CMon(S)-valued with basepoint given by the properφ-structured map ∅→X ; we
will return to this observation in the sequel.
Remark 6.4.If E∈Pr L (resp. PrSt), thenGysPφ(Sm; E)∈Pr L (resp. PrSt). This
follows, for instance, from the equivalence
GysPφ(Sm)⊗E
∼
− →GysPφ(Sm;E),(6.6)
where⊗denotes the Lurie tensor product inPr L (resp.Pr St).
Lemma 6.5.Let E be a presentably symmetric monoidal∞-category. The Day
convolution product exhibitsGysPφ(Sm; E)as presentably symmetric monoidal with
unit given by the composition
1E[Trφ] : TrCorex
φ (Sm)
Trφ
−−→S
1E[−]
− −−− →E;(6.7)
here, 1E[−]denotes the essentially unique symmetric monoidal functor given by
sending∗∈Sto1 E∈E.
Proof. This follows from formal properties of the Day convolution product; cf. for
example [LNP25, Corollary 3.29] or [KP25, Proposition 3.12].□
To consider φ-Gysin sheaves, we will endow TrCorex
φ (Sm)op with a natural
Grothendieck topology. To accomplish this, we will make heavy use of the results in
Appendix A.
Construction 6.6.Let F : DSmop→CMon gp be a structure functor which is also
a sheaf onDSm; this yields a right fibrationπF : DSmF→DSm and a canonical
sectionσ F : DSm→DSm F. By the results of [Par25, Section 2.8], the composite
DSmF
πF
−−→DSm
|−|
−−→Top(6.8)
exhibits DSmF as a topological site such that bothπF andσF are strict topological
functors. By the general yoga of topological sites, we obtain Grothendieck sites such
thatπ F andσ F are continuous functors.
Definition6.7.Let S beacoveringsieveof X∈DSm generatedbyanopencovering
U; we denote byC(U)⊂S the full subcategory spanned by open embeddingsU→X ,
whereUis a nonempty finite intersection of opens inU.
Observe, by [Par25, Lemma 2.2.20], the inclusionC(U)→S is cofinal. We now
summarize some of the basic features of the Grothendieck topology onDSmF.
Lemma 6.8.The Grothendieck siteDSm F has the following properties.

===== PAGE 53 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 53
(1) A sieveS on X∈DSm F is covering if and only if it is generated by an
open coverU ={Ui→X∈DSm F}i∈I, where, for eachi∈I , the morphism
Ui→Xbelongs to the essential image ofσF.
(2)DSm F is fine in the sense of Definition A.7.
(3) A presheafF∈PShv(DSm F )is a sheaf if and only ifσ∗
F Fis a sheaf.
(4) It is subcanonical.
Proof. By definition, a sieveS⊂ (DSmF )/X is covering if and only if it is generated
by a family
{
(fi,αi) : Ui →X
}
i∈I, where each(fi,αi)is an open embedding.
However, note that(fi,αi) :U i→Xcan be factored as
Ui
(id,αi)
−−−−→Ui
(fi,0)
−−−→X(6.9)
which proves (1).
The fineness ofDSmF can be deduced from our assumptions about the point-set
topology of derived smooth manifolds, specifically, we have assumed they are all
paracompact Hausdorff; this proves (2).
For (3), one direction is clear, so assumeσ∗
F F is a sheaf, and letS be a covering
sieve ofX∈DSm F. By (1),S is generated by an open coverU in the essential
image ofσF. It is enough to show the map
F(X)→lim
U∈C(U) op
F(U)(6.10)
is an equivalence. However, note that the composition
C(U)→S→DSm F (6.11)
factors throughσF, whence the claim.
To establish (4), first, recall the equivalence
MapDSmF (−,X)≃Map DSm(−,X)×F(−)(6.12)
from Lemma 4.17. BecauseF is a sheaf onDSm and DSm is subcanonical, the
claim follows from the fact thatC(U)is cosifted.□
By Lemma 4.18,DSmF admits pullbacks. Subsequently, for each(f,α ) :X→
Y∈DSm F, the functor given by post-composition,
(DSmF )/X→(DSm F )/Y,(6.13)
admits a right adjoint(−)×Y X; this implies the coCartesian fibration which
evaluates at the source,
evs : DSm[1]
F →DSm F,(6.14)
is also a Cartesian fibration which is classified by a functor
(DSmF )/(−) : DSmop
F →Cat∞ (6.15)
which sends(f,α ) :X→Y to(−)×Y X : (DSmF )/Y → (DSmF )/X. By abuse of
notation, we will write
(DSmF )/(−) : DSmop→Cat∞ (6.16)
for the restriction toDSmop. The next proposition is crucial.

===== PAGE 54 =====
54 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Proposition 6.9.The functor
(DSmF )/(−) : DSmop→Cat∞ (6.17)
is a sheaf. Furthermore, if(DSmP
F )/(−) denotes the (full) subfunctor spanned by
proper morphisms, this too is a sheaf.
Proof. Let S be a covering sieve onX∈DSm generated by a covering familyU
and consider the commutative square
(DSmF )/X limU∈C(U) op(DSmF )/U
Shv(DSmF )/X limU∈C(U) op Shv(DSmF )/U.
(6.18)
Because Shv(DSmF )is a topos, [ Lur09a, Theorem 6.1.3.9] implies the bottom
horizontal functor is an equivalence. Therefore, it is enough to show the top
horizontal map is essentially surjective. LetΘ∈ (DSmF )/U; we may view this as a
Cartesian section
Θ :C(U)→
∫c
U∈C(U)
(DSmF )/U≃C(U)× DSmF DSm[1]
F .(6.19)
LetΘ( U) = (fU,αU) : WU→U . The Cartesianness ofΘimplies that, for every
V⊂UinS, the commutative square
WV WU
V U
⌟
(fV,αV ) (fU,αU) (6.20)
is a pullback inDSmF. Post-composing with the Yoneda embedding, we obtain a
Cartesian section
ΘShv :C(U)→
∫c
U∈C(U)
Shv(DSmF )/U≃C(U)× DSmF Shv(DSmF )[1] (6.21)
which induces a morphism of sheaves
W≡colim
U∈C(U)
WU→colim
U∈C(U)
U≃X.(6.22)
To complete the proof of the first claim, we will show thatWis representable and
that the pullback ofW→XalongU→Xis equivalent to
(fU,αU) :W U≃U× X W→U(6.23)
for allU∈C(U). By (6.20), the functor
evs◦Θ :C(U)→DSm F (6.24)
factors throughσF : DSm→DSm F. BecauseσF is a continuous functor between
subcanonical sites, it follows that
W= colim
U∈C(U)
WU≃colim
U∈C(U)
(σF )!WU≃(σ F )!
(
colim
U∈C(U)
WU
)
,(6.25)
where the last colimit is formed inShv(DSm). As DSm is a perfect topological
site, representability is a local property (cf. [Par25, 2.8.47]), socolimU∈C(U) WU∈
Shv(DSm)is representable, and therefore so is(σF )!
(
colimU∈C(U) WU
)
; we may now

===== PAGE 55 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 55
identifyW→X with a morphism(f,α ) :W→X∈DSm F. By the universality of
colimits inShv(DSmF ), the pullback of(f,α)alongU→Xis given by
colimV∈C(U)
(
(U× X V)× V WV
)
colimV∈C(U) WV ≃W
U≃colim V∈C(U) (U× X V) colimV∈C(U) V≃X
⌟ (6.26)
in Shv(DSmF ). However, asU× X V→V is an open embedding for allV∈C (U),
we have an identification
colim
V∈C(U)
(
(U× XV)× V WV
)
≃colim
V∈C(U)
(WU×XV )≃colim
V∈V
(WU×XV)≃W U,(6.27)
which completes the proof of the first claim. Finally, properness is local on the
target, so(DSmP
F )/(−) is also a sheaf.□
GivenX∈DSm ~KO, let( DSmP
τ )/X⊂ (DSmP
~KO)/X denote the full subcategory
spanned by objects of the form(f,τf) :W→X; this determines a subfunctor
(DSmP
τ )/(−)⊂(DSmP
~KO)/(−).(6.28)
Lemma 6.10.The functor
(DSmP
τ )/(−) : DSmop→Cat∞ (6.29)
is a sheaf.
Proof.By Proposition 6.9, we have a commutative square
(DSmP
τ )/X limU∈C(U) op(DSmP
τ )/U
(DSmP
~KO)/X limU∈C(U) op(DSmP
~KO)/U.∼
(6.30)
Therefore, it is enough to show the top horizontal map is essentially surjective.
Tracing through the proof of Proposition 6.9, an object inlimU∈C(U) op(DSmP
τ )/U
determines a morphism( f,v ) : W→X , where v∈ ~KO(W )corresponds to
(τfU )U∈C(U) op∈lim U∈C(U) op~KO(WU). However, as~KO is a sheaf, it follows that
v≃τ f; the lemma follows.□
Proposition 6.11.There is a Grothendieck topology onCorφ(DSm)op in which a
sieveSonXis covering if and only if it is generated by a family
U={U i
id
←−Ui ↪→X}i∈I,(6.31)
where{U i}i∈I is an open cover ofX. This site has the following properties.
(1) The inclusionDSm↪→Corφ(DSm)op is continuous.
(2) A presheaf F∈PShv
(
Corφ(DSm); E
)
, for E∈Pr L, is a sheaf if and only if
F|DSmop is a sheaf.
(3) It is subcanonical.
Furthermore, there is an induced Grothendieck topology on the subcategory
Corφ(Sm)op⊂Cor φ(DSm)op (6.32)
satisfying the analogues of (1)-(3) above.

===== PAGE 56 =====
56 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Proof.It is routine to verify that
Corφ(DSm)op≃Cor(DSm B;Pφ,DSm)(6.33)
satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma A.9. Corollary A.10 applied to this situation
implies (1) and (2) above. To prove (3), note that we have a canonical equivalence
MapCorφ(DSm)op(−,X)≃
(
DSm/X×DSmB (DSmP
φ )/(−)
)≃
,(6.34)
where
DSmP
φ = DSmP
τ ×DSmP
~KO
DSmP
B.(6.35)
Using the fact that(−)≃ preserves small limits, we can conclude by combining
Proposition 6.9 and Lemma 6.10; this proves the first part.
For the second part, it is not difficult to see that the subcategoryCorφ(Sm)op
inherits the claimed Grothendieck topology satisfying (1) and (2). To establish the
analogue of (3), letDSm≤1 denote the subcategory ofDSm spanned by amplitude
at most1derived smooth manifolds and amplitude at most1morphisms between
them. As above, we have a canonical equivalence of functors
MapCorφ(Sm)op(−,X)≃
(
DSm≤1
/X×DSm≤1
B
(DSm≤1,P
φ )/(−)
)≃
.(6.36)
All the arguments above can be adaptedmutatis mutandisto show that this
presheaf is in fact a sheaf; the key point is that the amplitude of a map is local on
the target.□
Proposition 6.12.There is a Grothendieck topology onTrCorex
φ (Sm)op in which a
sieve S on( X,dX)is covering if and only if it is generated by a family of the form
{
(Ui,dX|Ui)
id
←−(Ui,dX|Ui)↪→(X,dX)
}
i∈I
,(6.37)
where{Ui→X} i∈I is an open cover inSm. We call this the open cover topology
onTrCor ex
φ (Sm)op.
Proof.This follows directly from Proposition 6.11 and Lemma A.5.□
Definition 6.13.Let E be an∞-category. We sayF∈GysP φ(Sm; E)is atangen-
tially φ-structured Gysin sheaf(or simply,φ-Gysin sheaf), valued inE, provided F
satisfies descent for the open cover topology. The∞-category of E-valuedφ-Gysin
sheaves is denoted by
Gysφ(Sm;E)⊂GysP φ(Sm;E).(6.38)
Observe, the inclusion ofφ-Gysin sheaves intoφ-Gysin presheaves admits a left
adjoint given by sheafification:
Lsh : GysPφ(Sm;E)→Gys φ(Sm;E).(6.39)
Remark 6.14.By [Lur18, Remark 1.3.1.6], for anyE∈Pr L, we have
Gysφ(Sm)⊗E
∼
− →Gysφ(Sm;E)(6.40)
as well as a commutative diagram
GysPφ(Sm)⊗E GysPφ(Sm;E)
Gysφ(Sm)⊗E Gysφ(Sm;E).
∼
Lsh⊗E Lsh
∼
(6.41)

===== PAGE 57 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 57
It follows that Gysφ(Sm; E)is presentable; if E is also stable, thenGysφ(Sm; E)
is stable. Finally, note that the top horizontal map in the diagram above is an
equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal∞-categories.
Proposition 6.15.Let E be a presentably symmetric monoidal∞-category. The
functor Lsh : GysPφ(Sm; E)→Gys φ(Sm; E)is compatible with the Day convolution
product in the sense of[Lur17, 2.2.1.6]: that is, for allF,G∈GysP φ(Sm; E), the
induced map
F⊗G→(L shF)⊗G(6.42)
is anLsh-local equivalence. Consequently,Gysφ(Sm; E)inherits the structure of a
symmetric monoidal∞-category with respect to whichLsh is a symmetric monoidal
functor.
Proof. By Remark 6.14 we can reduce to the universal caseE = S. Because the Day
convolution product is compatible with small colimits andLsh is a left adjoint, we
may assumeGis representable:
G= Map TrCorex
φ (Sm)
(
(Y,dY ),−)
)
≡Tr (Y,dY )
φ .(6.43)
By the Yoneda lemma, it will be enough to show that the induced map
MapGysPφ(Sm)(LshF⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,H)→Map GysPφ(Sm)(F⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,H)(6.44)
is an equivalence for allH∈Gys φ(Sm). As GysPφ(Sm)is presentably symmetric
monoidal, it admits an internal Hom which we denote byHom(−,− ). By rewriting
the map above using the tensor-Hom adjunction inGysPφ(Sm), the desired result
follows provided
Hom(Tr(Y,dY )
φ ,H)≃H
(
−⊠(Y,d Y )
)
(6.45)
is aφ-Gysin sheaf; observe, the aforementioned equivalence follows from the descrip-
tion of the internal Hom for the Day convolution product [Nik16, Proposition 3.11].
LetU be an open covering of(X,dX)determined by an open covering{Ui→X} i∈I
and consider the natural map
H
(
(X,dX)⊠(Y,d Y )
)
→lim
U∈C(U) op
H
(
(U,dX|U)⊠(Y,d Y )
)
;(6.46)
this is clearly an equivalence as the family{Ui×Y→X×Y} i∈I is an open
covering.□
The following lemmata provide a useful connection betweenφ-Gysin sheaves and
sheaves on smooth manifolds. For each integerd∈Z, let
id : Smop→TrCor ex
φ (Sm)(6.47)
denote the functor given byX↦→(X,d).
Lemma 6.16.If F∈GysP φ(Sm; E), then F is a sheaf (with respect to the open
cover topology) if and only if the following two conditions are satisfied.
(1) For every countable set of objects
{
(Xj,dj)
}
j∈J in TrCorex
φ (Sm), withdj∈Z
for allj, the canonical map
F(X,dX)→
∏
j∈J
F(Xj,dj)(6.48)
is an equivalence, whereX≡⊔ j∈JXj and dX : Sing(X)→Z is the induced
function.

===== PAGE 58 =====
58 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
(2) For everyd∈Z, the presheafi ∗
dF=F(−,d)is actually a sheaf.
Proof. The only if direction is clear, so assumeF is aφ-Gysin presheaf satisfying (1)
and (2) above. LetU≡
{
(Ui,dUi)→ (X,dX)
}
i∈I be an open cover. AsX∈Sm ,
it is either path-connected or a countable disjoint union of path components, each
of which is an open submanifold ofX. IfX is path-connected, there is nothing to
prove asdX : Sing(X)→Z is constant and so (2) impliesF satisfies descent for the
given cover. IfX =⊔j∈JXj, then the restriction ofdX to Sing(Xj)is constant, i.e.,
given by a fixeddj∈Z . Furthermore, for eachj∈J , we obtain a coveringUj of
Xj by pulling backU along the inclusion. However, as{Xj}j∈J is itself an open
covering ofX, the collection of covering familiesUj determines another covering
family of(X,d X)given by
V≡
{
(Ui∩Xj,dj)→(X,d X)
}
i,j;(6.49)
observe,V is a refinement ofU. Furthermore, as theXj’s are all disjoint, we find
that there is an equivalence of Čech nerves
⨆
j∈J
C(Uj)≃C(V).(6.50)
Subsequently, we obtain the following commutative diagram
F(X,dX) limU∈C(U) F(U,dU)
∏
j∈J F(Xj,dj) ∏
j∈J limUj∈C(Uj) F(Uj,dj),
∼ (6.51)
where the right vertical arrow is an equivalence sinceV refinesU. Therefore, F will
be aφ-Gysin sheaf as soon as the left vertical and bottom horizontal arrows are
equivalences, but these are by assumptions (1) and (2) above.□
The proof of the preceding lemma easily implies the following useful corollary.
Corollary 6.17.The collection of functors
{
i∗
d : Gysφ(Sm;E)→Shv(Sm;E)
}
d∈Z (6.52)
is a jointly conservative family.
Lemma 6.18.For allF∈GysP φ(Sm;E), the canonical map
Lshi∗
dF→i ∗
dLshF, d∈Z(6.53)
is an equivalence of sheaves onSm.
Proof. By the construction of the sheafification functor on a site [Lur09a, 6.2.2.9],
it will be enough to show the canonical map
(i∗
dF)†→i∗
dF† (6.54)
is an equivalence of presheaves onSm. GivenX∈Sm , the value of(6.53) is given
by
colim
S∈Cov(X)
lim
U∈C(U) op
F(U,d)→colim
T∈Cov(X,d)
lim
V∈T op
F(V,d).(6.55)
By the definition of the Grothendieck topology on TrCorex
φ (Sm)op, there is an
isomorphism between the poset of covering families onX∈Sm and the poset of
covering families on(X,d )∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)op. Finally, by the equivalence of sieve
and Čech descent, (6.55) must be an equivalence.□

===== PAGE 59 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 59
Proposition 6.19.Theφ-Gysin presheaf
Trφ : TrCorex
φ (Sm)→S(6.56)
is in fact aφ-Gysin sheaf.
Proof. To see thatTrφ is a sheaf, letU be a covering family of(X,dX)and consider
the following commutative square:
Trφ(X,dX) limU∈C(U) op Trφ(U,dX|U)
MapCorφ(Sm)(R0,X) limU∈C(U) op MapCorφ(Sm)(R0,U).∼
(6.57)
The claim will follow as soon as we can show the aforementioned diagram is
actually a pullback inS for every choice of basepoint(f,α )∈Map Corφ(Sm)(R0,X ).
To this end, fix such aφ-structured map( f,α ) : W→X whose image under
the bottom equivalence in the aforementioned diagram is given by the system{
(fU,αU) : WU →U
}
U∈C(U) op. By Lemma 5.40, the induced map between the
vertical fibers,
fib(f,α)→lim
U∈C(U) op
fib(fU,αU),(6.58)
also fits into a commutative square:
fib(f,α) limU∈C(U) op fib(fU,αU)
Map(ThW (τf)⊗ S MφW{−f∗dX},f !Mφ) limU∈C(U) op Map
(
ThWU (τfU )⊗ S MφW{−f∗
UdX|U},f !
UMφ
)
,
(6.59)
where, by Lemma 5.40, the vertical arrows are inclusions of subspaces given by the
extended transfer classes . Using the trivializationsThW (τfU )≃ MφW induced
by αU’s and the equivalencesf!
Uj∗
U≃j ∗
WUf!
U, the bottom horizontal map of the
previous diagram can be identified with
Ω∞Γ
(
W;f !(MφX{dX})
)
→lim
U∈C(U) op
Ω∞Γ
(
WU;j∗
WUf!(MφX{dX})
)
,(6.60)
where the latter is an equivalence sincef!(MφX{dX})is a sheaf. However, as being
an extended transfer class is a property local on the target, this equivalence restricts
to the top horizontal map, whence the claim.□
6.2.Homotopy invariant Gysin (pre)sheaves.
Definition 6.20.Let F∈PShv (Sm; E). We say F ishomotopy invariant(or
R-invariant) if, for everyX∈Sm, the map
F(X)→F(X×R)(6.61)
induced by the obvious projectionX×R→Xis an equivalence. We denote by
PShvR(Sm;E)⊂PShv(Sm;E)(6.62)
the full subcategory of such objects. Analogously, we sayF∈Shv (Sm; E)ishomotopy
invariantif its underlying presheaf is; we denote by
ShvR(Sm;E)⊂Shv(Sm;E)(6.63)
the full subcategory of such objects.

===== PAGE 60 =====
60 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Recall, we have the constant sheaf/global sections adjunction:
Γ∗ :E⇄Shv(Sm;E) : Γ ∗.(6.64)
The following result of Dugger [Dug01] shows that, once one requires homotopy
invariance, differential cohomology theories are determined by homotopy theory.
Theorem 6.21([Dug01]).For any presentable∞-categoryE,
Γ∗ : ShvR(Sm;E)→E(6.65)
is an equivalence with inverseΓ∗.9 If E is presentably symmetric monoidal, then
the aforementioned equivalence is in fact one of presentably symmetric monoidal
∞-categories. Moreover, the aforementioned equivalence is natural inE.
Definition 6.22.Let F∈GysP φ(Sm). We say thatF ishomotopy invariant(or
R-invariant) if, for every(X,dX)∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)the map
F(X,dX)→F(X×R,pr ∗
1dX)(6.66)
induced by the obvious projection(X,dX)⊠ (R, 0)≃ (X×R,pr ∗
1dX)→ (X,dX)is
an equivalence. We denote by
GysPR
φ(Sm;E)⊂GysP φ(Sm;E)(6.67)
the full subcategory of such objects. Analogously, we say F∈Gys φ(Sm; E)is
homotopy invariantif its underlyingφ-Gysin presheaf is; we denote by
GysR
φ(Sm;E)⊂Gys φ(Sm;E)(6.68)
the full subcategory of such objects.
Remark 6.23.It is clear that restriction alongSmop→TrCor ex
φ (Sm)sends homo-
topy invariant (pre)sheaves to homotopy invariant (pre)sheaves. In particular, we
have a functor
GysR
φ(Sm;E)→Shv R(Sm;E).(6.69)
Construction 6.24(Morel-Suslin-Voevodsky).Given n≥ 0, we let∆n
sm denote
the hyperplane inRn+1 defined by
∆n
sm =
{
(x0,...,x n)∈R n+1|
n∑
i=0
xi = 1
}
.(6.70)
By the usual argument, this determines a cosimplicial smooth manifold∆•
sm : ∆→
Sm, and thus a simplicial object
(∆•
sm,0) : ∆ op→Sm op→TrCor ex
φ (Sm).(6.71)
Given F∈GysP φ(Sm; E), we defineHF∈GysP φ(Sm)to be the geometric realiza-
tion of the simplicial spatialφ-Gysin presheaf
F
(
−⊠(∆•
sm,0)
)
: ∆op→GysP φ(Sm).(6.72)
On objects, this is given by the formula
HF(X,dX)≃
⏐⏐F
(
(X,dX)⊠(∆ •
sm,0)
)⏐⏐≃
⏐⏐F(X×∆ •
sm,pr∗
1dX)
⏐⏐.(6.73)
Because R0 is terminal inSm, there is a natural transformation∆× [1]→Sm from
∆•
sm to the constant cosimplicial object onR0. Therefore, we have a functor
H : GysPφ(Sm;E)→GysP φ(Sm;E)(6.74)
9In particular, a constant sheaf is homotopy invariant; this is a key step in the proof.

===== PAGE 61 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 61
together with a natural transformation
η: id GysPφ→H.(6.75)
The following lemma describes the basic features ofHandηconstructed above.
Lemma 6.25.LetEbe a presentable∞-category.
(1) For allF∈GysP φ(Sm;E),HFis a homotopy invariantφ-Gysin presheaf.
(2) If E is a homotopy invariantφ-Gysin presheaf, thenηF : F→ HF is an
equivalence.
(3) For any F∈GysP φ(Sm; E), the mapHηF : HF→ H(HF)is an equivalence.
Hence,Hdetermines a Bousfield localization ofGysP φ(Sm;E)which we denote by
LR : GysPφ(Sm;E)→GysP R
φ(Sm;E).(6.76)
Proof.The proof is essentially identical to the arguments in [ADH23, I.5].□
Proposition 6.26.Let E be a presentably symmetric monoidal∞-category. The
functor LR : GysPφ(Sm; E)→GysP R
φ(Sm; E)is compatible with the Day convolution
product in the sense of[Lur17, 2.2.1.6]: that is, for allF,G∈GysP φ(Sm; E), the
induced map
F⊗G→(HF)⊗G(6.77)
is anH-local equivalence. Consequently,GysPR
φ(Sm; E)inherits the structure of a
symmetric monoidal∞-category with respect to whichLR is a symmetric monoidal
functor.
Proof. As in the proof of Proposition 6.15, we may reduce to the universal case
E = S, and, asLR preserves small colimits, we may assumeG = Tr(Y,dY )
φ . It is
enough to see that
MapGysPφ
(F⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,G)→Map GysPφ
(HF⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,G)(6.78)
is an equivalence for allG∈GysP R
φ(Sm). Using the tensor-Hom adjunction, it is
enough to check
Hom(Tr(Y,dY )
φ ,G)≃G
(
−⊠(Y,d Y )
)
(6.79)
is homotopy invariant. However, this is obvious as we assumedG was homotopy
invariant.□
We now prove a useful lemma for recognizing when aφ-Gysin sheaf is homotopy
invariant.
Lemma 6.27.Let E be an∞-category andF∈Gys φ(Sm; E). We have thatF is
homotopy invariant if and only if, for eachd∈Z , the sheafi∗
dF∈Shv (Sm; E)is
homotopy invariant.
Proof. Let( X,dX)∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)and decompose X into path components:X =
⊔j∈J,Xj; of course, this impliesdX|Xj =dj∈Z . Because F is aφ-Gysin sheaf, we
obtain a commutative square
F(X,dX) F(X×R,pr ∗
1dX)
∏
j∈J F(Xj,dj) ∏
j∈J F(Xj×R,d j);
∼ ∼ (6.80)

===== PAGE 62 =====
62 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
in particular, the top horizontal map is an equivalence if and only if the bottom
horizontal map is, proving the claim.□
Corollary 6.28.IfF∈GysP R
φ(Sm;E), thenL shFis homotopy invariant.
Proof. The result follows by combining Lemmas 6.27, 6.18, and [ADH23, 4.4.11]. □
Lemma 6.29.The inclusionGys R
φ(Sm;E)⊂Gys φ(Sm;E)admits a left adjoint
Lhi : Gysφ(Sm;E)→Gys R
φ(Sm;E)(6.81)
which is equivalent to the composition
Gysφ(Sm;E)⊂GysP φ(Sm;E)
LR
−−→GysPR
φ(Sm;E)
Lsh
−−→GysR
φ(Sm;E).(6.82)
Proof. It is not hard to see that the inclusionGysR
φ(Sm; E)⊂Gys φ(Sm; E)preserves
small limits and is accessible, soLhi exists by the adjoint functor theorem. Now,
the unit for this adjunction canonically factors as
F→L shLRF→L hiF.(6.83)
By Corollary 6.17 and Lemma 6.18, the second map is an equivalence as soon as
LshLRi∗
dF→L hii∗
dF(6.84)
is an equivalence of sheaves onSm for alld∈Z ; the latter claim follows from from
[ADH23, 4.4.12].□
Proposition 6.30.Let E be a presentably symmetric monoidal∞-category. The
functor Lhi : Gysφ(Sm; E) →Gys R
φ(Sm; E)is compatible with Day convolution
product in the sense of[Lur17, 2.2.1.6]: that is, for all F,G∈Gys φ(Sm; E), the
induced map
F⊗G→(L hiF)⊗G(6.85)
is anLhi-local equivalence. Consequently,GysR
φ(Sm; E)inherits the structure of a
symmetric monoidal∞-category with respect to whichLhi is a symmetric monoidal
functor.
Proof. As in the proof of Proposition 6.15, we may reduce to the universal case
E = S, and, as bothLhi and⊗ preserve small colimits of sheaves, we may assume
G= Tr (Y,dY )
φ . It is enough to see that
MapGysφ
(F⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,G)→Map Gysφ
(LhiF⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,G)(6.86)
is an equivalence for allG∈Gys R
φ(Sm), but asG is aφ-Gysin sheaf, this is equivalent
to showing
MapGysPφ
(F⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,G)→Map GysPφ
(LshLRF⊗Tr (Y,dY )
φ ,G)(6.87)
is an equivalence. By the tensor-Hom adjunction, we only need to check that
Hom(Tr(Y,dY )
φ ,G)≃G
(
−⊠(Y,d Y )
)
(6.88)
is a homotopy invariantφ-Gysin sheaf. However, this follows by our work in the
proofs of Propositions 6.15 and 6.26, whence the claim.□
Notation 6.31.Let E be a presentably symmetric monoidal∞-category. We write
1E
φ≡L hiTrφ (6.89)
for the unit ofGysR
φ(Sm;E).

===== PAGE 63 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 63
Proposition 6.32.Let E be a presentably symmetric monoidal∞-category. The
functor
i∗
0 : GysR
φ(Sm;E)→Shv R(Sm;E)≃E(6.90)
is canonically lax symmetric monoidal.
Proof. This follows from the fact thati∗
0 : GysPφ(Sm; E)→PShv (Sm; E)is canoni-
cally lax symmetric monoidal together with compatibility ofi∗
0,L R, andL sh.□
6.3.Thom-Gysin transfers.In this subsection, we will treat TrCorex
φ (Sm)as
if we had defined it to contain objects which are allowed to be smooth manifolds
with boundary. This is a harmless assumption since (1) any smooth manifold with
boundary is an example of a derived smooth manifold and (2) any smooth manifold
with boundary is smoothly homotopic to a smooth manifold with empty boundary,
namely, its interior. In particular, the value of a homotopy invariant sheaf on a
smooth manifold with boundary is completely determined by its value on the interior
of that smooth manifold with boundary.
The following construction is essentially due to Dold, cf. [Dol78, Example 3.11].
Construction 6.33(Thom-Gysin transfer).Let π :E→X∈Sm be a smooth
vector bundle of rankd∈Z ≥0; we will consider the disk resp. sphere bundle
of E, denoted D(E)resp. S(E). Of course, D(E)is a smooth manifold with
boundary S(E). Suppose[ E]∈ ~KO(X)admits a φ-structure α, then the zero
section embedding,
i:X ↪→D(E),(6.91)
admits theφ-structure−αsince
τi≃τ X−i∗τD(E)≃τ X−
(
[E] +τX)≃−[E].(6.92)
In particular, we obtain the morphism
(X,0)
id
←−X
(i,−α,θ)
−−−−−→
(
D(E),d
)
∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)(6.93)
which we denote byi for brevity. In fact, if we consider the morphism
(
S(D),d
)
→(
D(E),d
)
∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)induced by the inclusionS(D)↪→D(E), then we obtain
the following pullback square inTrCorex
φ (Sm):
(∅,0)
(
S(E),d
)
(X,0)
(
D(E),d
)
.
⌟
i
(6.94)
Finally, givenF∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp), we obtain a commutative diagram
F(X,0) F(X,0) F(∅,0)
F
(
D(E),S(E),d
)
F
(
D(E),d
)
F
(
S(E),d
)
,
∼
∃! Fi (6.95)
where the rows are fiber sequences. We refer to
ι! :F(X,0)→F
(
D(E),S(E),d
)
(6.96)
as theThom-Gysin transfer.

===== PAGE 64 =====
64 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Lemma 6.34.Let π : E→X∈Sm be a smooth vector bundle of rankd such
that[ E]∈ ~KO(X)admits a φ-structure α, then, for anyF∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp), the
associated Thom-Gysin transfer is a homotopy equivalence.
Proof. We may produce an explicit inverse as follows. Observe,π induces a morphism
(
D(E),d
) id
←−D(E)
(π,α,θ)
−−−−→(X,0)∈TrCorex
φ (Sm);(6.97)
hence, we obtain a morphism
π! :F
(
D(E),S(E),d
)
→F(X,0).(6.98)
Now, the composition
X D(E)
(X,0)
(
D(E),d
)
(X,0)
id i id π (6.99)
is clearly the identity, therefore,π!ι!≃id . Meanwhile, since i◦π is (smoothly)
homotopic to the identity (recall,X is a deformation retract ofD(E)), the composi-
tion
D(E) X
(
D(E),d
)
(X,0)
(
D(E),d
)
id π id i (6.100)
is equivalent to the identity, therefore,ι!π!≃id.□
Notation 6.35.GivenF∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp)andd∈Z, we denote by
Fd∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp)(6.101)
the homotopy invariantφ-Gysin sheaf given by
Fd(−)≡F
(
−⊠(R 0,d)
)
.(6.102)
Explicitly, this sends(X,dX)to F(X,dX +d)with the obvious effect on morphisms.
Corollary 6.36.For any F∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp), there is a canonical homotopy equiva-
lence which is natural inX∈Sm:
F(X,0)
∼
− →Σ−1F(X,1)∈Sp,(6.103)
i.e., there is a canonical equivalence of underlying sheaves onSm:
ΣF
∼
− →F1∈Shv R(Sm; Sp).(6.104)
Consequently, for anyd∈Z , it follows that there is a canonical equivalence of
underlying sheaves onSm:
ΣdF
∼
− →Fd∈Shv R(Sm; Sp).(6.105)
Proof.Let
π:R ≡X×R→X∈Sm(6.106)
be the trivial bundle of rank 1. In this case, we have that
D(R) =X×[0,1]andS(R ) =X×S 0 =X⊔X.(6.107)

===== PAGE 65 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 65
In particular, since the inclusion of a component ofS(R)into D(R)followed by π is
clearly the identity onX, we have the fiber sequence
F
(
D(R),S(R ),1
)
→F
(
D(R),1
)
≃F(X,1)
∆
− →F(X,1)⊕F(X,1)≃F
(
S(R),1
)
.10
(6.108)
But this implies
F(X,0)≃F
(
D(R),S(R ),1
)
≃Σ−1F(X,1).(6.109)
Clearly, this argument can be made to be functorial inX∈Sm , whence the
claim.□
6.4.Homotopy invariant Gysin sheaves and cobordism.The purpose of
this subsection is to elucidate the connection betweenφ-structured cobordism and
homotopy invariant spatial/spectralφ-Gysin sheaves.
Lemma 6.37.For each F∈Gys φ(Sm; S), the counit mapF→L hiF induces an
equivalence ofφ-Gysin sheaves
HF
∼
− →LhiF.(6.110)
Consequently,
LR : GysPφ(Sm;S)→GysP R
φ(Sm;S)(6.111)
preserves sheaves andLR≃L hi. The same result is true forφ-Gysin sheaves valued
inS∗,CMon, orCMon gp.
Proof. By Lemma 6.16 and Corollary 6.17, it is enough to show thatHF is aφ-Gysin
sheaf andi∗
dHF≃i ∗
dLhiF for alld∈Z . By [BBP24, Theorem 1.2] combined with
Lemma 6.18, we can conclude thati∗
dHF is a sheaf and thati∗
dHF≃i ∗
dLhiF for all
d∈Z . Therefore, it will be enough to verify condition (1) from Lemma 6.16. To
this end, let
{
(Xj,dj)
}
j∈J be a countable collection withdj∈Z for eachj∈J .
Because F is aφ-Gysin sheaf, the claim follows as soon as we can verify that the
limit interchange map
colim
∆op
(∏
j∈J
F(Xj×∆•
sm,dj)
)
→
∏
j∈J
(
colim
∆op
F(Xj×∆•
sm,dj)
)
(6.112)
is an equivalence of spaces. However, this followsmutatis mutandisfrom the elegant
proof of [BBP24, Lemma 5.13].□
Remark 6.38.Given(X,d X)∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm), we have an equivalence
1S
φ(X,dX)≃colim
∆op
Trφ(X×∆ •
sm,dX).(6.113)
Therefore, we can identifyπ01S
φ(X,dX)with the set of proper extendedφ-structured
maps
(g,α,θ) :W→(Y,d X)(6.114)
up to the relation ofφ-cobordism; by the usual argument, this is indeed a group, cf.
Proposition 6.45.
10Recall,Fsends sums to products since it is a sheaf.

===== PAGE 66 =====
66 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Recollection 6.39.Recall, by [GGN15, Theorem 5.1], the symmetric monoidal
functorΣ∞
+ :S→Spadmits a symmetric monoidal factorization into
S
(−)+
−−−→S∗→CMon
(−)gp
−−−→CMongp B∞
−−→Sp.(6.115)
Here, we stress the presentably symmetric monoidal structure onCMon is the one
uniquely determined by the requirement thatFreeE∞ : S→CMon is symmetric
monoidal. Furthermore, by the results of [Nik16, Section 6], if C is a semiaddi-
tive symmetric monoidal∞-category, the forgetful functorCMon→S induces a
symmetric monoidal equivalence of∞-categories
Fun×(C,CMon)
∼
− →Fun×(C,S),(6.116)
where the source and target both carry the Day convolution product andFun×
denotes the∞-category of product-preserving functors. Furthermore, if1C is the
unit ofC, then the unit ofFun×(C,CMon)is given by
MapC(1C,−) :C→CMon,(6.117)
where the semiadditivity ofC provides a lift of the mapping spaces throughCMon.
Finally, we note that there is a canonical equivalence of symmetric monoidal∞-cat-
egories
Fun×(C,CMon)≃CMon
(
Fun×(C,S)
)
.(6.118)
Proposition 6.40.The symmetric monoidal functors in(6.115) induce equivalences
of symmetric monoidal∞-categories
Gysφ(Sm;S)
∼
− →Gysφ(Sm; CMon)(6.119)
and
GysR
φ(Sm;S)
∼
− →GysR
φ(Sm; CMongp).(6.120)
As a consequence, theE∞-algebra 1S
φ = HTrφ∈Gys R
φ(Sm; S)admits a canonical lift
toGys R
φ(Sm; CMongp)such thatHTr φ≃1 CMongp
φ .
Proof. First, we showGysφ(Sm; S)is semiadditive. Due to the sheaf condition, it is
clearGys φ(Sm;S)is a full subcategory of
Fun×(TrCorex
φ (Sm),S),(6.121)
which, by [GGN15, Corollary 2.4], is a semiadditive∞-category. It is easy to see
that the inclusion
Gysφ(Sm;S)⊂Fun ×(TrCorex
φ (Sm),S)(6.122)
preserves products so thatGysφ(Sm; S)is semiadditive. Following [Bar17, Propo-
sition 6.5] and [BGS20, Lemmas 3.5, 3.7],Fun×(TrCorex
φ (Sm),S )is a symmetric
monoidal localization of GysPφ(Sm; S), and one can show thatGysφ(Sm; S)is a
further symmetric monoidal localization ofFun×(TrCorex
φ (Sm),S ). Therefore, by
Recollection 6.39, we obtain an equivalence of semiadditive symmetric monoidal
∞-categories
Fun×(
TrCorex
φ (Sm),S
)
≃Fun×(
TrCorex
φ (Sm),CMon
)
.(6.123)
This identification induces the desired symmetric monoidal equivalence between
∞-categories of φ-Gysin sheaves. Furthermore, the unit of Gysφ(Sm; CMon)is
given byTrφ.

===== PAGE 67 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 67
Because GysR
φ(Sm; S)is a symmetric monoidal localization ofGysφ(Sm; S), the
free commutative monoid functor
GysR
φ(Sm;S)→Gys R
φ(Sm; CMon)(6.124)
induces an equivalence of symmetric monoidal∞-categories. To complete the proof,
it will be enough to show thatHTrφ(X,dX)is group-complete for all(X,dX)as
group-completion is a smashing localization. However, this was demonstrated in
Remark 6.38, which completes the proof.□
Remark 6.41.The argument above also shows that1S∗
φ ≃HTrφ.
Corollary 6.42.The canonical maps
1Sp
φ →Σ∞
+ 1S
φ and1 S
φ→Ω∞1Sp
φ (6.125)
are equivalences ofE∞-algebras.
Proof. The first equivalence is purely formal. For the second equivalence, note that
the composition
CMongp B∞
−−→Sp
Ω∞
−−→S(6.126)
is equivalent to the forgetful functor and thatB∞ is symmetric monoidal and
colimit-preserving. These induce functors
GysR
φ(Sm; CMongp)→Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp)→Gys R
φ(Sm;S)(6.127)
whose composite, by Proposition 6.40, is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal
∞-categories. Therefore, we have canonical equivalences
1S
φ
∼
− →Ω∞B∞HTrφ≃Ω∞1Sp
φ (6.128)
as claimed.□
Definition 6.43.We say
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(Y,dY )∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)(6.129)
isφ-cobordantto
(R0,0)
(f′,0)
←−−−W′ (g′,α′,θ′)
−−−−−−→(Y,dY )∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)(6.130)
if there exists an extended correspondence of the form
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−Wbord
(~g,~α,~θ)
−−−−→(Y×R,dY )∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)(6.131)
together with the following property. There exists a commutative diagram inDSm
of the form
W Wbord W′
Y×R 0 Y×R Y×R 0,
g
⌟
~g g′
⌞ (6.132)
where each square is a pullback and the bottom horizontal morphisms are the
inclusion over 0 and 1, such thatα resp. α′ and θ resp. θ′ are obtained via base
change from~αresp.~θ.
The following result is the well-known fact that, in the language of the present
article, (non-orbifold) global Kuranishi cobordism is equivalent to smooth cobordism.

===== PAGE 68 =====
68 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Lemma 6.44.The extended correspondence
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(Y,dY )∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm),(6.133)
isφ-cobordant to some
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W′ (g′,α′,θ′)
−−−−−−→(Y,dY )∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)(6.134)
such thatg′ :W ′→Y∈Sm.
Proof. Recall, g is locally of standard presentation. In particular, since all of our
derived smooth manifolds are paracompact Hausdorff, we may use a standard
partition of unity argument to show thatgis of the following form:
W T Y
T E,
e
⌟
π
s (6.135)
whereπ :T →Y∈Sm ,E→T is a smooth vector bundle,s is a smooth section, and
the bottom horizontal morphism is the 0-section embedding. Now, by perturbing
s to be transverse to the 0-section, we have constructed the desired commutative
diagram inDSm:
W Wbord W′
Y×R 0 Y×R Y×R 0.
g
⌟
~g g′
⌞ (6.136)
It remains to show the claims about theφ-structure and transfer class; this
is straightforward. First, e is φ-structured by assumption, and this induces a
φ-structure onπ. In particular, when perturbings, we induce aφ-structure on
Wbord→Y×R with the desired property. Moreover, sinceθ is assumed to be an
extended transfer class, we see thatθ is in fact equivalent to the adjoint of the
composite given by the interchange map associated toe followed by (the pullback
of the adjoint of the) classical transfer associated toπ. In particular, again when
perturbing s, we induce an extended transfer class onWbord→Y×R with the
desired property. This completes the proof.□
Recall,
Trφ(X×∆ 0
sm,dX) = TrCorex
φ
(
(R0,0),(X×∆ 0
sm,dX)
)
(6.137)
is naturally a pointed space with basepoint
(R0,0)←∅→(X×∆ 0
sm,dX);(6.138)
in fact, every space we will encounter in the present subsection will naturally be a
pointed space with basepoint the empty correspondence, so we will elide this fact
from now on. Moreover, recall that we have shown1S
φ is the unit of a presentably
symmetric monoidal structure onGysR
φ(Sm; S); in particular,π∗1S
φ(R0, 0)is a graded
commutative ring.
Proposition 6.45.We have the following isomorphism of graded commutative
rings:
π∗1S
φ(R0,0)∼= Ω−∗
φ (∗).(6.139)

===== PAGE 69 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 69
Moreover, letX∈Sm such thatX =⊔iCi, whereCi are the path components ofX.
We have the following isomorphism of abelian groups:
πn1S
φ(X,dX)∼=
∏
α
Ω
−n+dCi
φ (Ci), dCi≡d X
(
Sing(Ci)
)
∈Z, n≥0.(6.140)
In fact, the previous ismorphism is in fact an isomorphism of graded modules.11
Proof. It suffices to consider the case whereX is connected; the general case is a
straightforward extension. Recall, we have the pointed simplicial space
Sφ
• ≡Trφ(X×∆ 0
sm,dX)←
←Tr(X×∆ 1
sm,dX)←←←···(6.141)
which satisfies|Sφ
•|=1 S
φ(X,dX). We will computeπn|Sφ
•|via [Lur14, Proposition
8].12 AsSφ
• is a (pointed) simplicial space, it determines a functor fromsSet to S
viaS φ
• (K)≡Map sS(K,X), whereKis given the discrete topology levelwise.
We see thatSφ
• (∂∆n) = Trφ(X×∂ ∆n
sm,dX), where∂∆n
sm denotes the smoothing
of Rn minus the standardn-simplex. LetSφ
n,∂ be the homotopy fiber of the map
Sφ
n→S φ
• (∂∆n)lying over the empty correspondence; this space is the subspace of
Trφ(X×∆ n
sm,dX)consisting of correspondences
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(X×∆n
sm,dX)(6.142)
such thatg is of constant rank−g∗dX and the fibers ofg are empty overX×∂ ∆n
sm.
Meanwhile, letΛ⊂∂ ∆n+1 be the subset obtained by removing the interiors of two
faces. We see thatSφ
• (Λ) = Trφ(X× Λsm,dX), whereΛ sm denotes the smoothing of
Rn minusΛ. Let Sφ
∂,Λ be the homotopy fiber of the mapSφ
• (∂∆n+1)→S φ
• (Λ)lying
over the empty correspondence; this space is the subspace ofTrφ(X×∂ ∆n
sm,dX)
consisting of correspondences
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(X×∂∆n
sm,dX)(6.143)
such thatg is of constant rank−g∗dX and the fibers ofg are empty overX× Λsm.
Observe, we have a canonical equivalence:
Sφ
∂,Λ
∼
− →Sφ
n,∂×S φ
n,∂.(6.144)
Now, [Lur14, Proposition 8] saysπn|Sφ
•| is preciselyπ0Sφ
n,∂ modulo the following
equivalence relation: two elements ω,ω′ ∈π 0Sφ
n,∂ are identified if the element
ω∈π 0Sφ
∂,Λ, corresponding to(ω,ω′), can be lifted toπ0Sφ
n+1,Λ, where the latter
space is the homotopy fiber of the mapSφ
n+1 → Sφ
• (Λ)lying over the empty
correspondence. More concretely,πn|Sφ
•|consists of correspondences
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(X×∆n
sm,dX),(6.145)
such thatg is of constant rank−g∗dX and the fibers ofg are empty overX×∂ ∆n
sm,
and we identify two such correspondences, denotedW and W′, if there exists a
11I.e., the action of π∗1S
φ(R0, 0) ∼= Ω−∗
φ (∗)on the graded abelian group π∗1S
φ(X,d X) ∼=
∏
i Ω
−∗+dCi
φ (Ci), where∗ must be at least 0, is identical; one can think of the latter graded
abelian group as the “truncated”φ-structured geometric cobordism group ofCi.
12Technically, to apply [Lur14, Proposition 8], we must check thatSφ
• satisfies the Kan condition;
this is relatively straightforward as the Kan condition, in this case, amounts to the fact that
cobordisms can be (1) reversed and (2) glued.

===== PAGE 70 =====
70 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
correspondence
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(f,α,θ)
−−−−→(X×∆n+1
sm ,dX),(6.146)
such that the fibers ofg are empty overX× Λsm, which restricts toW and W′
over the appropriate subset ofX×∂ ∆n+1
sm . Utilizing an appropriate modification
of Definition 6.43 and the subsequent Lemma 6.44, we have shown that we have a
bijection of sets
πn1S
φ(X,dX)∼= Ω−n+dX
φ (X).(6.147)
It remains to identify all of the claimed algebraic structure. We begin with the
additive structure. Now, the group structure onπn1S
φ(X,dX)is explicitly induced
by the semiadditive structure onTrCorex
φ (Sm). Consider two
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(X×∆n
sm,dX),(6.148)
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W′ (g′,α′,θ′)
−−−−−−→(X×∆n
sm,dX),(6.149)
then their sum is the correspondence obtained via the composition
W⊔W ′ (
(X×∆ n
sm)⊔(X×∆ n
sm),dX
)
(R0,0)
(
(X×∆ n
sm)⊔(X×∆ n
sm),dX
)
(X×∆ n
sm,dX),
(f⊔f′,0)
(g⊔g′,α⊔α′,θ⊔θ′)
(6.150)
where the map(X× ∆n
sm)⊔ (X× ∆n
sm)→X× ∆n
sm is the obvious "fold" map. But
this is precisely the group structure onΩ−n+dX
φ (X)given by disjoint union.
Next, we continue with the ring structure in the case(X,dX) = (R0, 0). Now,
the ring structure onπ∗1S
φ(R0, 0)is explicitly induced by the symmetric monoidal
structure onTrCorex
φ (Sm). Consider two
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(R0×∆n
sm,),(6.151)
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W′ (g′,α′,θ′)
−−−−−−→(R0×∆n
sm,0),(6.152)
then their product is the correspondence obtained via the composition
W×W ′ (R0×∆n+m
sm ,0)
(R0,0)
(
(R0×∆n
sm)×(R 0×∆m
sm),0
)
(R0×∆n+m
sm ,0).
(f×f′,0)
(g×g′,α×α′,θ×θ′) ∆×id
(6.153)
But this is precisely the ring structure onΩ−∗
φ (∗)given by Cartesian product.
Finally, we end with the module structure. Consider two
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(R0×∆n
sm,0),(6.154)
(R0,0)
(f′,0)
←−−−W′ (g′,α′,θ′)
−−−−−−→(X×∆m
sm,dX);(6.155)
we abuse notation and denote by
(R0,0)
(f,0)
←−−−W
(g,α,θ)
−−−−→(X×∆n
sm,0)(6.156)

===== PAGE 71 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 71
the correspondence obtained via the composition
W (X×∆ n
sm,0)
(R0,0) (R0×∆n
sm,0) (X×∆ n
sm,0).
(f,0)
(g,α,θ) ∗×id (6.157)
The module action is the correspondence obtained via the composition
W×W ′ (X×∆ n+m
sm ,dX)
(R0,0)
(
(X×∆ n
sm)×(X×∆ m
sm),dX
)
(X×∆ n+m
sm ,dX).
(f×f′,0)
(g×g′,α×α′,θ×θ′) ∆×id
(6.158)
But this is precisely the action ofΩ−∗
φ (R0)onΩ −∗+dX
φ (X),∗ at least 0, given by
Cartesian product. It is straightforward to check this behaves well with the additive
structure; the proposition follows.□
Fortunately, although1S
φ(X,d ), for an arbitraryd∈Z , does not see all of the
φ-structured geometric cobordism groups ofX, we may make a careful choice of
shift so that we can.
Corollary 6.46.Let X∈Sm be path connected. We have the following isomorphism
of graded modules:
π∗1S
φ(X,dimX) ∼= Ω−∗+ dimX
φ (X).(6.159)
Meanwhile, with1 Sp
φ , we can see more.
Proposition 6.47.Let X∈Sm be connected. We have the following isomorphism
of graded modules:
π∗1Sp
φ (X,d)∼= Ω−∗+d
φ (X), d∈Z.(6.160)
In fact, if( X,d ) = ( R0, 0), then we have the following isomorphism of graded
commutative rings:
π∗1Sp
φ (R0,0)∼= Ω−∗
φ (∗).(6.161)
Proof.First, we have the following commutative diagram:
GysR
φ(Sm;S) GysR
φ(Sm; CMongp) GysR
φ(Sm; Sp≥0) GysR
φ(Sm; Sp)
ShvR(Sm;S) ShvR(Sm; CMongp) ShvR(Sm; Sp≥0) ShvR(Sm; Sp)
S CMongp Sp≥0 Sp,
∼
∼ ∼ ∼ ∼
(6.162)
where the equivalence between the second row and the third row is Dugger’s theorem.
By Proposition 6.40, for anyd∈Z, we have that the delooping of
1S
φ(X,d)≃Map S
(
Sing(X),1 S
φ(R0,0)
)
(6.163)
is given by
1Sp
φ (X,d)≃F
(
Σ∞
+ Sing(X),1 Sp
φ (R0,0)
)
;(6.164)
i.e.,
1S
φ(X,d)≃Ω ∞1Sp
φ (X,d).(6.165)

===== PAGE 72 =====
72 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Now, we have that
πn1Sp
φ (X,d)∼=πn1S
φ(X,d), n≥0;(6.166)
meanwhile, using Subsection 6.3, we obtain the negative homotopy groups:
π−n1Sp
φ (X,d)∼=π01Sp
φ (X,d+n) ∼=π01S
φ(X,d+n), n≥0.(6.167)
The result follows by Proposition 6.45.□
7.Homotopy coherent Pontryagin-Thom
7.1.Quillen cohomology theories.The following definition essentially appears
in [Qui71]; hence, we find it appropriate that such objects carry Quillen’s namesake.
We denote byGrAbthe category of graded abelian groups.
Definition 7.1.Let h∗ : Smop→GrAb be a functor and, givenf :X→Y∈Sm ,
denote byf∗ :h∗(Y )→h∗(X)∈GrAb the induced map. Aφ-structured Quillen
cohomology theoryis a functorh∗ of the aforementioned form together with, for any
properφ-structured mapg:W→Y∈Sm, a map
g∗ :h∗+rkg (W)→h ∗(Y),(7.1)
referred to as aGysinmap, satisfying the following properties.
(1) Iff 0,f 1 :X→Yare homotopic, thenf ∗
0 =f∗
1.
(2) Ifg:W→W ′ andg′ :W ′→Yare both properφ-structured maps and if
g′◦ghas the inducedφ-structure, then(g ′◦g)∗ =g′
∗◦g∗.
(3) If
W≡W× Y Y Y
W Y
f
g
⌟ f
g
(7.2)
is a transversal pullback inSm, whereg is a properφ-structured map such
that ghas the inducedφ-structure, theng ∗f∗ =f∗g∗.
Remark 7.2.We may define a morphism of φ-structured Quillen cohomology
theories in the obvious way: it is a natural transformation of the underlying functors
compatible with the Gysin maps.
Example 7.3.The following are quick examples ofφ-structured Quillen cohomology
theories.
(1) The functorΩ∗
φ : Smop→GrAb which sends a smooth manifold to its usual
φ-structured geometric cobordism ring.
(2) The functorΩ∗,ho
φ ≡π−∗F
(
Σ∞
+ Sing(−), Mφ
)
: Smop→GrAb given by the
usualφ-structured homotopical cobordism ring.
Remark 7.4.As already mentioned, the usual Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism says
we have the following equivalence of Quillen cohomology theories:
Ω∗
φ
∼
− →Ω∗,ho
φ ;(7.3)
this equivalence is given by the celebrated Pontryagin-Thom construction.
The following result showsφ-structured homotopical cobordism is initial among
φ-structured Quillen cohomology theories.

===== PAGE 73 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 73
Theorem 7.5(Proposition 1.10 in [ Qui71]).Let h∗ be a φ-structured Quillen
cohomology theory and choosea∈h 0(∗). There is a unique map ofφ-structured
Quillen cohomology theoriesθ : Ω∗,ho
φ →h∗ such thatθ(1) =a, where1∈ Ω0,ho
φ (∗)
is the cobordism class of the identity map∗→∗ with theφ-structure corresponding
to the positive orientation.
Remark 7.6.Of course, [Qui71, Proposition 1.10] is only written to pertain to
complex cobordism, but the proof straightforwardly generalizes.
We will now explain how, given a spectral Gysin sheaf, we may construct a
Quillen cohomology theory.
Construction 7.7.Let F∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp); we may construct a Quillen cohomology
theory, denotedQ∗
F, as follows. First, givenX∈Sm, we define
Q∗
F(X)≡π −∗F(X,0).(7.4)
Second, givenf:X→Y∈Sm, we define
f∗ :Q∗
F(Y)→Q ∗
F(X)(7.5)
via
π−∗F
(
(Y,0)
(f,0)
←−−−X
id
−→(X,0)
)
:π−∗F(Y,0)→π −∗F(X,0).(7.6)
Finally, giveng:X→Y∈Smwithφ-structureα, we define
g! :Q∗+rkg
F (X)→Q ∗
F(Y)(7.7)
via
π−∗F
(
(X,−rkg)
id
←−X
(g,α,θα)
−−−−−→(Y,0)
)
:π−∗+ rkg F(X,0)∼=
π−∗F(X,−rkg)→π −∗F(Y,0);(7.8)
here, we use Subsection 6.3. Moreover, it is straightforward to see that
θ:F→G∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp)⇝Q ∗
θ :Q∗
F→Q∗
G.(7.9)
7.2.Global sections and the categorified Thom isomorphism.By definition,
the realization functorDSm→Top necessarily factors throughLCH⊂Top . This
induces a functorCor(DSm;P)→Cor (LCH;P)and therefore a 6-functor formalism
Shv(−;R) : Cor(DSm;P)→ ˆCat∞, X↦→Shv(X;R).(7.10)
Unstraightening, we obtain a symmetric monoidal functor
Un
(
Shv(−;R)
)
≡
∫cc
Cor(DSm;P)
Shv(−;R)→Cor(DSm;P).(7.11)
For eachX∈DSm , the formation of global sections determines a functorΓ(X;−) :
Shv(X;R)→Mod R which is lax symmetric monoidal. Givenf :X→Y∈DSm ,
there is a natural transformation
Γ(Y;−)→Γ
(
X;f∗(−)
)
.(7.12)
In the case wherefis proper, there is an additional natural equivalence
Γ(X;−)≃Γ
(
Y;f∗(−)
)
≃Γ
(
Y;f !(−)
)
.(7.13)
As we will see, these two kinds of natural transformations can be packaged into a
coherent global sections functor.

===== PAGE 74 =====
74 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Proposition 7.8.Let R be an E∞-ring spectrum. There is a lax symmetric
monoidal functor
Γ : Un
(
Shv(−;R)
)
→Mod R (7.14)
given by sending a pair(X,F)toΓ(X;F).
Proof.It suffices to produce a lax symmetric monoidal functor
Un(Shv(−;R)) =
∫cc
Cor(DSm;P)
Shv(−;R)→Mod R,(7.15)
which is tantamount to producing a lax symmetric monoidal functor
Un(Shv(−;R))→Cor(DSm;P)×Mod R,(7.16)
where the target is the coCartesian unstraightening of the constant functor on
Cor(DSm;P)with value ModR; such a functor is the same as a lax natural trans-
formation
Shv(−;R)→const(Mod R)(7.17)
of functors Cor(DSm;P)→ ˆCat∞ which is additionally lax symmetric monoidal.
To produce such a lax natural transformation we appeal to [CLL26, Theorem 6.13];
we now explain how this result applies to our situation. Following the notation of
loc cit., we haveC = DSm, I = iso, P =P, andE =P; becauseI = iso it is clear
these choices satisfy [CLL26, Convention 3.1]. By [Vol25, Proposition 2.32], the
functor
Shv(−;R) : DSm op→Pr St (7.18)
is symmetric monoidal, and, asDSmop has an initial object, there is a canonical
symmetric monoidal natural transformation of functorsDSmop→Pr St,
const(ModR)→Shv(−;R),(7.19)
given by sending anR-module M to the constant sheafp∗
XM∈Shv (X;R). By
forming the fiberwise right adjoint of the transformation above, we obtain a lax
natural transformation of functors fromDSmop to ˆCat∞,
Γ : Shv(−;R)→const(Mod R),(7.20)
which is lax symmetric monoidal. We are now in the situation of [CLL26, Theorem
6.13]. BecauseI = iso, we only need to check that, for any proper mapp :X→Y ,
the square
Shv(Y;R) Shv(X;R)
ModR ModR
p∗
Γ(Y;−) Γ(X;−)
id
(7.21)
is horizontally right adjointable; this follows from the equivalence
Γ(X;−)≃Γ
(
Y;p∗(−)
)
≃Γ
(
Y;p !(−)
)
(7.22)
above. Therefore,Γextends to a lax symmetric monoidal lax natural transformation
of(∞,2)-categories fromCor(DSm;P)to ˆCat∞:
Shv(−;R)→const(Mod R).(7.23)

===== PAGE 75 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 75
Restricting to the invertible2-cells in Cor(DSm;P), we obtain a lax symmetric
monoidal lax natural transformation of functors fromCor(DSm;P)→ˆCat∞. Un-
straightening this transformation, we obtain the desired lax symmetric monoidal
functor
Un
(
Shv(−;R)
)
→Cor(DSm;P)×Mod R.(7.24)
□
Remark 7.9.Note thatΓ| Smop≃F
(
Σ∞
+ Sing(−),Mφ
)
.
We use global sections to produce a lax symmetric monoidal functor
Γφ : TrCorex
φ (Sm)→Sp.(7.25)
To accomplish this, we categorify the Thom isomorphism.
Construction 7.10.The E∞-Mφ-trivialization from Remark 5.8 induces the
following canonical commutative diagram inCAlg
(
Fun(DSmop,ˆCat∞)
)
:
B Shv(−; Mφ)
∗ Shv(−; Mφ),
Thφ
idcanφ (7.26)
where we have written∗ for the trivial structure functor. This induces a commutative
diagram inFun
(
DSmop,CAlg
(
Mod(ˆCat∞)
))
:
(B,Shv(−; Mφ)) (∗,Shv(−; Mφ))
(B,∗) (∗,∗).
(7.27)
After applying−/ /−and forming the coCartesian unstraightening, this yields a
commutative square of symmetric monoidal∞-categories:
∫cc
DSmop Shv(−; Mφ)/ /B
∫cc
DSmop Shv(−; Mφ)
DSmop
B DSmop.πB
(7.28)
Passing to the fiber overX∈DSm op, we have a commutative square
Shv(X; Mφ)/ /B(X) Shv(X; Mφ)
∗/ /B(X) {X}.
(7.29)
AsB(X)acts trivially onShv(X; Mφ), the induced map
Shv(X; Mφ)/ /B(X)→∗/ /B(X)×Shv(X; Mφ)(7.30)
is an equivalence, which, combined with [Lur09a, Corollary 2.4.4.4], shows that
(7.28) is a pullback square. Therefore, by straightening, we have an equivalence of
lax symmetric monoidal functors
canφ : Shv(−; Mφ)B≃π∗
BShv(−; Mφ).(7.31)

===== PAGE 76 =====
76 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Proposition 7.11(Categorified Thom isomorphism).Let πφ : Corφ(DSm)→
Cor(DSm;P)denote the forgetful functor. There is a canonical equivalence of
6-functor formalisms
Dφ
∼
− →π∗
φShv(−; Mφ);(7.32)
equivalently, there is a pullback square of symmetric monoidal∞-categories:
∫cc
Corφ(DSm) Dφ
∫cc
Cor(DSm;P) Shv(−; Mφ)
Corφ(DSm) Cor(DSm;P).
⌟
πφ
(7.33)
Proof. By the construction of the 6-functor formalism in Proposition 4.41, the
equivalence
canφ : Shv(−; Mφ)B≃π∗
BShv(−; Mφ)(7.34)
prolongs to an equivalence of 6-functor formalisms
Shvφ≃(π cor
B )∗Shv(−; Mφ),(7.35)
where πcor
B : Cor(DSmB;PB)→Cor (DSm;P). Restricting this equivalence along
Corφ(DSm)⊂Cor(DSm B;P B)yields the claim.□
Definition 7.12.We define φ-structured homotopical cobordismto be the lax
symmetric monoidal functor
Γφ : TrCorex
φ (Sm)⊂Un(D φ)→Un
(
Shv(−; Mφ)
) Γ
− →Sp.(7.36)
Remark 7.13.By construction, for each( X,dX)∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm), we have an
equivalence
Γφ(X,dX) = Γ(X; MφX{dX})≃
∏
i∈I
F
(
Σ∞
+ Sing(Xi),ΣdiMφ
)
,(7.37)
where⊔ iXi =Xis the decomposition ofXinto its path components.
Theorem 7.14. φ-structured homotopical cobordism admits the structure of an
E∞-algebra in the category of spectralφ-Gysin sheaves. Therefore, there is an
essentially unique map ofE∞-algebras:
PTφ :1 φ→Γ φ∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp).(7.38)
Proof. The functorΓ φ is a sheaf essentially by construction, and the fact it is
homotopy invariant follows from the equivalence in the preceding remark. As the
localization
LhiLR : GysPφ(Sm; Sp)→Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp)(7.39)
islaxsymmetricmonoidal,Γ φ admitsthestructureofan E∞-algebrain GysR
φ(Sm; Sp);
this determines the essentially unique mapPTφ, as claimed.□
7.3.Identifying universal Thom spectra.We are now ready to prove Theorem
1.2; it essentially amounts to a proof of the following result.
Theorem 7.15.The map ofE∞-algebras,
PTφ :1 φ→Γ φ,(7.40)
is an equivalence ofφ-Gysin sheaves.

===== PAGE 77 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 77
Proof.It suffices to show the induced map ofE∞-rings
PTφ(R0,0) :1 φ(R0,0)→Γ φ(R0,0) = Mφ(7.41)
is an equivalence, i.e., is an isomorphism on homotopy groups. Let us consider the
induced map onφ-structured Quillen cohomology theories induced byPTφ from
Construction 7.7:
Q∗
PTφ :Q∗
1Sp
φ
→Q∗
Γφ = Ω∗,ho
φ .(7.42)
Now, Proposition 6.45 implies
Q∗
1Sp
φ
= Ω∗
φ.(7.43)
In particular, [Qui71, Proposition 1.10] showsQ∗
PTφ is precisely the Pontryagin-Thom
construction via the uniqueness statement. We conclude by observing
Q∗
PTφ = PTφ(R0,0)∗.(7.44)
□
Finally, we prove Theorem 1.3 and Corollary 1.4; we restate them for convenience.
Theorem 7.16.The lax symmetric monoidal functor
Hom(1Sp
φ ,−) : Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp)→Sp(7.45)
induces an equivalence of symmetric monoidal∞-categories
Hom(1φ,−) : Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp)→Mod End(1φ)(Sp).(7.46)
Consequently,PT φ induces a symmetric monoidal equivalence
GysR
φ(Sm; Sp)≃Mod Mφ(Sp).(7.47)
Proof. For the first claim, by [Lur17, Proposition 7.1.2.7], it is enough to show1φ
is compact and the functorHom(1φ,− )is conservative. To begin, note there is an
equivalence
Hom(1φ,F)≃F(R 0,0)(7.48)
which is natural inF∈Gys R
φ(Sm; Sp). Therefore, by Dugger’s theorem, the functor
in question may be identified with restriction alongSmop→TrCor ex
φ (Sm):
(−)|Smop : GysR
φ(Sm; Sp)→Shv R(Sm; Sp).(7.49)
As(−)|Smop preserves small limits and colimits, it follows that1φ is compact. Now,
let F be a homotopy invariantφ-Gysin sheaf and assumeF(R0, 0)≃ 0; we aim to
show F≃ 0. To proceed, let(X,dX)∈TrCor ex
φ (Sm)and consider the decomposition
of X into path components:X =⊔i∈IXi; note,dX|Xi≡d i∈Z . As the family of
maps {
(Xi,di)→(X,d X)
}
i∈I (7.50)
determines a covering family inTrCorex
φ (Sm)andFis a sheaf, the canonical map
F(X,dX)→
∏
i∈I
F(Xi,di)(7.51)
is an equivalence. Therefore, by Corollary 6.36, we have an equivalence
F(X,dX)≃
∏
i∈I
Σdi F(Xi,0),(7.52)

===== PAGE 78 =====
78 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
and the conservativity ofHom(1φ,− )follows by another application of Dugger’s
theorem. The equivalence withMφ-modules is now immediate from Theorem 7.15.
□
AppendixA.Grothendieck topologies, new from old
This appendix addresses a few elementary results which allow us to construct
Grothendieck topologies in some cases of interest. As a point of order, by [Lur09a,
Remark 6.2.2.3], a Grothendieck topology on an∞-category C reduces to the notion
of a Grothendieck topology on its homotopy categoryhC; we will make repeated use
of this observation in our arguments below. For more details, we direct the reader
to [MLM94, Chapter III] and [Lur09a, Chapter 6.2].
Definition A.1.Let C be an∞-category. Abasis for a Grothendieck topology
on C is a functionB which assigns to each objectX∈C a collection of subsets of
Ob(hC/X)such that the following holds.
(1) Iff:X→X ′ is an equivalence, then{f:X ′→X}∈B(X).
(2) If{Vj→Y} j∈J∈B (Y ), then, for any morphismf :X→Y , there exists a
covering family{Ui→X} i∈I∈B (X)with the property that the composite
Ui→X→Yfactors through someY j→Y.
(3) If{Ui→X} i∈I∈B (X)and if for each i∈I we have{Uij→U i}j∈Ji∈
K(Ui), then{Uij→X} (i,j)∈∪i∈IJi∈B(X).
The basis B induces a topology by declaring a sieveS⊂C /X to be covering if and
only if it is generated by a covering familyU∈B(X).
Remark A.2.Notice that {X
∼
− →Y}in C generates the sieveC/X, as does the
family{idX :X→X} . Therefore, condition (1) can be replaced with the condition
that{id X :X→X}∈B(X).
Remark A.3.Any topological site has a Grothendieck topology determined by
open embeddings.
Definition A.4.Let p : D→C be a functor of∞-categories where( C,τ )is a site
with basis B. We say thatp isCartesian over B provided that: for everyf :U→X
belonging to a covering familyU∈B (X)and every object ~X with p(~X)≃X , there
exists ap-Cartesian morphism ˜f: ~U→ ~Xliftingf.
Lemma A.5.Let( C,τ )be a Grothendieck site with basisB and letp : D→C
be a functor which is Cartesian over B. Given D∈D and a covering family
U of X = p(D), letUD denote collection ofp-Cartesian lifts of morphisms inU
with targetD. For eachD∈D , letp∗B(D)denote the set of familiesUD, where
U∈B
(
p(D)
)
. The functionD↦→p∗B(D)is a basis for a Grothendieck topology,
and the functorp:D→Cis continuous.
Proof. The continuity claim follows immediately once we verifyp∗B is a basis for a
Grothendieck topology. Furthermore, we may work withhD throughout in place of
Dwhile checking the axioms for a basis above.
(1) Equivalences in D are p-Cartesian lifts of equivalences inC, so any equiva-
lenceD′→Ddetermines a covering family inp∗B(D).
(2) Let ϕ :D→D ′ in D with f =p(ϕ) :X→X ′ and letUD′∈p∗B(D′). As
B is a basis, we may choose a covering familyf∗U∈B (X), from which we

===== PAGE 79 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 79
may form(f∗U)D. The Cartesian lifting property easily implies(f∗U)D
satisfies (2) from Definition A.1.
(3) Let{Di→D} i∈I ∈p ∗B(D)and, for each i∈I , let{Dij→D i}j∈Ji ∈
p∗B(Di). The fact thatp-Cartesian arrows are closed under composition
implies{D ij→D} (i,j)∈∪i∈IJi∈p∗B(D).
□
Remark A.6.For any structure functor F on DSm, the right fibration πF :
DSmF→DSm determines a Grothendieck topology onDSmF. In fact,DSmF is a
topological site by [Par25, 2.8.3.14].
Definition A.7.Let C be a site generated by a basisB. We say the basisB isfine
provided that, for any morphismf :X→Y in C and for any covering familyU of
X, there exists a covering familyV of Y together with a refinementf∗V→U . By
abuse of notation, we say the Grothendieck siteCis fine.
Example A.8.SmandDSmare fine Grothendieck sites. In fact, any topological
∞-site determines a fine Grothendieck site. Both the Nisnevich and étale topologies
are fine sites by [MVW06, Lemma 6.16].
Lemma A.9.Let C be an∞-category which admits pullbacks,( C; CL,CR)an
adequate triple, and assumeCR is a fine Grothendieck site with basisB, such that,
for each covering family{Ui→X} i∈I∈B (X)and for each morphismW→X in
eitherC L orC R, we have{Ui×X W→W} i∈I∈B(W). For eachU∈B(X), let
UCor≡{U i
id
←−Ui→X} i∈I (A.1)
and let BCor(X)denote the collection of families of the form above. We have that
BCor is a basis for a Grothendieck topology onCor(C; CL,CR), where a sieve is
covering if and only if it is generated by a family of the formUCor.
Proof.We check the conditions from A.1.
(1) It is clear that, for anyX∈C , the identity correspondence is of the form
UCor.
(2) LetV∈B(Y)and denote byAthe correspondence
Y
f
← −W
g
− →X.(A.2)
It will be enough to prove that there existsU∈B (X)with the property
that, for eachUi→X∈U, there exists a commutative diagram
Ui W× Y Ui Vj
X W Y
(A.3)
withVj→Y∈V . By pulling backV alongf, the fineness ofB allows us to
refineg∗Vby a coveringf ∗Ufor someU∈B(X).
(3) This claim is clear from the definitions, as the left legs inUCor are identity
morphisms.
Therefore, BCor is a basis for a Grothendieck topology whose covering sieves are
described as claimed.□

===== PAGE 80 =====
80 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
Corollary A.10.Let( C; CL,CR)be an adequate triple,B a basis for a Grothendieck
topology on CR satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma A.9, andE be a presentable
∞-category.
(1) The functoriR :C R→Cor(C;C L,CR)is continuous.
(2) An E-valued presheafF : Cor(C; CL,CR)op→E is a sheaf if and only ifi∗
RF
is a sheaf.
Proof. (1) is clear from the definitions. The claim (2) follows from a cofinality
argument.□
References
[AB19] Omar Antolín-Camarena and Tobias Barthel. A simple universal property of Thom
ring spectra.Journal of Topology, 12(1):56–78, 2019.
[AB24] Mohammed Abouzaid and Andrew J. Blumberg. Foundation of Floer homotopy theory
I: flow categories. arXiv:2404.03193, 2024.
[ABG+14] Matthew Ando, Andrew J. Blumberg, David Gepner, Michael J. Hopkins, and Charles
Rezk. An∞-categorical approach toR-line bundles,R-module Thom spectra, and
twistedR-homology.Journal of Topology, 7(3):869–893, 2014.
[ADH23] Araminta Amabel, Arun Debray, and Peter J. Haine. Differential cohomology: cat-
egories, characteristic classes, and connections. To appear in Cambridge Studies
in Advanced Mathematics, currently available athttps://peterjhaine.github.io/
files/diffcoh.pdf, 2023.
[AG14] Benjamin Antieau and David Gepner. Brauer groups and étale cohomology in derived
algebraic geometry.Geometry & Topology, 18(2):1149–1244, 2014.
[Bar17] Clark Barwick. Spectral Mackey functors and equivariant algebraicK-theory (I).
Advances in Mathematics, 304:646–727, 2017.
[BBP24] Daniel Berwick-Evans, Pedro Boavida de Brito, and Dmitri Pavlov. Classifying spaces
of infinity-sheaves.Algebraic & Geometric Topology, 24(9):4891–4937, 2024.
[BGS20] Clark Barwick, Saul Glasman, and Jay Shah. Spectral Mackey functors and equivariant
algebraicK-theory, II.Tunisian Journal of Mathematics, 2(1):97–146, 2020.
[BGT13] Andrew J. Blumberg, David Gepner, and Gonçalo Tabuada. A universal characteriza-
tion of higher algebraic K-theory.Geometry & Topology, 17(2):733–838, 2013.
[BP26] Kenneth Blakey and Noah Porcelli. Bulk-deformations, Floer complex bordism, and
Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch. arXiv:2605.06620, 2026.
[Bre97] Glen E. Bredon.Sheaf theory, volume 170 ofGraduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-
Verlag, New York, second edition, 1997.
[CJS95] RalphCohen, JohnD.S.Jones, andGraemeB.Segal.Floer’sinfinitedimensionalMorse
theory and homotopy theory.The Floer Memorial Volume, Progress in Mathematics,
133:297–325, 1995.
[CLL26] Bastiaan Cnossen, Tobias Lenz, and Sil Linskens. Universality of span 2-categories
and the construction of 6-functor formalisms. arXiv:2505.19191, 2026.
[Dol78] Albrecht Dold. Geometric cobordism and the fixed point transfer. In Peter Hoffman,
Renzo A. Piccinini, and Denis Sjerve, editors,Algebraic Topology, pages 32–87, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 1978. Springer.
[Dug01] Daniel Dugger. Universal homotopy theories.Advances in Mathematics, 164(1):144–
176, 2001.
[GGN15] David Gepner, Moritz Groth, and Thomas Nikolaus. Universality of multiplicative
infinite loop space machines.Algebraic & Geometric Topology, 15(6):3107–3153, 2015.
[GHN17] David Gepner, Rune Haugseng, and Thomas Nikolaus. Lax colimits and free fibrations
in∞-categories.Documenta Mathematica, 22:1255–1266, 2017.
[GTMW09] Søren Galatius, Ulrike Tillmann, Ib Madsen, and Michael Weiss. The homotopy type
of the cobordism category.Acta Mathematica, 202(2):195–239, 2009.
[HHLN23] Rune Haugseng, Fabian Hebestreit, Sil Linskens, and Joost Nuiten. Two-variable
fibrations, factorisation systems and∞-categories of spans.Forum of Mathematics,
Sigma, 11:e111, 2023.

===== PAGE 81 =====
A HOMOTOPY COHERENT PONTRYAGIN-THOM ISOMORPHISM 81
[HM24] Claudius Heyer and Lucas Mann. 6-functor formalisms and smooth representations.
arXiv:2410.13038, 2024.
[HO26] Alice Hedenlund and Trygve P. Oldervoll. Structured flow categories and twisted
presheaves. arXiv:2603.29576, 2026.
[KP25] Liam Keenan and Maximilien Péroux. On products of skeleta. arXiv:2510.18961, 2025.
[KS90] Masaki Kashiwara and Pierre Schapira.Sheaves on manifolds, volume 292 of
Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathe-
matical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990. With a chapter in French by Christian
Houzel.
[LM14] Gerd Laures and James E. McClure. Multiplicative properties of Quinn spectra.Forum
Mathematicum, 26(4):1117–1185, 2014.
[LM24] Gerd Laures and James E. McClure. Commutativity properties of Quinn spectra.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Section A. Mathematics, 154(6):1848–
1936, 2024.
[LNP25] Sil Linskens, Denis Nardin, and Luca Pol. Global homotopy theory via partially lax
limits.Geometry & Topology, 29(3):1345–1440, 2025.
[Lur09a] Jacob Lurie.Higher topos theory, volume 170 ofAnnals of Mathematics Studies.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2009.
[Lur09b] Jacob Lurie. On the classification of topological field theories. arXiv:0905.0465, 2009.
[Lur14] Jacob Lurie. Lecture 7: Simplicial spaces. Notes from Math 281: Manifold Topology
and Algebraic K-theory, Harvard University Fall 2014, available athttps://www.math.
ias.edu/~lurie/, 2014.
[Lur17] Jacob Lurie. Higher algebra. Unpublished manuscript, available athttps://www.math.
ias.edu/~lurie/, 2017.
[Lur18] Jacob Lurie. Spectral algebraic geometry. Unpublished manuscript, available athttps:
//www.math.ias.edu/~lurie/, 2018.
[Lur26] Jacob Lurie. Kerodon.https://kerodon.net, 2026.
[MLM94] Saunders Mac Lane and Ieke Moerdijk.Sheaves in geometry and logic: a first intro-
duction to topos theory. Universitext. Springer, New York, NY, 1994.
[MVW06] Carlo Mazza, Vladimir Voevodsky, and Charles Weibel.Lecture notes on motivic
cohomology, volume 2 ofClay Mathematics Monographs. American Mathematical
Society, Providence, RI; Clay Mathematics Institute, Cambridge, MA, 2006.
[Nik16] Thomas Nikolaus. Stable ∞-operads and the multiplicative Yoneda lemma.
arXiv:1608.02901, 2016.
[Nov62] Sergei P. Novikov. Homotopy properties of Thom complexes.Matematicheski˘i Sbornik.
Novaya Seriya, 57(99):407–442, 1962.
[Nov67] Sergei P. Novikov. Methods of algebraic topology from the point of view of cobordism
theory.Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR. Seriya Matematicheskaya, 31:855–951, 1967.
[Par25] John Pardon. Derived moduli spaces of pseudo-holmorphic curves. Unpublished
manuscript, available athttps://johnpardon.com/holomorphiccurves-2025-04.pdf,
2025.
[Qui69] Daniel Quillen. On the formal group laws of unoriented and complex cobordism theory.
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 75(6):1293–1298, 1969.
[Qui70] Frank Quinn.A geometric formulation of surgery. PhD thesis, Princeton University,
1970.
[Qui71] Daniel Quillen. Elementary proofs of some results of cobordism theory using Steenrod
operations.Advances in Mathematics, 7(1):29–56, 1971.
[Qui95] Frank Quinn. Assembly maps in bordism-type theories. InNovikov conjectures, index
theorems and rigidity, Volume 1, pages 201–271. Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[Ram26] Maxime Ramzi. A monoidal Grothendieck construction for∞-categories.Nagoya
Mathematical Journal, 261:e8, 2026.
[Sau23] Victor Saunier. A theorem of the heart for K-theory of endomorphisms.
arXiv:2311.13836, 2023.
[Sch26] Peter Scholze. Six-functor formalisms. arXiv:2510.26269, 2026.
[Tho52] René Thom. Espaces fibrés en sphères et carrés de Steenrod.Annales scientifiques de
l’École Normale Supérieure, 69(3):109–182, 1952.
[Tho54] René Thom. Quelques propriétés globales des variétés différentiables.Commentarii
Mathematici Helvetici, 28(1):17–86, 1954.

===== PAGE 82 =====
82 KENNETH BLAKEY AND LIAM KEENAN
[Vol25] Marco Volpe. The six operations in topology.Journal of Topology, 18(4):e70050, 2025.
[Wei13] Charles A. Weibel.The K-book, volume 145 ofGraduate Studies in Mathematics.
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2013. An introduction to algebraic
K-theory.
Department of Mathematics, MIT, 182 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A.
Email address:kblakey@mit.edu
Department of Mathematics, Brown University, 151 Thayer St., Providence, RI 02912,
U.S.A.
Email address:liam_keenan@brown.edu
