===== PAGE 1 =====
arXiv:2506.22392v1  [physics.ins-det]  27 Jun 2025
The real-time data processing and acquisition system for Project 8 Phase II
A. Ashtari Esfahani j,1, A. Banducci j, S. B¨ oserd, N. Buzinsky g,2, R. Cervantesj,3, C. Claessens d,j,∗,
L. de Viveiros i, M. Fertld, J. A. Formaggiog, L. Gladstone a,4, M. Grando h,5, M. Guigue h,6, J. Hartse j,
K. M. Heegerk, A. M. Jonesh,7, K. Kazkazf, B. H. LaRoqueh, A. Lindman d, B. Monreal a, J. A. Nikkelk,
E. Novitskij, N. S. Oblathh,∗, W. Pettus c, R. G. H. Robertsonj, G. Rybkaj, L. Salda˜ nak,8, P. L. Slocumk,
Y.-H. Suna, P. T. Surukuchik, A. B. Tellesk, F. Thomasd, M. Thomas h,9, T. Th¨ ummlere, L. Tvrznikovaf,10,
B. A. VanDevenderh,j, T. E. Weissk, A. Youngb,11, E. Zayasg, A. Ziegler i,12
aCase Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA 44106
bCenter for Astrophysics — Harvard & Smithsonian, Cambridge, MA, USA 02138
cIndiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA 47405
dJohannes Gutenberg-Universit¨ at, Mainz, Germany 55099
eKarlsruhe Insitute of Technology,Karlsruhe, Germany 76021
fLawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA 94550
gMassachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 02139
hPacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA 99354
iPennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA 16802
jUniversity of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 98195
kYale University, New Haven, CT, USA 06520
Abstract
In Phase II of the Project 8 neutrino mass experiment, electrons from the decays of tritium or 83mKr are
detected via their≈26 GHz cyclotron radiation while contained within a circular waveguide. The signal from
a given electron is characterized as a brief chirp, lasting ≲10 ms and changing in frequency by ≲1 MHz/ms.
To detect these signals, the Project 8 collaboration developed a Data Acquisition (DAQ) system tailored
to the signal properties. The DAQ is responsible for simultaneously selecting up to three 100 MHz-wide
frequency windows to study, detect, and trigger on likely signals from different electron kinetic energies, and
for writing the relevant data to disk. We describe the Phase II DAQ system in detail and address how the
system was used for data-taking operations.
Keywords: neutrino mass, project 8, data acquisition, ROACH, FPGA, signal processing
PACS: 29.85.Ca, 14.60.Pq, 07.50.Qx, 23.40.-s
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: claesc@uw.edu (C. Claessens),
noah.oblath@pnnl.gov (N. S. Oblath)
1Now at Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
2Now at University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
98195
3Now at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia,
IL, USA 60510
4Now at Institute for Defense Analyses, Alexandria, VA,
USA 22305
5Now at Invictus Animus Research and Design, Centen-
nial, CO, USA 80015
6Now at Sorbonne Universit´ e, Universit´ e Paris Cit´ e,
CNRS/IN2P3, 75005 Paris, France
7Now at Ozen Engineering, Sunnyvale, CA, USA 94025
8Now at The Est´ ee Lauder Companies, New York, NY,
USA 10153
9Now at Booz Allen Hamilton, San Antonio, TX, USA
1. Introduction
The Project 8 experiment aims to measure
the neutrino mass using the tritium endpoint
method [1, 2]. In a Cyclotron Radiation Emis-
sion Spectroscopy (CRES)-based experiment such
as Project 8 [3, 4], the kinetic energies of electrons
are measured by detecting the cyclotron radiation
from individual electrons while they are trapped in
78226
10Now at Waymo, Mountain View, CA, USA 94043
11Now at Radboud University, 6500 GL Nijmegen, The
Netherlands
12Now at HRL Laboratories, Malibu, CA, USA 90265
Preprint submitted to Nuclear Instrumentation and Methods A June 30, 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
a magnetic field [5]. The cyclotron radiation fre-
quency is inversely proportional to the total energy
of the electron:
fc = 1
2π
eB
me +Ekin/c2, (1)
where e is magnitude of the electron charge, B is
the magnetic field strength, me is the electron rest
mass, Ekin is the electron kinetic energy, and c is
the speed of light. In Phase II 13 of Project 8 [7, 8]
the magnetic field strength is≈1 T, putting the fre-
quencies of interest for 83mKr conversion-electron
decay and molecular tritium (T 2) beta decay at
≈26 GHz.
The core of the Phase II experiment [10] (Fig-
ure 1) is a circular waveguide that both contains
the radioactive gas (it was filled with either 83mKr
or T 2) and transmits the emitted cyclotron radia-
tion through its coupling to the waveguide’s TE 11
mode. Electrons from the source gas are magneti-
cally trapped within the waveguide so they can be
observed for an extended period of time. The mag-
netic field consists of a 0.959 T background field cre-
ated by the superconducting solenoid magnet, and
small (O(0.05−0.5 mT)) dips in the field—the elec-
tron traps—created by a set of trapping coils. All
data are collected with a single Radio-Frequency
(RF) antenna at one end of the waveguide. Ana-
log processing—consisting of amplifying, mixing,
and band-pass and low-pass filtering [10]—reduces
the frequencies of interest to the Intermediate Fre-
quency (IF) band near 1 GHz (the signal is mixed
down by 24 .5 GHz). The analog RF stage fur-
ther sets the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and total
power to match the specifications (e.g. the volt-
age range) of the digitizer. In the Phase II experi-
ment, we need to observe a≈4 keV span around the
tritium endpoint to study the backgrounds above
the endpoint and the shape of the spectrum below.
This translates to a ≈200 MHz band in frequency
space.
The purpose of the Data Acquisition (DAQ) sys-
tem for a CRES experiment is to enable the ac-
curate and precise frequency measurement of the
particle’s cyclotron radiation. In the context of
13The Project 8 experiment is divided into four phases [3],
with Phase I being the initial demonstration of CRES [6],
Phase II performing the first CRES tritium beta decay end-
point measurement [7, 8], Phase III demonstrating the ability
to scale up in volume and realize an atomic tritium source [9],
and Phase IV being the final neutrino-mass measurement [9].
Cryocooler
Signal
Gas Supply
Superconducting 
Solenoid Magnet
Waveguide
Gas Cell and
Trapping Coils
Cryogenic 
Amplifiers
Figure 1: In Phase II of Project 8, a waveguide was in-
serted into the bore of a superconducting magnet. A gas
cell near the end of the waveguide is filled with 83mKr or T2
gas. The superconducting solenoid magnet provides a back-
ground field of 0 .959 T. Small copper coils around the cell
are powered with ≤ 1 A to create magnetic-field dips that
trap some of the electrons emitted in nuclear decays. The
electrons spiral around the magnetic field lines while oscillat-
ing up and down in the trapping field and emitting cyclotron
radiation. This radiation is detected by an antenna at the
far end of the waveguide, amplified by cryogenic amplifiers,
and finally filtered and recorded by the DAQ.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Phase II, the DAQ system was optimized with a
primary focus on efficiently recognizing event can-
didates and writing the relevant raw data to disk
(i.e. no online reconstruction), and a secondary fo-
cus on minimizing the total data volume. The
Phase II DAQ is able to digitize a single analog
input and simultaneously process three frequency
intervals of 100 MHz each. The center of each fre-
quency band can be set independently and the sys-
tem operates without deadtime in either a continu-
ous streaming mode or a triggered mode. Without
triggering the data rate is 600 MB/s. Hence, keep-
ing the total recorded data volume for the planned
100 day tritium run period below the targeted max-
imum disk space of 200 TB required efficient rejec-
tion of noise by the trigger. Event reconstruction
and careful filtering of remaining false events (noise
fluctuations mimicking events) are performed of-
fline [11].
Figure 2 shows the spectrogram for a typical
CRES event from Phase II, produced by performing
a short-time Fourier Transform on the time-series
data. The SNR for the event in 24 .4 kHz-wide fre-
quency bins is plotted as a function of both fre-
quency and time. The cyclotron radiation from a
single electron is detected as a narrow peak in fre-
quency over time, forming an upward-sloping line.
The initial frequency of the signal provides the ini-
tial energy of the electron. The slope is a result
of the electron losing power via cyclotron radia-
tion;fc typically changes by≈0.3 MHz/ms through
this mechanism. Multiple lines are the result of
the electron scattering inelastically off residual gas
atoms or molecules while remaining magnetically
trapped. These signal characteristics guided the
choices made for the DAQ system. We describe
the hardware and software details of this system
in section 2. In section 3 the optimization of the
trigger for Phase II data is presented and its per-
formance evaluated. In section 4 we discuss the
requirements and plans for future DAQ systems of
CRES neutrino-mass experiments.
2. System Description
2.1. Overview
The DAQ system comprises an Analog-to-Digital
Converter (ADC) coupled to a Field-Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA) that performs initial process-
ing of the data and a data-processing server to ana-
lyze the data in real time and write the time series
0.5
 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Time (ms)
87
88
89
90
91
92
93Frequency (MHz)
Pre-trigger time
Initial trigger
Continue writing
Acquisition length
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
SNR
Figure 2: Cyclotron radiation from a magnetically trapped
electron is observed as a sequence of chirps of varying time
lengths and distances in frequency in a spectrogram pro-
duced using a short-time Fourier Transform on time-series
data down-converted to a range of 0 MHz to 100 MHz. This
spectrogram was produced with the same 40.96 µs-wide rect-
angular window used in the DAQ and data analysis. The
goal of the triggered data-taking is to reduce data volume
by only recording the color-shaded time span. Details of
how an acquisition is formed are given in section 2.4.5. Pre-
and post-trigger times here are for illustration only.
to data files. Figure 3 shows the overall DAQ sys-
tem.
The ADC and FPGA are part of the Recon-
figurable Open-Architecture Computing Hardware
version 2 (ROACH2) platform [12, 13] developed
by the Collaboration for Astronomical Signal Pro-
cessing and Electronics Research (CASPER) [14].
The single channel of digitized data at the IF band
is split into three channels on the FPGA, each
with an independent digital downconversion step.
Each channel is divided into a frequency-domain
path and a time-domain path, both of which are
transmitted over high-speed Ethernet to the data-
processing server. We chose to start the time- and
frequency-domain data paths on the FPGA to take
advantage of its real-time processing capabilities
and to simplify the analysis performed by the data-
processing server. The ROACH2 timing was refer-
enced to an atomic rubidium frequency standard to
ensure coherent timing throughout data taking.
Each channel is processed on the server by an in-
dependent instance of the data-processing software.
A software trigger uses the frequency-domain data
to detect the presence of electron signals because
the signals are narrow in frequency and the noise
in a single frequency bin is smaller than the to-
tal noise present in the time-domain signal. The
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
IF analog 
signal
10 Gb 
Ethernet
Remote storage 
& processing
10 Gb 
Ethernet
ROACH2 Server
Psyllid
Psyllid
Psyllid
ADC
 FPGA
Experiment 
controls
1 Gb 
Ethernet
Figure 3: Overview of the DAQ system, showing the main
hardware components (ROACH2 and server), and the data
path from the IF analog signal through digitization, splitting
into three channels, data processing, and storage. Psyllid is
the data-processing software described in section 2.4. The
system is connected to the experiment controls over a 1 Gbit
Ethernet network.
trigger algorithm is designed to produce continu-
ous time-domain acquisitions of flexible length with
no deadtime, where an “acquisition” is defined as a
contiguous block of data, either in the time or fre-
quency domain. This way we ensure that we can
trigger on events such as the one shown in Figure 2.
The time-domain data representing the duration of
a triggered acquisition are written to disk to pre-
serve the rawest form of the digitized data for later
analysis. Data are stored temporarily on the server
before being transferred to a remote system for pro-
cessing and long-term storage.
The trigger algorithm is based on the concept
of frequency-mask triggering. The in-streaming
frequency-domain data are compared to a pre-
recorded frequency mask 14 that accounts for any
variation in the noise level with frequency. As soon
as the mask level is exceeded at any frequency, the
algorithm checks if the start-writing condition is
fulfilled. This condition can be dynamically con-
figured at runtime and typically consists of a re-
quirement for one or more high-power bins within
a certain time interval. To prevent the event start
from being missed if only a later part of the event
meets the start-writing condition, since the starting
frequency is critical for measurig the initial electron
energy, a fixed amount of data is buffered and writ-
ten out as pre-trigger samples. An acquisition is
14Typically, the mask is recorded right before triggered
data-taking by averaging over the frequency-domain data for
a period of time.
ended if no new occurrence of high power in the
frequency domain is detected for a set amount of
time.
2.2. Hardware and Firmware
The analog RF chain of the Phase II experiment
prepares the signal for digitization [10]. A mixer
shifts the signals down to the IF frequency band
and a band-pass filter reduces image noise from fre-
quencies above and below the frequency range of
interest. Finally, a combination of an amplifier and
a filter set the total power near the optimum level
for the digitizer at the sampling rate used and pre-
vents noise aliasing into the first Nyquist zone of
digitization.
The front-end of the DAQ system (Figure 3) is
the ROACH2 board, which features an ADC im-
plemented on a daughter board [12, 13], a Xil-
inx Virtex 6 FPGA, and a PowerPC 440EPx pro-
cessor that runs a Linux operating system. Con-
trol of the ROACH2 platform is conducted over
a 1 Gbit Ethernet link. A second daughter board
adds four SFP+ (enhanced Small Form-factor Plug-
gable) 10 Gbit Ethernet ports to the platform for
high-speed digital data transmission. The data-
processing server features an Intel Xeon processor
and two dual 10 Gbit Ethernet network interface
cards for receiving the data over a dedicated con-
nection to the ROACH2 and transmitting it to off-
site storage.
The ADC daughter board in use has an
EV8AQ160 ADC chip that is capable of 8-bit sam-
pling at a rate of up to 5 GS /s. We use a digitiza-
tion rate of 3 .2 GS/s to capture a 1600 MHz-wide
IF band.
On the FPGA, data are processed with a custom
firmware configuration. The single input channel is
split into three channels that process data in paral-
lel. An overview of the processing implemented in
each of the three channels on the FPGA is shown in
Figure 4. The channels have independently-tunable
center frequencies (tuning step size: 3 .125 MHz)
that are used to select 100 MHz-wide bands from
within the total IF bandwidth.
When the data from the ADC appear at the in-
put to each channel, they require decimation by
a factor of 16, since the input data are digitized
at 3.2 GS/s and the FPGA is clocked at 200 MHz.
For each channel, the 100 MHz-wide band of inter-
est is down-converted with a single-sideband mixer
and 128-tap (127th-order) Finite Impulse Response
(FIR) band-pass filter. Decimation is achieved by
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
Figure 4: Processing implemented on the FPGA for each
digital channel. The signal digitized by the ADC is down-
converted and its FFT computed. Both time- and frequency-
domain data are streamed over 10 Gb Ethernet.
computing every sixteenth filter output to yield a
serial stream of time-domain samples at the FPGA
clock rate. The data are then routed to two parallel
paths, one for time-domain processing and one for
frequency-domain processing. On the two paths the
data are segmented into 8192-sample “records” that
are handled simultaneously in parallel. A record ID
value is assigned to guarantee that we can identify
which time and frequency records correspond to the
same period in time.
The frequency-domain processing computes an
8192-point complex-valued discrete Fourier trans-
form (DFT) using a pipelined fast Fourier trans-
form (FFT) architecture. This yields a spectral res-
olution of 24.4 kHz. The negative-frequency sam-
ples do not contain any unique information com-
pared with the positive-frequency samples, so only
the 4,096 complex-valued spectral samples in the
positive half-spectrum are retained.
In parallel, the time-domain processing produces
an IQ (In-phase / Quadrature) sampling of the
100 MHz wide channel by centering the channel on
DC, passing it through a fourth-order Infinite Im-
pulse Response (IIR) low-pass filter and downsam-
pling by a factor of two. The IIR filter is imple-
mented using a scattered look-ahead architecture,
which allows pipelining recursive loops to meet tim-
ing constraints while guaranteeing stability [15].
The output of the frequency-domain and time-
domain paths are requantized to 8 bits per sample
to compensate for bit growth throughout the pro-
cessing. The data are then packetized such that
frequency-domain samples for a single record are
inserted into the payload of one packet, and the
time-domain samples that correspond to the same
DFT window are inserted into the payload of the
following packet. Application layer headers are at-
tached to each packet before being transmitted over
10 Gb Ethernet. At the transport layer, User Data-
gram Protocol (UDP) is used.
2.3. Multi-channel Use Cases
The multi-channel implementation with indepen-
dent central frequencies enables the ROACH2 to
record data from different frequency ranges simul-
taneously. This offers many possible applications:
• Due to the electron motion in the waveguide,
the received signal frequencies are Doppler-
shifted. This leads to frequency modulation
and hence sidebands in the spectrum. For
a large modulation frequency, the separation
between the main carrier frequency and side-
bands is larger than the bandwidth of a sin-
gle channel (100 MHz). Using one channel to
record the main carriers and the other two
channels to record the sidebands would allow
us to record all visible bands. The Phase II ex-
periment was configured in a way that did not
result in visible sidebands and this application
was never used.
• Project 8 uses the 83mKr spectrum for cal-
ibration measurements. The energies of
the internal-conversion lines with the highest
branching ratios in 83mKr decay are the K line
at≈17.8 keV, the L lines at ≈30.4 keV, and
the M lines at ≈31.9 keV. In Phase II the
separations of these lines in the CRES fre-
quency spectrum are ≈600 MHz (L− K lines)
and≈70 MHz (M−L lines). After analog mix-
ing with 24.5 GHz, all three lines fall into the
1.6 GHz bandwidth of the ROACH2 and the
three channels can be used to record them si-
multaneously.
• For the tritium spectrum analysis in Phase II,
the energy region of interest corresponds to a
much larger frequency range than the 100 MHz
bandwidth of a single channel. Therefore, the
channels’ central frequencies were configured
such that the 3 channels were adjacent to each
other and together cover the full tritium region
of interest (see section 3.4.2). Because the full
time-series is recorded for each detected event
candidate, splitting the spectrum into 3 fre-
quency ranges reduces the recorded data vol-
ume per event by 3 compared to an FPGA im-
plementation with a single 300 MHz-wide chan-
nel, as most events are seen by only one chan-
nel.
• For trigger optimization and other systematic
studies, it is useful to be able to record the
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
same frequency range with separate channels.
For example, to compare the trigger efficiency
for different register settings on the ROACH2
or different software trigger configurations, one
channel can serve as reference with a constant
configuration, while the other two channels are
used to explore the configuration parameter
space (see section 3.2.1).
2.4. Data-Processing Software
On the data-processing server, the software trig-
ger is implemented as part of the real-time trig-
gering package Psyllid [16] (written in C + +). Its
purpose is to receive UDP packets via a network
port, analyze them in real time (each packet cov-
ers 40.96 µs) and write data to disk. The file format
used is the “Egg” version 3 format [17], a file format
that is based on the industry standard Hierarchical
Data Format, version 5 (HDF5) [18]. The Psyllid
architecture was designed to:
• be modular and configurable at runtime,
• process data in real time with no deadtime,
• safely run the signal processing steps in paral-
lel, and
• integrate into an existing Dripline [19, 20] ex-
periment control system.
The remainder of section 2.4 describes the com-
ponents of the data-processing software in detail.
2.4.1. Software Framework: Midge
Psyllid is based on the Midge framework [21, 22].
The working principle behind Midge is that data are
produced, read, and processed by different kinds of
operators called “nodes”. A “data stream” is used
to connect a node writing data to a node reading
data. The different types of nodes are:
• Producers: nodes that only write output data
to a data stream(s), and do not read input data
from a data stream;
• Transformers: nodes that read input data from
a data stream(s), and write output data to a
data stream(s);
• Consumers: nodes that only read data from a
data stream(s), and do not write data to a data
stream.
Data streams are circular buffers of data objects,
which make it possible to continuously process data
as long as data are read from the buffer as quickly,
on average, as it is written to the buffer. Each
data stream carries a single type of data. Produc-
ers and transformers (writing) move along the data
stream writing to each data object. Consumers and
transformers (reading) follow the writing operator
along the data stream, reading from each data ob-
ject. Each node runs in its own thread which allows
for parallel processing. Mutexes are used to avoid
collisions between reading and writing nodes, and
since a writing node cannot pass a reading node,
nodes are prevented from overwriting data that has
not yet been read.
In principle, nodes can use an arbitrary num-
ber of input and output streams, though each data
stream has a single producer. All nodes can be con-
nected via data streams in almost arbitrary ways,
where each operator takes action on the incoming
data as soon as it “appears” on the output of the
upstream operator. A concrete example of a node
configuration used in Phase II is shown in Figure 5.
Upon initialization of a Midge instance, the network
of nodes is established and connected according to
a pre-configured structure.
2.4.2. Data processing overview
In Psyllid we implemented a feature that al-
lows rapid starting and stopping of data process-
ing. Prior to initializing the Midge nodes, Psyllid
is in the “idle” state. Psyllid is put in the “acti-
vated” state before starting data processing—which
involves initializing the desired Midge nodes, con-
necting them via their input and output streams,
and starting the threads for each node—so that
data processing can start almost instantly when the
run is started. One or more of the nodes must have
the ability to pause its data processing, in a way
that halts the overall data processing. The act of
starting a data-taking run puts Psyllid in the “run-
ning” state by un-pausing the relevant node(s). The
end of the run pauses the node(s) again and returns
Psyllid to the “activated” state. In this way, data-
taking runs can be started and stopped with essen-
tially no delay in the action of the DAQ system.
For Phase II of Project 8, we built a number of
nodes in Psyllid specifically for processing CRES
data. Pausing and un-pausing is performed by
the “ROACH receiver” (described below in more
detail). Data taking is performed in two modes:
streaming and triggered. In streaming mode, the
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
time series data received from the ROACH2 is writ-
ten directly to disk. In triggered mode, time-series
data are written to disk only when an event is
present. In both configurations, the data are pro-
cessed by Psyllid in three stages:
1. Receiving: network packets arrive on the net-
work interface, are transferred into memory,
and then are split into time and frequency
streams;
2. Analyzing: the time and frequency streams are
processed by different sets of transformer nodes
depending on whether Psyllid is in streaming
or triggered mode;
3. Writing: time series data are written to disk.
In all configurations, deadtime is avoided by care-
fully balancing the workload of the nodes in use.
Each node must process data at least as quickly
as the data are received by Psyllid. As long as
the rate of packets being received by Psyllid is the
limiting rate in the system, all downstream nodes
will stay synchronized with the incoming data. The
consequence of a slower downstream node would
be for the buffers of the nodes upstream of the
slow node to fill up until eventually arriving pack-
ets are dropped when they cannot be written to the
packet receiver’s output buffer. In development of
the Psyllid configuration used to record Phase II
data, the processing rates of all nodes were checked
to ensure that deadtime would not be introduced
by Psyllid.
In sections 2.4.3 and 2.4.4, we will briefly describe
how Psyllid applies the three stages above to oper-
ations in streaming and triggered modes, respec-
tively. Section 2.4.5 will cover the setup and nodes
of Psyllid for production data-taking in triggered
mode in more detail.
2.4.3. Streaming mode
In streaming mode the goal is to write as much
data as possible to disk, without introducing dead-
time.
Receiving. The process of receiving data from the
ROACH2 involves two nodes: the “packet receiver”
and the “ROACH receiver”. The packet receiver
is responsible for taking packets directly from the
server’s network interface, and copying the data as
a raw sequence of bytes to a raw-data object in the
packet receiver’s output data stream.
The ROACH receiver takes the raw-data objects
from the packet receiver and interprets them as ei-
ther time- or frequency-domain packets, outputting
the two types of data on separate output streams.
Each packet contains a single record holding two
arrays (In-phase / Quadrature (IQ) samples) with
4096 8-bit integer numbers.
Analyzing. No analysis is performed on the data
in streaming mode; the frequency-domain data are
ignored with a “terminator” node, and the time-
domain data are passed directly from the ROACH
receiver to the writer node.
Writing. The purpose of streaming mode is to
write all time-domain data received to disk. The
“streaming writer” copies the time-series data di-
rectly from each data object into an Egg file. The
Egg file contains a single acquisition covering the
entire run period, except in the rare cases when
a data-processing problem induces deadtime and
starts a new acquisition.
2.4.4. Triggered mode
Triggered mode differs from streaming mode in
that we seek to only write data that includes a po-
tential event. To accomplish this we perform a real-
time analysis of the frequency-spectrum data, and
then write to disk the time-series data where the
signal is present.
Receiving. The process of receiving data in trig-
gered mode is the same as in streaming mode, as
described above.
Analyzing. Only the frequency-domain data are
analyzed to determine if an event is present; the
time-domain data are directly passed from the
ROACH receiver to the writer node. The first node
in the analysis process is the frequency-mask trigger
(FMT), where a configurable frequency-dependent
threshold is applied to each record to determine if
it contains any signal power. The output of the
FMT is a trigger flag for each record that indicates
whether the trigger conditions have been met.
The next node, the event builder, implements
logic to set the trigger flag of a record based on
the surrounding records and create “events,” sets of
records likely to contain a full electron signal (or, in
principle, that of multiple simultaneous electrons).
Its input is trigger flags from the frequency-mask
trigger node, and its output is also trigger flags
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
(not the same as the input), which are read by the
writer node. The event builder uses circular buffers
to store a certain number of trigger flags to build
events in two ways: (1) a set number of records
called a pre-trigger are added before the first trig-
gered record in an event, and (2) a gap between
triggered records is filled in if it is smaller than a
specified “skip tolerance.”
Two further options allowed customization of the
triggering process to help reduce noise fluctuations
being interpreted as events. The FMT included an
option to use two threshold levels. The trigger flags
would indicate whether the low or both the high
and low thresholds were crossed. When this fea-
ture was used, the event builder would require the
high threshold to be crossed to trigger an event, but
trigger flags crossing the low threshold would de-
fine a wider time window for the event, accounting
for variability in the event power while maintain-
ing high noise rejection and still seeing the whole
event. The event builder could also require more
than one trigger flag before creating an event. This
improved noise rejection since false events due to
noise were most likely to be short. The settings
used for all configurable parameters are optimized
in section 3.2.
Writing. The “triggered writer” node has two in-
puts: time-domain records and trigger flags. For
each record, if a trigger flag is true, then the time-
domain data for that record is written to an Egg
file. In the end, the Egg file contains a set of acqui-
sitions, each nominally containing the signal from
a single event.
2.4.5. Psyllid Nodes
The nodes used in triggered mode are depicted
in Figure 5. Their functionality is as follows.
Packet receiver. Psyllid has two types of packet
receivers, both of which are producer nodes: the
socket receiver and the fast-packet receiver. The
socket receiver gets the UDP packets via the stan-
dard POSIX socket interface [23]. As this is a sim-
ple high level process, it is very useful for testing
purposes or for receiving packets from a packet sim-
ulator that produces UDP packets at a slower rate.
For production data-taking, this interface is too
slow because the Linux socket interface uses one
system call to capture a single packet. The fast-
packet-receiver, on the other hand, gets the pack-
ets via the memory-mapped ring buffer [24]. The
Producer node: 
Packet receiver
Transformer node: 
ROACH receiver
Transformer node: 
Frequency-mask 
trigger
Transformer node: 
Event builder
Consumer node: 
Triggered writer
Raw-data blocks
Frequency-
domain 
packets
Time-domain 
packets
Trigger 
flags
Trigger 
flags
Output: 
Egg files
Input:Packets
from ROACH
Figure 5: Psyllid node configuration in triggered mode.
The ROACH receiver interprets packets as either time- or
frequency-domain data, and sends the data on the appro-
priate stream. Records from the time-domain packets are
passed directly to the writer, while their frequency-domain
equivalents are inspected for high-power bins by the fre-
quency mask trigger node (FMT). The event builder deter-
mines which record IDs comprise the next acquisition. The
writer node then writes the time-domain records sorted as
acquisitions to an Egg file using the Monarch3 [17] library.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
memory-mapped buffer provides a circular buffer of
configurable size that is shared between the kernel
and the user. Instead of issuing a system call, the
user can read packets from the shared buffer. Both
receivers are Midge producers with a single output
stream and they both write the packet content as
raw blocks of memory (i.e. without interpreting
as any particular data structure) to improve data
throughput.
ROACH receiver. The ROACH receiver is a trans-
former node responsible for dividing the time and
frequency data packets onto separate paths. Its in-
put is a stream of raw data packets from the packet
receiver, and it has two output streams, one for
each domain of data. The ROACH receiver is also
responsible for implementing the “pausing” behav-
ior mentioned above. In the paused mode, data ob-
jects continuously arrive from the packet receiver
but are ignored until data processing is un-paused.
In that way, there is no backlog of data from the
network interface, and no extra buffering of packets
is needed to start a run immediately by un-pausing.
Frequency-mask trigger. The FMT is a transformer
node with one in-stream and one out-stream. The
input data type is freq-data and the output data
type is trigger-flags. The FMT can run in two dif-
ferent modes, “add-to-mask” and “triggering.”
In the add-to-mask mode, the FMT calculates
the mean and the variance of the incoming power
spectra over time. To do so, it takes the incoming
complex-valued array from each packet and sums
the absolute square (proportional to power) and
the square of the absolute square (variance of the
power) separately for each frequency bin. Once a
pre-configured number of records,N, has been pro-
cessed, the sums are divided by N and a third-
order spline is fitted to the mean and variance.
Depending on configurable options, the FMT then
either calculates one or two trigger masks equal
to rlow and rhigh-times the fitted average back-
ground (Figure 6) or rlow and rhigh standard devi-
ations above the background, where rlow and rhigh
are configurable parameters used to calculate the
trigger masks. For all of our production data-
taking we used the two-threshold option, calculat-
ing those thresholds using the standard deviations.
The output-data stream is not used in this mode.
In triggered mode the FMT loops over all bins
in the frequency domain data, calculates the power
from IQ amplitudes in each bin, and compares the
0 20 40 60 80 100
Frequency (MHz)
100
120
140
160
180
200
220Power (arb. units)
Power mean
Power std. dev.
Spline fit
Scaled mask
Figure 6: Example of a trigger mask calculated from N =
12, 000 frequency-spectrum packets. The bin-wise mean and
standard deviation are shown along with the spline fit and
the scaled mask. The mask threshold in this example is
12 ∗σpower. The inset shows that the spline fit does not
under- or over-estimate the shape of the average spectrum
even around one of the sharper spectral features.
result to its stored trigger masks. For each record,
a trigger-flag data object is written to the node’s
output stream. If the trigger conditions are met,
the flag is set to true, and otherwise it is set to
false.
While using a single trigger mask, each bin is
compared to the trigger mask until one is found
that exceeds the threshold. When that occurs, the
output-data trigger flag is set to true, and the loop
over bins is stopped.
While using two masks with different thresholds
(rlow < rhigh), the FMT scans through the bins of
the frequency spectrum comparing to both thresh-
olds. If a bin crosses the high threshold, then both
the trigger flag and the high-threshold flag in the
output data are set to true and the scan over the
bins stops. If a bin only crosses the low threshold,
then the trigger flag in the output data is set to
true and the scan continues. When the scan over
bins completes, if only the low threshold has been
crossed, then only the trigger flag is set to true in
the output data.
Event builder. The event builder is a transformer
node responsible for taking the set of records
passing the trigger threshold(s) and adding other
records around them to form an acquisition that
is likely to capture a full event (as shown in Fig-
ure 7). An acquisition includes a number of records
before the acquisition is triggered, called the pre-
trigger, and records to fill in small gaps between
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
triggered records, called the skip tolerance. Both
the input and output data types to the event builder
are trigger-flags.
The event builder is implemented as a finite state
machine with four states: un-triggered, collecting-
triggers, triggered, and skipping. The behavior of
the event builder is controlled with three param-
eters: the pre-trigger size, the skip-tolerance size,
and the trigger-requirement size, referred to as “n-
triggers” in the following sections. The parameters
are configurable at run time, and their use during
Phase II operations is discussed below.
The builder uses two circular buffers to temporar-
ily store trigger flags: the pre-trigger buffer and
the skip buffer. The sizes of those buffers are set
by the first two parameters. The third parame-
ter controls whether multiple records with trigger
flags set to true are required to start an acquisition.
Trigger-flag data objects on the input stream are se-
quentially put into one of the two buffers, depend-
ing on the state of the builder. The builder uses
the contents of the buffers to determine whether to
switch to a new state or remain in the current state.
Trigger-flag data objects are sequentially removed
from the end of the buffers (again, depending on
the state of the builder) and put into the output
data stream with the trigger flag set according to
whether an acquisition is triggered. The next four
paragraphs describe the state-machine logic in more
detail.
The event builder starts in the un-triggered state.
Input trigger flags are sequentially placed into the
pre-trigger buffer. Once the buffer is full, and as
data continues to arrive, trigger flags from the end
of the buffer are transferred to the output data
stream with their trigger-flag variables set to false.
An event will be triggered by the arrival of n-
triggers trigger flags that are set to true (requiring
the high-threshold flag if using the two-threshold
option). If n-triggers = 1, the state switches to
triggered. If n-triggers > 1, the state switches to
collecting triggers and starts filling the skip buffer.
Note that the pre-trigger buffer does not need to
have filled before trigger flags are checked. This
avoids deadtime between events or at the beginning
of a run. In the collecting-triggers state, as further
input data arrive, once the number of true trigger
flags in the skip buffer is equal to n-triggers, the
state is switched to triggered. If not enough true
trigger flags arrive while in the collecting-triggers
state to meet the trigger-requirement size by the
time the skip-buffer is full, the state is switched
back to un-triggered. In this case trigger flags are
transferred from the pre-trigger buffer to the output
data stream to make enough room in the buffer to
fit all trigger flags that are currently in the skip-
buffer. The transferred flags are set to false and no
acquisition is written.
When the state switches to triggered, all buffered
trigger flags are moved to the output data stream
with their trigger flag variables set to true (just the
pre-trigger buffer if n-triggers = 1, and the pre-
trigger and skip buffers if n-triggers > 1). Trigger
flags set to true that arrive at the builder while it
is in the triggered state are immediately moved to
the output stream.
The event builder uses its skipping state to han-
dle gaps (e.g. due to noise fluctuations) in the
middle of an acquisition. While in the triggered
state, if a false trigger flag arrives, the event builder
switches to the skipping state, and incoming trigger
flags are directed to the skip buffer. If a true trigger
flag arrives before the skip buffer is filled, then the
event builder switches back to the triggered mode;
all of the trigger flags in the skip buffer are moved
to the builder’s output stream with their trigger-
flag variables set to true. Alternatively, if no true
flags are found before the skip buffer fills, then the
acquisition is ended. Some or all of the trigger flags
in the skip buffer are used to add a post-event mar-
gin to the acquisition: if the skip buffer size is larger
than the pre-trigger buffer size, only the excess flags
above the pre-trigger buffer size are moved to the
builder’s output stream with their trigger-flag vari-
ables set to true and the remaining flags are trans-
ferred to the pre-trigger buffer; otherwise all flags
in the skip buffer are moved to the builder’s output
stream with their trigger-flag variables set to true
and the pre-trigger buffer remains empty. Figure 7
shows an example of a sequence of incoming trigger-
flags and indicates into which buffers they would be
placed by the event builder. Figure 2 shows how the
aspects of the event builder are applied to an actual
event.
Writers. Two consumer nodes are responsible for
writing data to disk: the streaming writer and the
triggered writer. Both write data in the Egg file for-
mat, which is based on the HDF5 file format [18],
using the Monarch software library [17]. The writ-
ers also both use the concept of an “acquisition” in
the Egg standard: a single acquisition represents a
contiguously recorded signal.
The streaming writer is a consumer node with
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Incoming
trigger-flags
2: False
3: False
4: False
5: True
6: False
7: False
10: True
11: False
12: False
13: False
14: False
15: False
Pre-trigger buffer Skip buffer Skip buffer
True flag:
Switch to
collecting
2nd true flag:
Switch to
triggered
False flag:
Switch to
skipping
Buffer full:
Switch to 
un-triggered
Outgoing
trigger-flags
1: False
2: True
3: True
4: True
5: True
6: True
7: True
8: True
9: True
10: True
11: True
14: False
15: False
Un-triggered:
 Fill pre-trigger buffer
 Wait for true flag
Skipping:
 Fill skip buffer
 Wait for true flag
Triggered:
 Set buffered flags to true
 Empty buffers
8: True
9: True
1: False
12: True
13: True
Collecting:
 Fill skip buffer
 Wait for n-1 more true flags
Figure 7: Example for trigger-flag processing in the event builder following the FMT, operating in single-threshold mode with
n-triggers = 2. While in the un-triggered state, in-streaming trigger flags are constantly placed into the pre-trigger buffer.
When a new trigger flag arrives and the pre-trigger buffer is full, the first trigger flag in the buffer is moved to the output
stream. Once a trigger flag set to true arrives (trigger-flag 5), the event builder switches to the collecting state and places
incoming flags into the skip buffer. If a new trigger-flag set to true arrives before the skip buffer is full, the event builder
switches to triggered state. In this state all trigger-flags in the pre-trigger buffer (2 to 5) and in the skip buffer (6 to 8) are
labeled as true and are moved to the event builder’s output stream. The next two trigger flags (9 and 10) are true because
the data are still above threshold and are transferred directly to the event builder’s output stream. When the next incoming
trigger-flag is labeled false (11), the event builder switches to the skipping state and starts filling the skip buffer again. If no
new true-flag arrives before the skip buffer is full, the event builder switches back to the un-triggered state. In this configuration
the skip-buffer is smaller than the pre-trigger buffer and all flags in the skip buffer are labeled as true and moved to the output
stream. All records corresponding to the trigger-flags that are moved to the out-stream as true (2 to 13) will be written to an
acquisition by the triggered writer. If no flag had been labeled true in the collecting state, or a single true-flag had arrived in
the skipping state, the event builder would have returned to the previous state (as indicated by the dashed arrows).
one input: time-series data. It simply writes every
record it receives into the Egg file. If a break in the
sequence of record ID numbers is detected, it starts
a new acquisition after the break.
The triggered writer is a consumer node with two
inputs: time-series data and trigger-flag data. If
the ID values for the time-series data object and
trigger-flag data object do not match, the run is
stopped so that the data streams can be synchro-
nized. If the trigger-flag is true, then the time-series
data are written to the Egg file; if it is false, then
the time-series data are skipped. Every contiguous
block of true trigger flags forms a single acquisition.
Psyllid includes a run-time configurable parame-
ter to limit file sizes and write to multiple files se-
quentially in a single run. Psyllid guarantees that
there is always an Egg file available to write data
to without delaying the process of acquiring data.
If file writing had to be paused to close a full file
and then open a new one, the writer would not be
able to catch up with the backlog of data, result-
ing in gaps in the data written to disk. Instead,
separate threads are used to open and close files in
parallel with the processing and writing of data to
disk. A new file is opened while an existing file is
being written to, and once the existing file is full,
it can be quickly swapped with the new file so that
the writing of data can continue. The existing file
is then closed in parallel with data being written to
the new file.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Unfortunately this practice revealed an issue
with our use of the underlying HDF5 library: the
C++ interface for HDF5 is not guaranteed to be
thread-safe, which caused instabilities in this multi-
threaded use of Psyllid. Psyllid would crash oc-
casionally as a result, and the affected data were
not used. No evidence of corruption to the data
recorded while Psyllid ran stably was found. While
this problem was handled for Phase II operations
by detecting software crashes quickly, it will have
to be addressed for future use of Psyllid with Egg
files.
The decision to start writing to a new file is made
after each record is recorded. As a consequence,
triggered events are sometimes split between files.
The first part of a triggered event, which is written
to the end of a given file, will result in an event
that is included in the analyzed data set. The sec-
ond part of a triggered event, which is written to
the beginning of the next file, will not result in an
event included in the analyzed data set because of
the cut on events starting in the first 0 .5 ms of an
acquisition. This occurs for only a small fraction of
events because the maximum file size is large com-
pared to the size of a single event in the file. There-
fore, while this affects the distributions of track and
event characteristics in principle, no effect was ob-
served.
Terminators. Two nodes were implemented for
stopping a data stream without further processing:
the time and frequency terminators. These con-
sumer nodes were capable of reading data on a time
or frequency data stream, respectively, and simply
taking no action. They would therefore ensure that
the buffer for the relevant data stream would not
fill up. Only the frequency terminator was used in
Phase II of Project 8, when operating in streaming
mode.
3. T rigger optimization and performance in
Project 8 Phase II
A trigger for CRES events has to fulfill a num-
ber of requirements. The trigger should be highly
efficient at identifying reconstructable events and
identifying undesired noise as events should be min-
imized. Deadtime should be minimized as events
can occur at any point in time. If the detection ef-
ficiency (defined as the fraction of events that are
detected) depends on frequency, that dependence
becomes a critical systematic effect in the shape
analysis of a CRES spectrum. Therefore, the trig-
ger efficiency should be independent of frequency
or at least the frequency dependence has to be very
well understood. In the following sections the per-
formance of the ROACH2-Psyllid triggering system
is evaluated and the configurable parameters are
optimized for the Phase II running conditions. The
trigger efficiency with optimized parameters is stud-
ied by applying the trigger to simulated data, and
a channel central-frequency configuration is found
that minimizes the impact of the trigger efficiency
on the Phase II spectrum analysis.
3.1. Deadtime
To test if the trigger can operate without dead-
time in the production configuration (triggered
mode), an Arbitrary Waveform Generator was used
to play an IQ white noise signal to a ROACH2 that
streamed the processed signal in packets to a run-
ning Psyllid instance. The Psyllid nodes were con-
figured as described in section 2.4.4 and a FMT
threshold scan was conducted. The pre-trigger and
skip-tolerance buffer sizes were set to 0, so that for
each FMT trigger (i.e. after the FMT, without fur-
ther event building), an acquisition with a single
record would be written to file. The fraction of
records that were not written to an Egg file is shown
in Figure 8. A trigger deadtime would lead to an in-
crease of the unrecorded time fraction compared to
the theoretical expectation. No large increases were
observed; however, at the lowest trigger threshold
of 5σ, the test run resulted in a recorded time frac-
tion of 99.72% instead of the expected > 99.99%.
One must conclude that in this extreme test case, in
which every record is a new trigger, Psyllid reaches
its limitations in deadtimeless operation. During
Phase II data-taking, we used trigger thresholds of
≥ 13σ. No excess of unrecorded time is observed in
this range during the deadtime test. We conclude
that Psyllid operates effectively without deadtime
(to the precision of this test) at the trigger rates
relevant in Phase II.
3.2. Parameter optimization for CRES triggering
We optimized the trigger parameters according to
event properties, such as event duration and SNR,
in the Phase II experiment. Based on the available
disk space in Phase II and the target to take tri-
tium data for 100 days, the goal was set to achieve
a recording rate that does not exceed 2 TB/day for
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
6 8 10 12 14
Trigger threshold ( )
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Unrecorded time fraction
Expectation
Test with AWG signal
Figure 8: Fraction of unrecorded time in a trigger threshold
scan. IQ white noise from an arbitrary waveform generator
(AWG) was injected into the ROACH2 input. Psyllid was
configured to write out all records that exceeded the trig-
ger threshold (if at least 1 sample in the record was above
the threshold). The recorded time fraction follows the ex-
pectation for exponentially distributed noise power in 4096
frequency bins per record.
all channels. Since in streaming mode, the 3 chan-
nels together process 600 MB/s, this corresponds to
a data reduction of 96 %.
The trigger logic has a total of five configurable
parameters as described in section 2.4.5:
• pre-trigger time
• skip-tolerance
• n-triggers
• FMT threshold (rlow)
• FMT high-threshold (rhigh)
The best compromise between data reduction
and detection efficiency for Phase II produc-
tion tritium data-taking was achieved with
pre-trigger time = 2 ms, skip-tolerance = 0 .5 ms,
n-triggers = 2, FMT high-threshold = 13 .5σ, and
FMT threshold = 11 σ. The optimization proce-
dure is described in the following sections.
3.2.1. Trigger parameter space
The optimum pre-trigger time is determined by
the average event duration (≈1 ms), which depends
on the gas pressure and composition in the waveg-
uide, as well as on the trap configuration. In par-
ticular, deeper traps lead to longer trapping times
and hence longer events. The pre-trigger time is
set such that >90 % of all event starts would still
4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Trigger threshold ( )
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Trigger rate (Hz)
Fit
Noise simulation
Figure 9: Noise trigger rate vs. FMT threshold for
n-triggers = 1 in simulated data. Since the noise power
is exponentially distributed, the noise trigger rate follows an
exponential function.
be contained in the acquisition window even if only
the very last bin in the events triggered the ac-
quisition. The skip tolerance was scanned between
0.5 ms (12 records) and 2.5 ms (61 records), which
roughly corresponds to the range of detected track
durations under Phase II running conditions.
To pre-select a range for the high-threshold pa-
rameter, Figure 9 shows the FMT-trigger rate as
a function of a set σ threshold for simulated noise.
Note that the optimization task is not to reduce the
noise trigger rate, but instead to limit the filled disk
volume per time. Therefore the threshold choices
depend on the acquisition lengths. With the as-
sumption that the majority of triggers are noise
triggers with no re-triggers (i.e. consecutive trig-
gers within the skip-tolerance), the minimum ac-
quisition length is calculated as the sum of the pre-
trigger time plus the minimum time that is recorded
after a trigger (skip-buffer length). For a skip-
tolerance of 0.5 ms and a pre-trigger length of 2 ms,
the resulting minimum acquisition length is 2.5 ms.
To reach the data-reduction goal of≥96 %, the trig-
ger rate has to be smaller than 16 Hz. We tested
thresholds above 14σ (32 Hz simulated noise trigger
rate) for the single-trigger configuration. For the
trigger configurations with n-triggers > 1, thresh-
olds as low as 13σ were tested because the re-trigger
requirement provides additional data reduction.
For the n-triggers parameter, only two settings
were tested. Since most events at Phase II pressures
are short (<1 ms) and hence not expected to exceed
the trigger threshold very often in their lifetime, n-
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
Skip-tolerance (ms)
9
10
11
12
13
14
Retrigger -threshold
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Trigger rate reduction
Figure 10: Noise trigger rate reduction in simulated data
by requiring a second FMT-trigger before starting an acqui-
sition (n-triggers = 2). The color encodes the fraction of
acquisitions that are not recorded by requiring that a sec-
ond trigger-flag from a re-trigger threshold σ occurs within
the time limit set by the skip-tolerance. The first trigger was
set at 13σ.
triggers was either set to 1 or 2. The additional
data reduction achievable by using a second trigger
(n-trigger = 2) can be seen in Figure 10. Based on
this simulation, an FMT threshold range between
10σ and 13σ was tested. Below 10σ the additional
data reduction is not sufficient to achieve the data
volume target.
3.2.2. Parallel trigger tests with 83mKr data
The trigger parameter optimization in Phase II
was done by maximizing the event rate in real data.
Simulations were then used to study the perfor-
mance of the trigger with respect to known true
event properties (section 3.3). To find the opti-
mum trigger configuration, 83mKr K-line electrons
were recorded with all three ROACH2 channels, a,
b, and c, in parallel, with all 3 central frequen-
cies of the down-converted 100-MHz band set to
IF = 1 .41 GHz (the frequency location of the K-
line events in the IF band). The Psyllid instance
processing packets from channel c served as ref-
erence and was always configured with the same
trigger settings (in a configuration that had been
found to work reasonably well), while the channel
a and b Psyllid instances were used to test new
configurations in each run. This way, two config-
urations could be tested per parallel three-channel
run. The reference channel is needed to ensure the
result is not falsified by fluctuations of the krypton
source activity over time. The trigger parameters
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
Data volume rate (TB / day)
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4Relative event rate Reference configuration
Selected configuration
Configuration tests
0.920.940.960.981.00
Data reduction
Figure 11: Event rate vs. data volume in the trigger-
optimization test runs. Each data point originates from a
different trigger configuration. The horizontal error bars are
smaller than the markers. The configuration marked by a
red star was chosen for production data-taking. It achieves
a detection efficiency improvement of 8% over the reference
configuration while reducing the data volume on disk by an
additional 26%. See section 3.2.2 for a description of how the
reference configuration was used. With 96.7% absolute data
reduction the selected configuration satisfies the triggering
requirement.
were scanned over the pre-defined parameter space
(see section 3.2.1), and the event rates after trig-
gering and reconstruction were compared to obtain
the relative efficiency and data reduction for each
parameter combination. Figure 11 shows the de-
tected event rate versus the recorded data volume
for all tested trigger configurations. The selected
configuration (marked in red) for production data-
taking achieves a data reduction of 96 .7 %. Note
that for the Phase II tritium data set [7, 8], the cut
thresholds in the offline reconstruction were higher
to achieve a zero background rate. As a result the
relative impact of the trigger efficiency on the de-
tected event rate is sub-dominant since more low-
SNR events are missed by the offline reconstruction.
The efficiency of the trigger and the offline recon-
struction under Phase II tritium running conditions
are compared in section 3.3.2.
3.3. Trigger performance in simulation
In this section we show the performance of the op-
timized trigger configuration. The software trigger
is tested using simulated events with signal proper-
ties (e.g. SNR, track and event duration) and ADC
settings that mimic real data. The simulated data
are generated using the Locust package [25]. To im-
itate CRES data, Locust is configured to generate
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
0 1 2 3 4 5
Event start in acquisition (ms)
101
102
103
104
Counts per 40.96 s
Figure 12: True start times of simulated events in triggered
acquisitions. The pre-trigger time was set to 2 ms, the skip-
tolerance to 0.5 ms. Only events that start within the acqui-
sition are shown. Events starting before 2 ms only triggered
after the true event start. This exhibits the importance of
the pre-trigger time. The plateau from 2 ms to 2 .5 ms orig-
inates from events that start during an ongoing acquisition
initiated by a noise trigger.
white noise and add CRES-like chirps to the time
series. The simulated CRES-signal properties are
randomly drawn from probability density functions
describing their distributions, as described below,
and the resulting chirp is added by Locust’s LM-
CFakeTrackSignalGenerator. The distributions of
track duration and number of tracks in an event are
found by doing an exponential and geometric fit re-
spectively to the reconstructed real data. The SNR
distribution is obtained from the calculated power
coupled to a waveguide by simulated electrons in
a magnetic trap (see, for example, Figure 15). It
was shown that this way, the signal of real CRES
electrons is well reproduced [11].
Locust writes the generated time series to Egg
files. In addition, the LMCFakeTrackSignalGener-
ator writes the simulated event truths to a ROOT
file. To process the simulated Egg files, a frequency-
transform node is added to the Psyllid stream to
read in and Fourier transform the simulated time-
series data before processing it with the FMT and
event-builder nodes. After processing, the read-in
and triggered time-domain data are written to a
second Egg file. The acquisition start and end times
are logged in the file header, which allows for analy-
sis of the true event-start times relative to the time
of triggering (Figure 12).
0 5 10 15 20 25
Nominal SNR
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Efficiency
Event start recorded
Event reconstructed
Event detected
Figure 13: Fraction of simulated events that are recorded
by Psyllid (dark blue) or reconstructed offline (bright blue)
as a function of the event SNR. The offline reconstruction
is tuned to remove low-SNR or short events that cannot be
distinguished from noise. Therefore, the combined detection
efficiency (red) closely follows the offline reconstruction effi-
ciency, and only a small additional fraction of otherwise re-
constructed events go undetected when recording data with
Psyllid.
3.3.1. Trigger efficiency dependence on SNR and
event duration
In a CRES experiment, the most important data
point of each event is the start of the signal. In
the following analysis, an event is only counted as
detected if the event start was recorded. To mea-
sure the efficiency vs. event SNR, simulated events
of various SNRs were generated and processed by
Psyllid in triggered mode. The efficiency is calcu-
lated as the fraction of events that started within
the acquisition. The trigger efficiency dependence
on simulated SNR is shown in Figure 13. In the low-
SNR limit, the recording efficiency corresponds to
the fraction of recorded time resulting from noise
triggers. This is because in this SNR regime the
events themselves do not lead to sufficient received
power in order to trigger an acquisition. Only for
SNR≥ 3 does the combination of noise power and
signal power start to lead to an increase of recorded
events above the random noise trigger efficiency.
Because event duration follows an exponential dis-
tribution, ≈10 % of events are shorter than one
40.96 µs record length (the exact fraction varied de-
pending on run conditions); their power is likely
to be split between two records with diminished
power in each. With n-triggers = 2, events that
are not longer than one record are only likely to
be detected if a noise fluctuation causes the second
trigger. Hence the trigger efficiency does not con-
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Event duration (ms)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Trigger efficiency
Figure 14: Dependence of the fraction of recorded simu-
lated events on the event duration. Events were simulated
with random nominal SNR following a uniform distribution
(range 0 − 25). Because of noise fluctuations and the varia-
tion of event SNR in a spectrogram (caused by the upward-
sloped tracks in conjunction with the frequency response of
the DFT), longer events are more likely to surpass the trig-
ger thresholds during their lifetime.
verge to 1 for high SNR. A further dependence of
the trigger efficiency on the event duration results
from longer events having a higher chance of over-
coming the trigger thresholds (Figure 14).
3.3.2. Comparison of trigger and reconstruction ef-
ficiencies
After recording by Psyllid, Egg files are trans-
ferred to a computing cluster for offline event re-
construction. For tritium data-taking, the offline
reconstruction was optimized for efficiency (event
rate) while maintaining a false event rate below 1
per 100 days per channel at 90 % confidence [11].
In contrast, the trigger was optimized for efficiency
while observing the constraint on data volume.
Here the reconstruction and trigger efficiency are
compared for simulated events. In Figure 13 it
can be seen that the event reconstruction is stricter
than the trigger and does not tolerate the misiden-
tification of noise fluctuations as events. Conse-
quently the efficiency of reconstructing events is sig-
nificantly lower than the efficiency of triggering on
events. Conversely, for events of a uniform SNR
distribution, only a small fraction of events that
could have been reconstructed are removed by the
trigger. Under Phase II data-taking conditions, the
majority of detected events have a reconstructed
SNR between 8 and 11 (Figure 15). In this range
the relative impact of the trigger efficiency on the
event detection (trigger plus offline reconstruction)
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
Reconstructed first track SNR
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700Counts
Reconstructed events
Detected events 
(triggered & reconstructed)
Figure 15: Histogram of reconstructed SNR from a simulated
data set that mimics Phase II data. The simulated SNR dis-
tribution of all events (not shown) resembles an exponential
distribution. When both the triggering and the reconstruc-
tion are applied (dashed red), 18% of the events that could
have been found by the offline reconstruction alone (solid
blue) are removed.
is larger than at higher SNR (see Figure 13). As a
result, 18 % of events that could be reconstructed
offline are not recorded. Low-SNR events corre-
spond to electrons with a large longitudinal trajec-
tory in the magnetic trap and the waveguide. Due
to the resulting frequency modulation [5], the power
in the main carrier frequency is reduced. Because
these electrons experience a different average mag-
netic field along their trajectory than other elec-
trons, they are detected at a different frequency ac-
cording to Equation 1. In addition, the event start-
ing points are more likely to be blurred by noise and
the frequencies reconstructed by the offline analysis
are on average less precise [11]. The trigger ineffi-
ciency for these events therefore narrows the spread
of detected frequencies and improves the frequency
resolution of recorded spectra.
3.4. Trigger efficiency vs. frequency
In the Project 8 Phase II experiment, all three
ROACH2 channels were used to record tritium data
in parallel. The central frequency of each channel
was set such that the channels covered different but
overlapping frequency bands. This way, the upper
2.6 keV of the tritium spectrum and 1 .1 keV past
the endpoint were recorded. Tritium spectroscopy
aiming for a neutrino mass measurement requires
a precise shape analysis of the spectral endpoint
region. The trigger efficiency as a function of fre-
quency must therefore be precisely known. If this
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
variation is not negligible compared to the statis-
tical power of the recorded spectrum, it must be
included in the spectral analysis. We measured the
trigger efficiency across a single channel’s frequency
band and found a configuration of the central fre-
quencies that keeps the frequency dependence of
the trigger efficiency small enough that it can be
ignored in the Phase II tritium analysis.
3.4.1. Trigger efficiency in a single channel
During the first down-conversion stage on the
ROACH2, the signal is band-pass filtered. Due to
aliasing of the remaining noise outside the Nyquist
zone, the SNR of a signal decreases towards the
edges of a channel’s frequency band. To mea-
sure the SNR dependence on frequency in a chan-
nel, a tone of fixed frequency is injected while a
single channel’s central frequency is scanned from
50 MHz below to 50 MHz above the tone frequency.
Figure 16a shows the ratio of the recorded tone
power to the noise floor as a function of the tone’s
frequency position in the channel. The event-
detection efficiency is expected to follow a similar
profile. To investigate the relative detection ef-
ficiency in a channel (Figure 16b), 83mKr K-line
electrons were recorded using all three channels si-
multaneously. This time, the central frequencies of
two channels were scanned from 50 MHz below the
17.8 keV peak position to 50 MHz above. The third
channel was kept centered on the peak and provided
the reference count rate (Figure 17).
For the count rate to be indicative of the ef-
ficiency at the peak position in a channel, only
events close to the peak center f0 are counted:
|f−f0|≤ 1 MHz. Dividing the event rates in the
two scanned channels by the rate in the reference
channel yields the detection efficiency dependence
on frequency relative to the central frequency in
the reference channel. The result is shown in Fig-
ure 16b. The efficiencies in the two channels agree
and they are fitted together with a band-pass filter
function of two independent orders, p1 and p2 and
cut-off frequencies, fcut,1 and fcut,2:
Gain(f) =A· 1r
1 +

f
fcut,1
2p1
· 1r
1 +

f
fcut,2
2p2
.
(2)
A is a frequency-independent scaling of the gain.
The cut-off frequencies and orders are independent
fit parameters because the efficiency roll-off is asym-
metric. This results from the fact that events at
0 20 40 60 80 100
Frequency in channel (MHz)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2Relative SNR
(a)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25Relative efficiency
Fit
Channel a
Channel b
0 20 40 60 80 100
Frequency in channel (MHz)
4
2
0
2
4
Residuals ( )
(b)
Figure 16: SNR (a) and trigger efficiency (b) as a function
of frequency in the ROACH2 channels. The SNR was mea-
sured by injecting a test tone, whereas the efficiency was
measured with 83mKr data. The trigger efficiency depen-
dence on frequency originates from the SNR roll-off at the
channel edges as a result of noise aliasing. The trigger effi-
ciency is further reduced at high frequencies by the detection
inefficiency for short tracks (at the upper edge of the fre-
quency band, tracks are cut short because of their upward
slope). The efficiency is fitted with Equation 2. The fitted
parameters areA = 1.001 ±0.002,fcut,1 = (89.8 ±0.1) MHz,
fcut,2 = (8.4±0.1) MHz,p1 = 31.4±1.3 andp2 = −2.3±0.2.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
100
 75
 50
 25
 0 25 50 75
Frequency offset from channel c center (MHz)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140Counts per 100 kHz
Scan channels a and b 
up across 100 MHz
Channel a+b
Channel c
Figure 17: The detection efficiency as a function of frequency
is measured by comparing count rates in channels a and b
with the count rate in channel c. The central frequencies
of channels a and b (blue) are scanned in 3.125 MHz steps
across the frequency band of channel c (light red) that is
centered on the 83mKr K-line frequency (the histogram is the
measured K-line distribution). Dividing the rate of detected
events in the overlapping region of a moving channel (purple)
by the rate in the stationary reference channel c yields the
relative detection efficiency (see Figure 16b).
high frequencies can drift out of the channel’s fre-
quency band and are cut short in the reconstruc-
tion. Because of the dependence of the trigger and
reconstruction efficiency on event duration, the de-
tection efficiency decreases more sharply at the up-
per frequency edge of the channel.
3.4.2. Channel configuration for Phase II
Using the asymmetric fitted filter function from
Figure 16b, the maximum efficiency loss for any
given distance between two channel central frequen-
cies can be calculated as illustrated in Figure 18.
Note that the distance between the central fre-
quencies in Figure 18b takes discrete values since
the ROACH2 central frequencies can only be set
in steps of 3 .125 MHz. For Phase II tritium data-
taking, we required that the maximum efficiency
decrease be< 0.5 % (Figure 19). An efficiency vari-
ation on this scale is negligible compared to the
statistical uncertainty of the recorded tritium spec-
trum and it was hence neglected in the data anal-
ysis [7, 8]. Events recorded in a channel beyond
the intersection point with the neighboring chan-
nel were cut during data analysis to avoid double
counting. The central frequencies for each channel
and the transition frequencies between channels are
shown in Table 1. For context, Table 1 also provides
the definition of the frequency window used in the
Parameter IF Frequency
(GHz)
Minimum T2 analysis freq. 1 .33
Center frequency, channel a 1 .353
Transition freq., channels a→b 1 .386
T2 endpoint 1 .371
83mKr K-line 1 .41
Center frequency, channel b 1 .413
Transition freq., channels b→c 1 .446
Center frequency, channel c 1 .472
Maximum T2 analysis freq. 1 .49
Table 1: Frequency parameters for the three channels as
used for Project 8, Phase II. The minimum and maximum
frequencies for the analysis of the tritium spectrum (shaded
region in Figure 19), the T 2 endpoint frequency, and the
83mKr K-line frequency are given as context. The full fre-
quency range corresponds to the calibration range of the
detector response [8] and is not limited by the DAQ.
analysis of the tritium spectrum (shaded region in
Figure 19) and the frequency of the T 2 beta-decay
endpoint.
3.5. Summary
The DAQ system described in section 2 has been
proven to be suitable for recording CRES events in
Phase II. By optimizing the configurable trigger pa-
rameters, a data reduction of 96 .7 % was achieved.
The running conditions for Phase II tritium data-
taking were chosen to maximize the event rate by
increasing the gas pressure and using a deep mag-
netic trap. Under these conditions, the trigger
misses 18 % of all events that could be reconstructed
offline. The majority of these events are of low SNR
and offline reconstruction would yield an increased
uncertainty on their start frequency [11].
The trigger efficiency is uniform across the center
of a channel’s frequency band but decreases towards
the edges due to noise aliasing. To record a wide
frequency range with all three channels in parallel,
the central frequencies were chosen such that the
efficiency drop between channels was small enough
to be ignored in Phase II. The DAQ therefore could
be eliminated as a source of systematic uncertainty
in the analysis of the tritium spectrum [7, 8].
4. Outlook for future CRES experiments
A primary goal of the next phase of Project 8
(Phase III) is to demonstrate the use of CRES for
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
20
 15
 10
 5
 0 5 10 15
Frequency - intersection frequency (MHz)
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000
1.005
1.010
1.015
1.020Channel efficiency
Maximal 
efficiency 
drop
Relative efficiency in channel a
Relative efficiency in channel b
Ignored in channel a
Ignored in channel b
(a)
40 45 50 55 60 65 70
Central frequency distance (MHz)
0.980
0.985
0.990
0.995
1.000Relative efficiency at intercept
(b)
Figure 18: Efficiency drop between two channels: When
channels are placed adjacent to one another and their fre-
quency bands overlap, the channel efficiencies intersect (a).
Events recorded in the shaded regions are ignored in the
analysis to prevent double counting. The magnitude of the
efficiency at the intersection point (b) depends on the dis-
tance between the two central frequencies. The red star in
(b) marks the selected channel configuration for Phase II tri-
tium data-taking.
1250 1300 1350 1400 1450 1500
Frequency - 24.5 GHz (MHz)
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00Relative efficiency
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Spectrum density (arb. units)
Channel a
Channel b
Channel c
Tritium spectrum
Figure 19: Channel configuration for tritium data-taking,
overlayed by the tritium spectrum. In this configuration
the efficiency drop between channels is < 0.5 % and could
therefore be neglected in the Phase II tritium analysis [8].
The grey shaded area marks the tritium analysis region of
interest (corresponding to the energy range 16 .2–19.4 keV).
measurements using a large-volume source. The de-
sign currently being pursued by the Project 8 col-
laboration uses a large resonant cavity to detect
a narrow range of signal frequencies, as described
in [9]. Project 8 plans to demonstrate the feasibil-
ity of this technique using a series of demonstra-
tor experiments that will eventually have resonant
frequencies of ≤1 GHz. At this frequency, regard-
less of the width of the final frequency band, the
data can be directly digitized using modern signal-
processing hardware. We are currently evaluating
the AMD Zynq Ultrascale+ ZCU216 RF System-
on-Chip (RFSoC) platform, but other hardware
may be chosen for the final system. This type of
system has the advantage of providing a highly inte-
grated platform that includes high-rate digitization,
a powerful FPGA for signal processing, and high-
speed Ethernet connectivity. Overall the capabili-
ties are similar to those provided by the ROACH2
system, but in an off-the-shelf commercial package.
Signal-processing optimizations can also be made
to avoid the efficiency rolloffs at the edges of the
frequency window(s) caused by image noise.
The data acquisition for a cavity-based experi-
ment will need to digitize a single or a few chan-
nels. The sampling rate is limited on the lower end
by the size of the frequency band corresponding to
the energy and frequency region of interest. The
frequency range to be covered by electron signals
depends on the variation of magnetic field experi-
enced by each electron and on the frequency of each
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
electron’s axial motion in the magnetic trap. This
range can then be mixed down to decrease the re-
quired data-storage volume. If no down sampling is
performed, the sampling rate would be larger than
2 GS/s by a margin that allows clean low-pass fil-
tering of the signal. A 2 GS /s sampling rate for
simplicity, with IQ sampling at 8-bit, results in a
data rate of 2 GB/s, and a total volume of 63 PB
per channel for a 1-year runtime. This volume can
be reduced by means of triggering and real-time
signal reconstruction.
In Phase III the goal is to demonstrate the abil-
ity to handle event rates significantly higher than in
Phase II and eventually it is expected that events
could be ongoing at any point in time. While the
information of main interest for performing spec-
troscopy is the event-start frequencies, other fea-
tures such as the full track durations, the number
of tracks, and the distribution of frequency jumps
between them contain important information about
scattering and gas composition that is needed in the
analysis of the spectrum [8]. Several options are
being studied that would allow for a reduction in
the overall data volume, while still providing the
information necessary for precision spectroscopy.
These include storing raw data at the start of each
event and reconstructed information about the re-
mainder of the event, and storing a narrow band
of frequencies around the signal. For any data-
reduction option, random triggers that record peri-
ods of raw data independent of information about
ongoing events would allow for the extraction of un-
biased statistical information about the track prop-
erties.
5. Conclusion
In this work we have described the data-
acquisition system for Phase II of Project 8, in
which we demonstrated the ability to record three
channels each with a 100 MHz-wide bandwidth in
parallel and perform real-time signal processing and
triggering on the data to enable efficient data stor-
age at the relevant event rate. We studied the sig-
nal and noise properties such that the systematic
uncertainties for the CRES analysis could produce
the first precision measurement of the tritium beta-
decay endpoint and neutrino mass limit with CRES
[7, 8]. The lessons learned will inform the design
and implementation of the data-acquisition system
for future phases of Project 8.
6. Acronyms
ADC Analog-to-Digital Converter.
CASPER Collaboration for Astronomical Signal
Processing and Electronics Research.
CRES Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spec-
troscopy.
DAQ Data Acquisition.
FIR Finite Impulse Response.
FPGA Field-Programmable Gate Array.
HDF5 Hierarchical Data Format, version 5.
IF Intermediate Frequency.
IIR Infinite Impulse Response.
IQ In-phase / Quadrature.
RF Radio-Frequency.
ROACH2 Reconfigurable Open-Architecture
Computing Hardware version 2.
SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
UDP User Datagram Protocol.
7. Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by
the following sources: the U.S. Department of En-
ergy Office of Science, Office of Nuclear Physics,
under Award No. DE-SC0020433 to Case Western
Reserve University (CWRU), under Award No. DE-
SC0011091 to the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology (MIT), under Field Work Proposal Number
73006 at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
(PNNL), a multiprogram national laboratory oper-
ated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC05-76RL01830, under
Early Career Award No. DE-SC0019088 to Penn-
sylvania State University, under Award No. DE-
FG02-97ER41020 to the University of Washing-
ton, and under Award No. DE-SC0012654 to Yale
University; the National Science Foundation un-
der grant No. PHY-2209530 to Indiana Univer-
sity, and under grant No. PHY-2110569 to MIT;
the Cluster of Excellence “Precision Physics, Fun-
damental Interactions, and Structure of Matter”
(PRISMA+ EXC 2118/1) funded by the German
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
Research Foundation (DFG) within the German
Excellence Strategy (Project ID 39083149); the
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) Center El-
ementary Particle and Astroparticle Physics (KC-
ETA); Laboratory Directed Research and Devel-
opment (LDRD) 18-ERD-028 and 20-LW-056 at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL),
prepared by LLNL under Contract DE-AC52-
07NA27344, LLNL-JRNL-847024; the LDRD Pro-
gram at PNNL; and Yale University. Portions of
the research were performed using Research Com-
puting at PNNL and the HPC cluster at the Yale
Center for Research Computing. The 83Rb/83mKr
isotope used in this research was supplied by the
United States Department of Energy Office of Sci-
ence through the Isotope Program in the Office of
Nuclear Physics.
8. Author contributions
C. Claessens : Software, Validation, Formal Anal-
ysis, Investigation, and Writing - Original Draft;
N. S. Oblath : Conceptualization, Software, Vali-
dation, Investigation, and Writing - Original Draft;
A. Y oung : Methodology, Software, Validation,
Writing - Original Draft; B. H. LaRoque : Soft-
ware, Investigation, Writing - Review & Editing;A.
Ashtari Esfahani, N. Buzinsky , R. Cervantes,
L. de Viveiros, M. F ertl, L. Gladstone, M.
Guigue, A. Lindman, E. Novitski, W. Pet-
tus, L. Salda˜ na, P . L. Slocum, Y.-H. Sun,
P . T. Surukuchi, M. Thomas, L. Tvrznikova,
T. E. W eiss, E. Zaya, and A. Ziegler: Investi-
gation and Writing - Review & Editing; A. Ban-
ducci, M. Grando, J. Hartse, A. M. Jones,
J. A. Nikkel, A. B. T elles, and F. Thomas:
Writing - Review & Editing; S. B¨ oser: Supervi-
sion, Funding Acquisition, and Writing - Review &
Editing; B. Monreal, J. A. F ormaggio, K. M.
Heeger, K. Kazkaz, R. G. H. Robertson, G.
Rybka, T. Th¨ ummler,and B. A. V anDeven-
der: Funding Acquisition and Writing - Review &
Editing
References
[1] G. Drexlin, V. Hannen, S. Mertens, C. Weinheimer,
Current direct neutrino mass experiments, Adv. High
Energy Phys. 2013 (2013) 293986. arXiv:1307.0101,
doi:10.1155/2013/293986.
[2] J. A. Formaggio, A. L. C. de Gouvˆ ea, R. G. H. Robert-
son, Direct Measurements of Neutrino Mass, Phys.
Rept. 914 (2021) 1–54. arXiv:2102.00594, doi:10.
1016/j.physrep.2021.02.002.
[3] A. Ashtari Esfahani, et al., Determining the neu-
trino mass with cyclotron radiation emission spec-
troscopy—Project 8, J. Phys. G 44 (5) (2017) 054004.
arXiv:1703.02037, doi:10.1088/1361-6471/aa5b4f.
[4] B. Monreal, J. A. Formaggio, Relativistic cyclotron
radiation detection of tritium decay electrons as a
new technique for measuring the neutrino mass, Phys.
Rev. D 80 (2009) 051301. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.80.
051301.
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.
80.051301
[5] A. Ashtari Esfahani, et al., Electron Radiated Power
in Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy Exper-
iments, Phys. Rev. C 99 (5) (2019) 055501. arXiv:
1901.02844, doi:10.1103/PhysRevC.99.055501.
[6] D. M. Asner, et al., Single electron detection and spec-
troscopy via relativistic cyclotron radiation, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 114 (16) (2015) 162501. arXiv:1408.5362, doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.162501.
[7] A. Ashtari Esfahani, et al., Tritium Beta Spectrum
Measurement and Neutrino Mass Limit from Cyclotron
Radiation Emission Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett.
131 (10) (2023) 102502. arXiv:2212.05048, doi:10.
1103/PhysRevLett.131.102502.
[8] A. Ashtari Esfahani, et al., Cyclotron radiation emis-
sion spectroscopy of electrons from tritiumβ decay and
Kr83m internal conversion, Phys. Rev. C 109 (3) (2024)
035503. arXiv:2303.12055, doi:10.1103/PhysRevC.
109.035503.
[9] Project 8 Collaboration, The Project 8 Neutrino Mass
Experiment (2022). doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2203.07349.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.07349
[10] A. A. Esfahani, et al., Project 8 apparatus for cyclotron
radiation emission spectroscopy with 83mkr and tritium
(2025). arXiv:2503.08807.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08807
[11] A. Ashtari Esfahani, et al., Reconstruction of electron
events from cyclotron radiation emission spectroscopy
for the Project 8 experiment, in preparation (2022).
[12] N. A. Patel, et al., Characterizing the performance of a
high-speed ADC for the SMA digital backend, Journal
of Astronomical Instrumentation 3 (01) (2014) 1450001.
[13] H. Jiang, et al., Digitizing the Yuan Tseh Lee Array
for microwave background anisotropy by 5Gsps ADC
boards, in: 2012 19th IEEE International Conference
on Electronics, Circuits, and Systems (ICECS 2012),
2012, pp. 304–307. doi:10.1109/ICECS.2012.6463741.
[14] J. Hickish, et al., A decade of developing radio-
astronomy instrumentation using CASPER open-
source technology, Journal of Astronomical Instrumen-
tation 5 (04) (2016) 1641001.
[15] K. K. Parhi, D. G. Messerschmitt, Pipeline interleaving
and parallelism in recursive digital filters. I. Pipelining
using scattered look-ahead and decomposition, IEEE
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Process-
ing 37 (7) (1989) 1099–1117. doi:10.1109/29.32286.
[16] C. Claessens, B. H. LaRoque, N. S. Oblath, Psyl-
lid v1.9.3, https://github.com/project8/psyllid (2019).
doi:10.5281/zenodo.2621401.
URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2621401
[17] N. S. Oblath, et al., Monarch, accessed: 2020-5-13
(Aug. 2018). doi:10.5281/zenodo.1325961.
URL https://github.com/project8/monarch
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
[18] The HDF Group, Hierarchical data format version 5,
accessed: 2019-10-4 (2000-2010).
URL http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5
[19] N. Oblath, B. LaRoque, N. Buzinsky, dripline-
org/dripline: Dripline3 First Production Release (May
2021). doi:10.5281/zenodo.4768475.
URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4768475
[20] B. H. LaRoque, Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spec-
troscopy: first demonstration and performance bench-
marks from the Project 8 experiment, Ph.D. thesis,
UCSB (2017).
[21] D. Furse, N. S. Oblath, Midge,
https://github.com/project8/midge (2019).
doi:10.5281/zenodo.2621395.
URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2621395
[22] D. L. Furse, Techniques for Direct Neutrino Mass Mea-
surement Utilizing Tritiumβ-Decay, Ph.D. thesis, MIT
(2015).
[23] IEEE and The Open Group, The Open Group Base
Specifications, Tech. Rep. 7 (2018).
URL https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/
9699919799/functions/V2_chap02.html#tag_15_10
[24] The Linux Kernel Archives, https://www.kernel.org/
doc/Documentation/networking/packet_mmap.txt, ac-
cessed: 2020-02-21 (2009).
[25] A. A. Esfahani, et al., Locust: C++ software for simu-
lation of RF detection, New Journal of Physics 21 (11)
(2019) 113051. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/ab550d.
URL https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/ab550d
22
