===== PAGE 1 =====
Lecture #11: Background 
 
 This lecture is a bit of a potpourri of topics, but reasonably important ones, especially 
given our brief format. 
 
 The first topic is a “rehash” of rays as interfering modes (from section 3.4.2 KPL), which 
is just the Tindle result in different notation.  There is a bit of extra discussion here that is worth 
rea
ding, but otherwise it’s a repeat showing different notation. 
 
 The second topic is modes as interfering rays, the flip side of the first topic (section 3.4.3 
KPL).  Not surprisingly, the condition that neighboring eigenrays add in phase is the key here, 
and one obtains the mode eigenvalue equation directly from the rays! 
 
 The third topic, distinguishing between ray and mode arrivals in real data, is of great 
practical importance.  Given a time series of (broadband) arrivals, is what I see a ray or a mode 
arr
ival?  What should I use to model it numerically?  More important ly, perhaps; how do I 
desig
n a signal so that it produces useful, reasonable arrivals?  This is treated in detail in KPL 
3.4.4, which concentrates on the time-bandwidth criteria from Munk and Wunsch’s paper, but 
also takes that paper’s deep water discussion and puts it into the context of a shallow water 
waveguide.  This discussion naturally leads to one asking what resolution one gets with receiver 
arrays, which use wavenumber processing, as opposed to frequency.  That is treated next. 
 
 Before getting into the array “filtration” of ray and modes, there is a one page reminder 
of basic useful equations.  These should be “meh” material to most readers. 
 
 The
 next section is actually a very important one, taken from C&M appendix A9.  It 
shows how one can use arrays to filter out normal modes from a CW, p(r,t) signal.  This is the 
way one can extract a coupled modal picture from the PE, or the mode arrivals used for inversion 
from an otherwise unresolved time series.  As a historical note, Clarence Clay (co-author of 
C&M) was the person who first showed how to do mode filtration using amplitude shaded 
vertical arrays and steered horizontal arrays, which are the topics in A9.  The math in this section 
is easy, and the physics can be encapsulated by saying:  the vertical array uses the mode 
orthogonality integral and the horizontal array relies on the array beamwidth discrimination of 
modes.  C&M also look at a “matched array” with finite SNR, which is a useful addition to the 
previous “infinite SNR” discussion. 
 
 The next section, using section 8.4 of KPL, adds more discussion of mode filtration, with 
additional detail.  Of interest here is the list of “warts and wrinkles” in mode filtration techniques 
(hey, nobody’s perfect), and also some nice examples.  The subsection on “mode separation 
using steered and focused arrays” has a very nice, practice oriented, discussion of how one 
causes such arrays.  (As a small note, resolution of modes with focused array was one of my 
early contributions, which was independently derived in Russian around the same time, in the 
early 80’s).  The “horizontal steered array” section following has a good discussion of the 
angular orientation of horizontal array relative to the source, and the ambiguity it creates if this 
angle is unknown.  Farther into this section, there is a rather curious figure, 8.13, which shows 
the author (left) and colleague Art Newhall (right) deploying an AUV with a horizontal array 
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
attached.  (Ignore how clunkily we did this, with an attached receiver pressure case – this was a 
prototype from 12 years ago, and things have greatly improved!).  Using AUV’s with acoustic 
arrays is part of the present and future of this mode filtration technology, and works well as 
Figures 8.14 and 8.15 can attest.  Section 8.4 ends with a bit more discussion of focused and 
combined vertical array/travel time filtration.  Figs. 8.19 and 8.20 again show that these 
techniques work very well in practice! 
 
 Given large, capable computers, and fast, accurate numerical models, it was inevitable 
that the next technique we will discuss, matched field processing (MFP), would arise.  MFP is 
(originally) a source localization  beamforming technique that works like this:  1) put an array in 
the ocean and measure the acoustic field across it (and any array will do – though some are better 
or worse), 2) use your monster computer and fast codes to calculate the field at your array (using 
a perfectly know ocean, of course) from every possible source position of interest (e.g. out to a 
certain range R), 3) cross correlate the calculated (replica) and measured fields for all source 
positions, and 4) make a map of the cross correlation peak magnitude versus source position, 
called the “ambiguity diagram.”  The real source position will have the highest peak.  Moreover, 
the more complex the ocean, the better MFP identifies the peak.  All these simple forms of MFP 
are easy to implement.  Sounds ideal, right?  Well, yes and no, as we will see. 
 
 In section 8.2 of KPL, MFP in shallow water is discussed.  Shallow water fields are easy 
to calculate, and the size of the “source space” is small, so it makes a good MFP test bed.  Also, 
since we don’t usually have real array data for sources all over the ocean waveguide, we often 
look at synthetic data studies of MFP.  (Real experiments exist of course, with limited source 
positions – but real data analysis is a bigger scale project.)   
 
 Section 8.2.1 starts out with the simplest case, the (modal) projection of the replica field 
onto the measured field, shown in matrix form in Eq. 8.4.3.  This is called the Bartlett 
beamformer.  The “resolution kernel” for the beamformer is shown in Eq. 8.47, and is useful in 
determining  mainlobe and sidelobe widths. 
 
 In section 8.2.2, a simple example of parameter estimation (for source angle) is given, 
and the Bartlett’s angular resolution is examined.  Another important example is the performance 
of the Bartlett beamformer in noise (finite SNR), which is also discussed clearly in this section.  
The bottom line of these examples is that the Bartlett MFP beamformer is noise tolerant, but has 
low resolution and high sidelobes.  Something better seems to be needed … 
  
 The “better” solution for MFP commonly seen is the maximum likelihood (ML) 
beamformer, discussed in section 8.2.3 of KPL.  This form has a much sharper peak, and 
explicitly includes the noise, as seen in Eq. (8.66).  However, it needs high SNR to work well. 
 
 One problem that is not discussed in the notes is that of environmental mismatch.  In 
doing MFP, we assumed a “perfectly known” ocean and seabed, which is, of course, perfect 
nonsense.  But MFP localization, and particularly ML, is very sensitive to such mismatch, and 
can produce gloriously inaccurate results due to routine errors in the environmental input.  Much 
effort has been expended in making MFP robust to such error, but that is beyond the scope of the 
notes. 
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
The last topic in our “potpourri” lecture is the “time reversal” of acoustic signals received 
by an array.  (This is phase conjugation for CW signals).  The idea is an old one in physics, and 
reasonably old even in ocean acoustics (Parvelescu & Clay, 1965).  Basically, if you take an 
impulsi
ve sound created at a point (say a hand clap in a hallway or a sharp ping in the ocean), 
record it on an array (or even a single microphone/hydrophone for broadband), and then transmit 
the recording backwards in time, you will hear the sharp impulse reproduced at the source 
position!  The physical trick here is that the time reversed signal reverses the dispersion curve 
(including scattering!) imposed on the original signal by the hallway or ocean waveguide.  When 
it gets back to the original source position, it is entirely undispersed.  Only two (important) 
things ruin this nice effect:  1) Attenuation in the medium, which is not time reversible, and 2) 
cha
nges in the waveguide one transmits through (in time or space).  The latter effect involves the 
stationarity time of the medium, which largely is due to the time variation of the oceanography in 
ocean acoustics.  Last note – try this on your computer with a microphone using a hand clap - it’s 
simple a
nd works well! 
  
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
2.682 Acoustical Oceanography
Spring 2012
 
 
 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
