===== PAGE 1 =====
Spinfoam tunneling of quantum geometries in angle variables
Pietro Donà ∗1, Hal M. Haggard †2,4, Carlo Rovelli ‡1,3,4, Gowrisankar Sreeram§1, and
Jacopo Taddei ¶5
1Aix-Marseille Univ, Université de Toulon, CNRS, CPT, Marseille, France
2Physics Program, Bard College, 30 Campus Road, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY 12504, USA
3The Rotman Institute, Western University, London ON, Canada
4Perimeter Institute, 31 Caroline Street North, N2L 2Y5 Waterloo ON, Canada
5Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
November 6, 2025
Abstract
Tunneling processes offer a promising path for finding signatures of quantum gravity. While tunneling of
geometry has long been recognized in the literature, few detailed analyses in covariant Loop Quantum Gravity
have been carried out. We investigate spinfoam transitions in the holonomy representation, which naturally
encodes the extrinsic curvature of boundary states. To reduce technical complications to a minimum, we study
these amplitudes within the simple framework of the Ponzano–Regge spinfoam model for three-dimensional
Euclidean quantum gravity. We identify the geometries dominating the spinfoam path integral in the classically
forbidden regime when formulated in terms of dihedral angles as boundary data. We characterize these non-
classical geometries and show that their contributions to the spinfoam amplitude are exponentially suppressed
in the semiclassical limit via analytic continuation of the discrete gravity action. We argue that they satisfy all
the desired properties of tunneling processes. We also shed light on quantum black-to-white-hole transitions, in
particular clarifying the origin of the exponential suppression of various quantum amplitudes, while at the same
time laying the basis for a future complete calculation of the amplitude in covariant Loop Quantum Gravity.
1 Introduction
Tunneling is among the quintessentially quantum phenomena. Already playing a role in Hund’s work on molecular
spectra in 1926, it has gone on to significantly impact quantum technologies, from semiconductors to scanning
tunneling microscopy [1], and foundational quantum questions, such as the time duration of tunneling events
[2, 3]. As often formulated, one thinks of a particle or atom tunneling through a potential barrier. However, this
decomposition into a purely background structure, like a potential barrier, and a single degree of freedom of interest
evolving on it, like a particle, is less obvious, and may not be possible in general, in the context of gravitational
physics. Nevertheless, quantum gravitational tunneling can be made sense of and holds the potential to uncover
peculiar quantum signatures of quantum gravity.
One path to understanding quantum gravitational tunneling, which has a long history, is to study symmetry-
reduced models. This has been pursued extensively in quantum cosmology, where Vilenkin’s tunneling proposal
[4] and the Hartle-Hawking no-boundary proposal [5] have provided models for cosmological origins without a
big-bang singularity, for a recent review see [6]. For recent work on the no-boundary proposal see [7, 8], and for a
discussion of limitations and extensions, e.g., [9]. In this approach, there is a symmetry that allows one to introduce
an effective potential and, using this potential, recover an analogy to the standard approach to tunneling. These
∗pietro.dona@cpt.univ-mrs.fr
†hhaggard@bard.edu
‡rovelli@cpt.univ-mrs.fr
§gowrisankar.sreeram@cpt.univ-mrs.fr
¶jacopo.taddei@studio.unibo.it
1
arXiv:2507.16633v2  [gr-qc]  5 Nov 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
works are in part rooted in Coleman, Callan, and De Luccia’s investigation of quantum field theoretic tunneling
[10, 11], including gravitational feedback [12].
A different and complementary viewpoint arises from discrete path integral approaches to quantum gravity,
initiated by Ponzano and Regge [13] in three Euclidean dimensions and later extended to general spinfoam models.
Rather than relying on a symmetry that isolates a single effective degree of freedom and an associated potential,
these frameworks aim to implement the gravitational path integral directly as a sum over discrete geometries. In
the original work, Ponzano and Regge observed a remarkable correspondence between the Wigner6j symbol, an
SU(2)-invariant object, and discrete general relativity in three Euclidean dimensions. Already in that first analysis,
they highlighted that their construction naturally accommodates non-classical evolutions between distinct classical
geometries. In particular, their semiclassical treatment showed that configurations with negative squared volume
contribute exponentially suppressed quantum amplitudes, and yet their contributions do not vanishes. While they
commented on the parallelism with WKB techniques and Feynman path integrals, the interpretation of their model
as a genuine path-integral formulation of gravitational degrees of freedom quantized in the spirit of loop quantum
gravity only emerged later [14]. As a consequence, they did not identify these non-classical contributions explicitly
as tunneling. The connection between classically forbidden geometries and tunneling phenomena has been clarified
more recently [15]. In close analogy with quantum-mechanical tunneling, these works show that spinfoam ampli-
tudes naturally receive contributions from classically forbidden configurations. Tunneling of quantum geometries
is not an artifact of symmetry reduction or of introducing an external potential. Instead, it emerges intrinsically
from the discrete gravitational path integral itself.
Modern spinfoam models build on these insights. Constructions such as the Barrett–Crane and Engle-Pereira-
Rovelli-Livine (EPRL) models generalize the Ponzano–Regge idea to four dimensions and Lorentzian signature,
providing a fully background-independent setting in which quantum gravitational tunneling can be studied. Here,
spacetime geometry is fundamental, and a sum over histories of quantum geometry replaces the notion of degrees
of freedom experiencing a potential barrier. The resulting amplitudes incorporate both classically allowed config-
urations and genuinely quantum contributions associated with classically forbidden ones. Despite this conceptual
richness, tunneling in spinfoam models remains largely unexplored. Progress has been made in some interesting
directions. Lefschetz-thimble techniques [16, 17], for instance, offer powerful methods for evaluating oscillatory in-
tegrals and capturing non-perturbative effects using sophisticated contour deformation and complex critical point
techniques. In parallel, several geometrically motivated approaches, e.g. [18–20], have investigated the role of
classically forbidden configurations in Lorentzian 4D geometries. Together, these developments further indicate
the importance of studying tunneling.
The present paper contributes to this direction. Our goal is to uncover the mechanism governing tunneling
processes in spinfoam theories, thereby clarifying the semiclassical structure of loop quantum gravity and exploring
its potential phenomenological consequences. Because spinfoam models are mathematically demanding, meaningful
progress requires three ingredients: complete control of the quantum amplitudes, a deep understanding of the
underlying classical theory, and the ability to distinguish classically allowed from classically forbidden trajectories.
For state-of-the-art four-dimensional models, many of these ingredients are still under development. This motivates
our decision to work in the simpler setting of three-dimensional Euclidean quantum gravity, where the spinfoam
model is fully understood and provides an ideal laboratory for defining and testing the relevant concepts.
While some of the technical elements we employ are present in the literature, the novelty of our approach lies
in how we analyze them and in the geometric interpretation we extract. A first step in this direction was taken
in [15], which investigated tunneling in the length representation, with boundary states defined as eigenstates of
length operators. Here we complement and extend that analysis by clarifying the tunneling mechanism in terms
of the dual, holonomy- or angle-based, variables, a perspective that had not previously been explored. This dual
description provides new insights into how classically forbidden geometries appear in the quantum amplitude and
how they contribute to the spinfoam path integral. The angle representation is not only of conceptual interest but
also essential for certain physical applications.
Inparticular, theproposedblack-to-white-holetransitioninloopquantumgravity(apotentialphenomenological
signal of quantum gravity) requires a detailed understanding of how extrinsic curvature inverts across the transition
quantum region. Since this inversion is naturally encoded in the conjugate, angle-like variables, a clear formulation
of spinfoam tunneling in the dual representation is indispensable for a detailed study of this process.
Although our analysis is performed in three-dimensional Euclidean quantum gravity, the lessons we draw are
broader. They can inform future work in the more physically relevant four-dimensional Lorentzian spinfoam models.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Taking seriously the hypothesis that spinfoams recover discrete gravity in the semiclassical limit, with canonical
LQG boundary states, we expect quantum evolution to be dominated by classically allowed geometries composed of
spacelike boundary 4-simplices. Classically forbidden geometries, corresponding to Euclidean 4-simplices obtained
via analytic continuation, should then play the role of tunneling configurations. By understanding how these
configurations emerge and contribute in three dimensions, we lay the groundwork for analyzing tunneling processes
in full four-dimensional quantum gravity.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we explain why tunneling in spinfoam can be used to compute
the tunneling of a black hole to a white hole and why using coherent boundary states is not optimal for studying
tunneling in quantum geometry. In Section 3, we review the Ponzano-Regge spinfoam model and its description of
spin networks in both spin and holonomy bases. In Section 4, we analyze classical transitions in three-dimensional
Regge calculus, introducing the angle Gram matrix and discussing the classically allowed and forbidden evolution of
surfaces. In Section 5, we derive the semiclassical limit of the vertex amplitude in the holonomy basis, showing how
the dynamics of classically allowed and forbidden transitions emerge naturally through the analytic continuation
of the Regge action. We conclude with Section 6, where we discuss the implications of our results for modeling
black-to-white hole transitions in covariant loop quantum gravity, and outline possible future directions. Finally,
an important note: To maintain the streamlined logic of the main text, we have moved all detailed calculations to
the Appendices. These should not be viewed as mere review material. They form an integral part of the paper,
providing essential derivations and supporting our arguments.
2 The black-to-white hole transition and the problem with using coher-
ent states
A striking astrophysical discovery of the past few decades is the abundance and diversity of the objects that we
call black holes. Direct and indirect observations of these objects are impeccably accounted for by classical general
relativity. However, classical general relativity alone does not capture the physics of their extreme–curvature
regions, where true quantum gravity effects are likely to become important. Studying these quantum regions is
needed to understand what happens to a black hole at the end of its Hawking evaporation.
An idea for describing the dynamics of these regions is to study the possibility of a tunneling of the black hole
into a white hole (a time-reversed version of the black hole) [21–30]. This scenario offers a natural solution to
the black hole information “paradox” by erasing it entirely, is empirically testable at least in principle [31], and
provides a natural candidate for dark matter without the need for any new physics (such as new fields, particles,
or modifications of the field equations) [32, 33].
Covariant Loop Quantum Gravity offers a background-independent, Lorentzian path-integral framework that is
ideally suited to describe such spacetime quantum transitions [34]. Numerous efforts have been made to develop a
concrete implementation of the black-to-white-hole transition amplitude in Covariant LQG, first using substantial
simplifications and analytical methods [35–38] and then confirming the results with numerical calculations [39, 40].
Generally, tunneling appears in the semiclassical limit of the amplitudes of transitions between boundary states
that are classically forbidden and can be understood mathematically in terms of complex saddle points in a sum
over histories analytically continued in the complex plane. In gravity, a simple realization of this phenomenon
was studied in the Ponzano-Regge model, a Euclidean 3D spinfoam theory [15]: analytically continued classical
geometries govern these amplitudes, each contributing an exponential suppression factor given by the Regge action,
the discrete counterpart of Einstein’s action for general relativity [41–44].
Early work in full, Lorentzian loop quantum gravity has observed a similar exponential suppression of the
amplitudeforboundarystatesdefinedbycoherentstatespeakedonthespacelikeboundarygeometry, andattributed
this suppression to a tunneling process. However, as we point out below, relying on coherent boundary states to
study tunneling amplitudes can lead to misinterpretation. Non-classical geometries dominate tunneling amplitudes,
whereas coherent states are peaked on classical geometries. Here, we argue for a reinterpretation of the suppression
and consider improvements to those computations.
The black-to-white hole transition is characterized by a flip in the sign of the extrinsic curvature between the two
spacelike boundary hypersurfaces of the black and white hole regions, respectively [23]. We notice that describing
tunneling transition amplitudes purely in terms ofintrinsic geometry obscures this key aspect of the physics. It is
more convenient to move to the conjugate (holonomy) basis, and this is what we do here.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
A helpful analogy to understand this fact is the quantum reflection of a particle from a potential barrier,
when the energy of the particleexceedsthe height of the barrier [45]. Classically, a particle gets past the barrier,
while quantum mechanically, there is a non-vanishing probability of reflection. In the position representation, the
description of this phenomenon is cumbersome and requires complex coordinates. In contrast, the momentum
representation displays the reflection naturally as a reversal in the sign of the momentum. Complex positions
emerge naturally as the conjugate variables associated with classically forbidden paths described in terms of real
momenta. Likewise, transitions between geometries distinguished by their extrinsic curvature become clearer in
the holonomy basis, where they are directly encoded.
The use of extrinsic coherent states in Loop Quantum Gravity (coherent spin networks) is advantageous when
constructing kinematic states that approximate both the intrinsic and extrinsic geometry of a spacelike hypersurface
[46,47]. However, instudyingthetunnelingofquantumgeometrieswithtruncateddegreesoffreedomandaminimal
two-complex, this strategy turns out to be suboptimal. The geometries dominating the transition amplitude are
non-classical, andthecalculationofcoherentstatesbecomesexcessivelycomplicated. Thisparallelsone-dimensional
quantum mechanics, where many analytical results on reflection and transmission coefficients for plane waves exist
and are transposed to wave packets, which are linear superpositions of plane waves. In the spinfoam framework,
however, we lack the analogue of the plane-wave calculation and have directly considered coherent states (wave
packets). A genuine holonomy eigenstate basis analysis provides a clearer picture and should be preferred over the
coherent-state treatment. Some current literature on quantum geometry tunneling [35–38] employs coherent states,
unintentionally concealing the physical mechanism in technical details, which also complicates interpretation.
These calculations of the amplitude of the black-to-white hole transition were performed in a minimal discretiza-
tion. To simplify the calculations, they used the simplest triangulation consistent with a classically allowed, albeit
degenerate, evolution. The calculation led to an exponential suppression of the amplitude. At first, this seems
reasonable. However, this is misleading: the suppression arises from an artificial mismatch between the extrinsic
geometry encoded in the boundary coherent state and the extrinsic geometry that is compatible with the intrinsic
boundary data. Let us illustrate this fact with a simple example.
Consider a quantum particle whose dynamic is given by an actionS. The quantum transition between initial
and final states, described by the positionsx0 andx1, is given by the propagatorK(x0,x 1), which can be expressed
in terms of Feynman’s path integral. In the semiclassical limit, the transition amplitude is dominated by classical
paths. Thesearesolutionsoftheequationsofmotionoftheunderlyingclassicaltheory, andthetransitionamplitude
between the initial and final states (x0 and x1) reduces to [48–50]
K(x0,x 1) =
Z x1
x0
D[q]e
i
ℏS(q)≈
s
i
2πℏ
∂2Sc
∂x0∂x1
e
i
ℏSc(x0,x1) , (1)
whereSc(x0,x 1) is Hamilton’s principal function, i.e., the action evaluated on a solution of the equations of motion
compatible with the boundary conditions. For simplicity, we assume there is only one such classical trajectory.
If instead of computing the transition between two eigenstates of positionx0 and x1, we want to compute the
amplitude of the transition between two coherent states, we have to consider the boundary states peaked at the
classical positionsq0 and q1 and momentap0 and p1,
ψq0,p0,q1,p1(x0,x 1) =
 1
ℏπ
 1
2
e− 1
2ℏ (x0−q0)2
e
i
ℏp0(x0−q0)e− 1
2ℏ (x1−q1)2
e−i
ℏp1(x1−q1) . (2)
Contraction of the propagator (1) and the boundary coherent state (2) gives the amplitude
A(q0,p 0,q 1,p 1) =
Z Z
dx0 dx1K(x0,x 1)ψq0,p0,q1,p1(x0,x 1) . (3)
This amplitude can be simplified in the semiclassical limit: First, approximate the propagator with its semi-
classical form. Then, perform the integral over the boundary Hilbert space using the saddle point approximation.
The result is
A(q0,p 0,q 1,p 1)≈
 1
ℏπ
 1
2
s
2πℏi
H
∂2Sc
∂q0∂q1
e
i
ℏSc(q0,q1)e− 1
2ℏ (p0+∂Sc/∂q0)2
e− 1
2ℏ (p1−∂Sc/∂q1)2
, (4)
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
whereH =

∂2Sc
∂q0∂q1
2
+

1−i∂2Sc
∂q 2
0

1−i∂2Sc
∂q 2
1

is the Hessian of the integration over the boundary Hilbert space.
The amplitude oscillates withSc(q0,q 1), Hamilton’s principal function evaluated on the classical trajectory joining
the classical labels of the boundary stateq0 to q1. Moreover, the amplitude is exponentially suppressed unless
the boundary momentap0 andp1 agree with the classical momenta computed from Hamilton’s principal function,
p0 =−∂Sc/∂q0 and p1 =∂Sc/∂q1. This suppression is quadratic in the momenta.
In a spinfoam theory, the result is completely analogous. We carry out the calculation using the Ponzano-Regge
model for simplicity, but one should obtain the same result also in the Lorentzian EPRL model [47]. The main
differences lie in how the intrinsic geometry is encoded using the intertwiner degrees of freedom and the areas of the
triangles. With coherent boundary states peaked on the lengthsℓf and dihedral anglesξf, the transition amplitude
is peaked on a classical geometry (we ignore the orientation ambiguity and all the Hessians for simplicity)
A(ℓf,ξf)≈e
i
ℏSR(ℓf )e
P
f− 1
2ℏ (ξf−∂SR/∂ℓf )2
, (5)
where SR =P
fℓfψf(ℓf) is the Regge action (Hamilton’s principal function of Regge gravity) andψf =∂SR/∂ℓf
are the dihedral angles. If the extrinsic curvature compatible with flat three-dimensional classical dynamics is
(partially) degenerate (ψf = 0), but the corresponding boundary momentaξf do not vanish, the amplitude is
suppressed bye−ξ2
f/(2ℏ). This suppression is unrelated to tunneling. By contrast, in genuine tunneling of quantum
geometries [15] one obtains a suppressione− 1
ℏℓf|ψf (ℓf )| after analytically continuing the dihedral angles to complex
values. This contribution comes from the dynamically primary Regge action.
3 The Ponzano-Regge spinfoam model
The Ponzano-Regge spinfoam model provides a path-integral quantization of three–dimensional Euclidean gravity.
It is defined on a simplicial 2-complex, where one assigns transition amplitudes to three–valent spin network states
living on the boundary of the complex. These boundary states describe two-dimensional quantum surfaces tiled
by Euclidean triangles, with each triangle dual to a (three-valent) node of the spin network. The overall spinfoam
amplitude encodes the quantum evolution of these surfaces and factorizes into a product over vertex amplitudes,
each of which is associated with a vertex of the 2-complex (these, in turn, are dual to tetrahedra). In this section,
we recall only the minimal ingredients needed. For a more detailed exposition, see the original paper [13] and the
extensive literature that followed [51–55].
At each spinfoam vertex, the boundary spin network forms a tetrahedral graph as shown in Figure 1. We label
its four nodes (each dual to a boundary triangle) bya = 1,..., 4, and each oriented link by the ordered pairab
carrying spinjab. To each link we also associate anSU (2) holonomyhab. The boundary state is then given by
Ψjab
v (hab) =
O
n
in
O
(ab)
Djab(hab) , (6)
where we have omitted the magnetic indices that are contracted and summed over using the intertwinersin, and
following the connectivity of the graph in Figure 1. The spinsjab determine the lengthsℓab = ℓP
p
jab(jab + 1)
of the edge shared by the boundary trianglesa and b in terms of the Plank lengthℓP = ℏG. The holonomieshab
encode the extrinsic curvature of the surface via parallel transport from trianglea to triangleb. In what follows,
we set the Planck length to unityℓP = 1.
A convenient parametrization of the holonomies is provided by the twisted–geometry framework. In the
twisted–geometry description of Loop Quantum Gravity holonomies [56–58], one introduces complex spinors|zab⟩
attached to each oriented link(ab) and an angleϕab encoding the extrinsic dihedral angle. We restrict ourselves,
without loss of generality, to unit spinors to simplify the notation. One then writes
hab = ei
ϕab
2 |zba]⟨zab| −e−i
ϕab
2 |zba⟩[zab| . (7)
Here, the spinors|zab⟩ carry the intrinsic geometry (in 3D, they encode the shape of the triangles). The anglesϕab
carry the extrinsic geometry (the dihedral angles between adjacent triangles). The spinorial notation is explained
in detail in Appendix B.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Figure 1: Canonical evolution of a surface discretized by two triangles, shown at an initial stage (left pair) and a final stage
(right pair), that is, you can think of “time” as flowing from left to right in each panel. Left panel – the boundary spin
network is highlighted in blue, with spin labelsjab. Right panel – the boundary spin network is highlighted in green, with
holonomy labelshab.
The Ponzano-Regge vertex amplitude in the spin network basis is given by the Wigner6j-symbol [59]
Av(jab) =

j12 j13 j14
j34 j24 j23

. (8)
Spins and holonomies
 
jab,hab

are conjugate variables on the Hilbert space of LQG. The vertex amplitude in the
holonomy basis is related to (8) by a (non-commutative) Fourier transform on the LQG Hilbert space using the
spin network basis (6)
Av(hab) =
X
jab
Av(jab)Ψjab
v (hab) . (9)
The sum over spins can be computed exactly and gives the locally flat connection condition that imposes trivial
parallel transport within the vertex [60, 61]. Technically, this is implemented with delta functions, which is very
convenient in some circumstances, but obscures how geometry emerges from the asymptotics. So, we will proceed
using the formulation of (9).
This completes our brief review of the quantum model. We turn now to classically allowed and forbidden
transitions.
4 Classically allowed transitions
In the path integral formalism, transition amplitudes in the semiclassical regime are dominated by classical paths,
as in (1). The classical theory underlying the Ponzano-Regge spinfoam model is three-dimensional Euclidean
Regge gravity. Therefore, before analyzing the semiclassical regime of the spinfoam model, we will briefly review
three-dimensional Euclidean Regge gravity. In the first order formulation of Regge calculus [62], the canonical
variables are the edge-lengthsℓab of the triangulation and the 3D dihedral anglesϕab dual to these edges. They
are canonically conjugate to one another.
The equations of motion fix the dihedral angles as functions of the six edge lengths of a Euclidean tetrahedron
ϕab = ψab(ℓab). We will use the symbolϕab to denote the dihedral angles treated as independent variables from
the lengths, andψab(ℓab) to represent the function of the lengths that describes the dihedral angles of a Euclidean
tetrahedron [15]. Together with the equations of motion, these functions also ensure that the sum of the dihedral
angles around a bulk edge is2π, which is consistent with the flatness of 3D gravity. Regge calculus, when interpreted
as a canonical theory, describes the evolution of two-dimensional surfaces through Hamilton’s principal function
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
[55, 63, 64]. Each surface consists of a collection of triangles joined along their edges. The classical dynamics
of three-dimensional canonical gravity can then be understood as a sequence of local moves, whereEuclidean
tetrahedra are glued onto the surface in all possible ways [63], resulting in a multi-fingered evolution.
Hamilton’s Principal function is the classical Regge action evaluated on the classical trajectory of a Euclidean
tetrahedron with edge lengthsℓab and dihedral anglesψab1
SR(lab) =
X
ab
ψab(ℓab)ℓab . (10)
This description prefers lengths over angles. Can we reverse the perspective and use dihedral angles as the
preferred variables instead? Dihedral angles of a Euclidean tetrahedron are not independent: they satisfy a
constraint that is local to each tetrahedron, and this constraint must be incorporated into the action. For each
tetrahedron, we define the angle Gram matrix as
Gij(ϕab) = cosϕij, i,j = 1,..., 4 , (11)
with the conventionϕii = 0. The Gram matrix of a Euclidean tetrahedron is singular—its rank is 3, and, hence,
its determinant vanishes. The null space of the Gram matrix is spanned by a positive vector proportional to the
area vector, whose components are the areas of the faces of the tetrahedron. This is a consequence of the closure
condition. (See Appendix A for a simple derivation and further characterization.) We impose the closure constraint
det(G(ϕab)) = 0 (12)
via a Lagrange multiplier [62]. Focusing on a single tetrahedron (each tetrahedron has an independent constraint),
the first-order action reads:
SR(ℓab,ϕab) =
X
ab
ℓabϕab + ˜λ det(G(ϕab)) . (13)
The equation of motion for the dimensionful Lagrange multiplier ˜λ enforces the closure constraint (12). The
equations of motion for the angles give an expression for the edge lengths as functions of the angles [62, 65]2
δSR
δϕab
=ℓab− ˜λ81
4
V 4
(A1A2A3A4)2AaAb sinϕab =ℓab−λlab(ϕab) . (14)
In the second equality, we have used the formula
lab(ϕab) = 2
3
AaAb
V sinϕab (15)
for the lengths in terms of the volume of the tetrahedronV and the areasAb, and introduced the dimensionless
scale
λ≡ ˜λ 35
23
V 5
(A1A2A3A4)2 . (16)
We will denote aslab(ϕab) the geometric length of the tetrahedron thought of as a function of the dihedral angles.
Note that the lengths cannot be uniquely determined as an arbitrary overall scale remains. This is expected:
rescaling the tetrahedron multiplies all edge lengths by the same factor, while leaving the dihedral angles invariant.
Hence, the dihedral angles determine the shape of the tetrahedron up to a global dimensionless scaleλ.
The action (13) reduces to Hamilton’s principal function in terms of the dihedral angles when evaluated on-shell,
i.e., on solutions to the equations of motion
SR(ϕab) =λ
X
ab
lab(ϕab)ϕab . (17)
We slightly abuse notation by employing the same symbol for both (17) and (10). Their arguments distinguish
them. Note that the two Hamilton’s principal functions are related, as they describe the same evolution and,
1We use external dihedral angles to align with the quantum gravity literature. However, the angles conjugate to the lengths are the
internal ones. Nothing changes in practice, but this distinction should be kept in mind.
2We started following the derivation of the derivative of [65]. Still, we completed it in a different way to get a fully geometrical
proportionality factor between the Gram matrix cofactor andAaAb. Our derivation is in Appendix A.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
thus, the same canonical transformation. Equation (17) can also be derived from (10) by performing a Legendre
transformation
SR(ϕab) =
X
ab
ℓabϕab +
X
ab
ℓab(ϕab)ψab , (18)
where we formally invertℓab in terms ofϕab using the equation
ϕab =ψab(ℓab) , which is equivalent to ℓab =λlab(ϕab) , (19)
with an arbitrary dimensionless scale factorλ.
The constraint (12) is a bit subtle. Consider a triangle described by its edge lengths. If the prescribed edge
lengths satisfy the triangle inequalities, this guarantees the existence of a boundary triangle with positive area.
However, satisfying the triangle inequalities for all four triangles is not sufficient to ensure that they can be
assembled into a Euclidean tetrahedron. Similarly, in the dual picture, a set of dihedral angles satisfying the
closure constraint (12) and whose associated Gram matrix has a positive area vector constitutes a necessary—but
not sufficient—condition for the existence of a Euclidean tetrahedron with those angles.
We recall that triangles that can form a Euclidean tetrahedron correspond to a classically allowed evolution. If
they do not, but still satisfy the closure constraint (12), they represent classically forbidden configurations. The
squared volume is a useful quantity to distinguish between the two cases and has proven to be effective in the
length picture [15]. However, in the angle picture, it is not particularly convenient since it is not scale invariant.
How, then, can we discriminate between allowed and forbidden classical evolution? Given a Gram matrixG,
the corresponding tetrahedron is embeddable in a metric space ifG is similar to the metric of that space (in
Appendix A, we report a detailed proof inspired by [66]). For a tetrahedron to be embeddable in Euclidean space,
the corresponding Gram matrix constructed from the dihedral angles must be positive semi-definite with signature
(3, 0, 1).3 However, if a Gram matrix has signature(2, 1, 1), then no Euclidean tetrahedron is compatible with
that set of angles, although a Lorentzian one exists. The signature of a Gram matrix, defined by the dihedral
angles associated with a boundary surface and having one positive null vector, fully determines whether there is a
compatible classical evolution.
Toillustratethisindetail, weproceedwithaconcreteexample. Tosimplifytheanalysis, weconsiderasymmetric
geometry. The results are general, but for the sake of concreteness, we reduce the study to a two-parameter family
of transitions. Specifically, we examine the evolution between two surfaces, each discretized by two triangles with
non-trivial extrinsic curvature represented by the dihedral angle between the triangles. We prescribe the angles so
that the areas of the triangles are equal in pairs. For simplicity, we take these angles to be equal, settingϕ12 =ϕ34.
Between the two surfaces, there are four additional dihedral angles. We impose a symmetry by setting one pair
of opposite dihedral angles equal (ϕ13 = ϕ24), fix another (ϕ14 = ϕR = arccos
 
− 1
3

), and determine the last one
(ϕ23) by requiring that the closure constraint (12) is satisfied. The closure condition is nonlinear and generally
yields two solutions forcos(ϕ23), corresponding to different angle configurations. For the purpose of the plot, we
select the solution compatible with the presence of the regular tetrahedron where all the anglesϕab =ϕR.
We then explore whether a classical transition is allowed for different values of the two free dihedral angles
in this symmetric configuration:ϕ12 (identified withϕ34) andϕ13 (identified withϕ24), both ranging from 0 to
π. We find that there exist entire regions in this configuration space of boundary surfaces where the transition is
classically forbidden. See the plot in Figure 2. The bottom-left part of the diagram is not allowed, as the Gram
matrix constructed from these angles does not have a positive null eigenvector. In the classically allowed region, the
Gram matrix has Euclidean signature, while in the classically forbidden region, it has Lorentzian signature. At the
boundary between the two regions, the Gram matrix has rank two, corresponding to a degenerate geometry. In the
Lorentzian region, when all the angles are real, all the edge lengths are time-like (i.e., imaginary). In the top-right
corner of the plot, we highlight a special Lorentzian region where the edge lengthℓ23 becomes spacelike: the length
is real while the corresponding angleϕ23 is complex (getting the correct sign forℓ23 requires some care in selecting
the correct branch ofϕ23 as you transition between the shaded and unshaded forbidden regions). Additionally,
along the anti-diagonal, two components of the area vector diverge. For readers interested in exploring similar
setups, we provide a companion Mathematica notebook [67] to experiment with alternative configurations.
Expressing all of the geometrical quantities of a tetrahedron in terms of its dihedral angles is intricate. In
particular, an explicit formula for any given geometrical quantity can only be defined up to an overall scale, which
3We use the notation(n+, n−, n0), where n+ is the number of positive eigenvalues,n− the number of negative ones, andn0 the
number of zero eigenvalues.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
φ13
φ12
0 φR
0
π
π
π − φR
φR
π − φR
Figure 2:Classically allowed (blue) and forbidden transitions (red) between symmetric boundary data. We identifyϕ12 =ϕ34
and ϕ13 = ϕ24, fix ϕ14 = ϕR = arccos
 
− 1
3

, and determine ϕ23 using the closure condition. We select the solution
compatible with the presence of the regular tetrahedron, highlighted by a gray triangle in the plot. The blue region corresponds
to configurations where the transition is allowed (Euclidean signature), while the red background indicates classically forbidden
configurations (Lorentzian signature). In the top-right corner, we shade the region where not all edge lengths are time-like
and l23 becomes spacelike. We extend the boundary between the two signature regions to include non-positive area vectors,
shown as a dashed purple line.
must be fixed in some way, and there is no obvious choice to make. In Appendix A we detail the space of dihedral
angles giving rise to tetrahedra and explore two concrete ways of fixing this scale. Consistent with the examples
above, both of these methods give lengthslij that are imaginary whenever an edge is timlike, as expected for a
Lorentzian tetrahedron.
5 Semiclassical limit of the vertex amplitude
In quantum mechanics, the semiclassical limit corresponds to a regime dominated by paths whose action is much
larger than Planck’s constant,S≫ ℏ. This holds in both the position and momentum pictures. Traditionally, we
focus on the position one because the physical intuition is stronger, but the same analysis can be carried out in
the momentum picture as well. A similar change of picture is also possible in the context of spinfoam models, as
we show explicitly in this section. This involves a shift in perspective: from viewing the transition amplitude as
a function of the spinsjab (or lengthsℓab) to taking it to be a funciton of the holonomieshab (or dihedral angles
ϕab).
The semiclassical regime of spinfoam models corresponds toSR≫ ℓP, whereSR is the Regge action andℓP
is the Planck length. Since the dihedral angles are dimensionless and bounded (in the Euclidean case), and we
work in units whereℓp = 1, this condition is typically associated with large spin valuesj. However, it is essential
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
not to confuse this with merely large-scale geometries. Exploring the semiclassical regime in spinfoams does not
necessarily imply studying large geometrical structures—it indicates that quantum fluctuations are suppressed
relative to the classical action [50].
States in the three-valent LQG Hilbert space correspond to triangulated quantum surfaces. The quantum
transition amplitude given in equation (9) fully characterizes the quantum evolution of the boundary state in
the holonomy basis. In the simplest case of evolution, the boundary state 2-complex is described by a trivalent
tetrahedral spin network graph, as illustrated in Figure 1. We compute the asymptotics of the transition amplitude
(9) in several steps.
The semiclassical limit of the6j symbol (8) has been extensively studied in the literature [13, 51, 68–70]. In
the spin basis, the Ponzano-Regge vertex amplitude in the semiclassical regime is dominated by the geometry of a
tetrahedron whose edge lengths are compatible with the boundary spins. The amplitude is well approximated by
Av(jab)≈ 1
2
p
−12iπV (ℓab)
eiSR(ℓab) +inverted orientation, (20)
where SR is interpreted as Hamilton’s principal function defined in (10), i.e., the Regge action of the Euclidean
tetrahedron described by the edge lengthsℓab. These lengths, in turn, are directly functions of the spins.
Next, we approximate the spin network statesΨjab
v (hab) of Equation (6) in the semiclassical regime. We fix
the holonomies to represent the parallel transport around the faces of a tetrahedron and use the twisted geometry
parametrization given in (7). Each sum over magnetic indices in the contraction between Wigner matrices and
three-valent intertwiners in (6) can be replaced by an integral overSU (2) spinors, which form an overcomplete
basis of the spin representation. We then approximate the integral using saddle point techniques, as detailed
in Appendix B. In summary, the integrals are peaked when the spinors are aligned with the holonomy spinors.
The intertwiners contract with these spinors to form three-valent Livine–Speziale coherent intertwinerscn(zab)
(derived in [71]). These contributions are exponentially suppressed unless the closure condition is satisfied, which,
in this simple case, requires that the spinors describe the shape of a triangle which is compatible with the one
determined by the lengthsℓab at that node. Otherwise, they scale as a power law in the spins and do not exhibit
any oscillatory phase. Furthermore, the dihedral anglesϕab are extracted from the holonomies and are encoded in
the corresponding phases.
Ψjab
v (hab)≈N (ℓab)e−i P
abℓabϕab +inverted orientation. (21)
The overall multiplicative factorN (ℓab) = (2π)12
Q
ncn(zab)Q
ab(ℓab)2 arises from the contribution of coherent intertwiners
and the Hessians of the spinor integrals. The spinorszab are determined by the closure conditions at the nodes and
are functions of the length variables. The sum is over the spins, which ultimately are the fundamental variables,
but in the semiclassical regime are simply related to the lengths (ℓab =
p
jab(jab + 1)≈jab + 1
2).
Combining the asymptotics of the vertex amplitude (20) and the spin network state (21) we obtain
Av(hab) ≈
X
jab
N (ℓab)
2
p
−12iπV (ℓab)
exp
 
i
X
ab
ℓabψab(ℓab)−i
X
ab
ℓabϕab
!
+all possible orientations. (22)
To perform the final summation, we employ the Laplace method for discrete sums, also known as the saddle
point approximation. It is typically used for integrals, but can also be employed for summations [72, 73]. A general
overview of this technique is provided in Appendix C. While this approach is mathematically equivalent to the
Poisson summation formula often used in the spinfoam literature [16, 17, 74], it offers a more direct and intuitive
route in our context. This perspective was developed initially in [38, 75]. In this work, we refine their technique
and provide a more precise formulation, demonstrating that it is particularly effective for evaluating spin-summed
amplitudes in the semiclassical regime.
The sums over the spins are concentrated around configurations satisfying the equation
ϕab =ψab(ℓab) , (23)
which coincides with the equation we found in the classical theory (19) and is solved byℓab =λlab(ϕab). We have
already discussed the solutions to (23): there are infinitely many, labeled by a scale parameterλ. The solution
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
fixes (up to scale) the lengths as functions of the dihedral angleslab(ϕab). Note that a solution to (23) exists only
if the relative orientation between the vertex and the spin network is the appropriate one. This was also derived
explicitly—together with the Hessian of the Regge action, which coincides with ours—in [76], where it was shown
that the Hessian possesses a unique null direction associated with the scaling symmetry. Only five out of the six
spin sums can be evaluated directly. The remaining sum corresponds to the null direction of the Hessian, i.e., the
overall scale. The final form of the amplitude takes the form:
Av(hab) ≈
X
λ
N (λlab)
2
p
−12iπV (λlab)
r
(2πλ5)
− detH exp
 
iλ
X
ab
lab(ϕab)ϕab
!
+inverted orientation. (24)
The asymptotic form of the vertex amplitude (24) explicitly shows that, in the semiclassical regime, the ampli-
tude is dominated by classical tetrahedra compatible with the boundary holonomies. It oscillates with a frequency
proportional to the Regge action of the tetrahedron.
The holonomies have been decomposed: the spinorial contribution is encapsulated in the intrinsic form factor
N, while the dihedral anglesϕab govern the dynamics.
Note that for each tetrahedron at fixed scaleλ, the edge lengths are completely determined by the dihedral
angles (and thus by the holonomies), according to equation (23). Alternatively, they can be derived directly from
the Hamilton principal function by taking its derivative with respect to the dual angle.
The appearance of an infinite number of contributions is not surprising, as the amplitude expressed in group
variables can be exactly rewritten as a series of delta functions. When these delta functions are saturated, the
result is necessarily divergent. Here, we have interpreted this divergence as being related to the scale invariance of
an angle description of the vertex amplitudes.
5.1 Classically Forbidden Transitions
Finally, we are in a position to address the original question: what happens to the amplitude if there are no
Euclidean tetrahedra compatible with the boundary holonomies? As we already discussed in the previous section,
for a given set of angles such that the signature of the Gram matrix is(2, 1, 1), there are only complex solutions to
equation (19). These solutions correspond to geometric tetrahedra that are not embeddable in Euclidean space, but
can be embedded in Minkowski space. Therefore, if interpreted as the evolution of a boundary surface, the process
is classically forbidden but becomes quantum mechanically allowed, as the analytic continuation of a classical
geometry.
Hamilton’s principal function for these geometries is obtained via analytic continuation of the Regge action
for the tetrahedron, written in terms of the dihedral angles, as in equation (17). These classically forbidden
geometries dominate the amplitude, and the expression (24) is to be analytically continued to complex lengths.
Each contribution at a fixed scaleλ is exponentially suppressed by the factor
exp
 
−λ
X
ab
|lab(ϕab)|ϕab
!
, (25)
in full analogy with the analysis in the length representation, as originally hinted at in [13] and more recently
discussed in [15].
6 Discussion
Spinfoams provide a path integral formulation of Loop Quantum Gravity, describing quantum evolution of kine-
matical states associated with spatial slices. Classically, in three Euclidean dimensions, evolution corresponds to
gluing tetrahedra to these slices. This evolution is governed by Hamilton’s principal function, which is explicitly
given by the Regge action evaluated on classical geometries [63].
However, specific boundary data can be incompatible with classical evolution. In these situations, trajectories
or geometries that are classically forbidden may dominate the path integral, though their contributions to the
amplitude become exponentially suppressed. We explicitly illustrated this scenario within the context of 3D
Euclidean quantum gravity described by the Ponzano-Regge spinfoam model. Although the interpretation in
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
terms of length variables was already clear [13, 15], previously there was no concrete demonstration of how this
corresponds precisely to the dual (holonomy) picture, nor how lengths emerge explicitly.
We showed that Hamilton’s principal function, governing the classical theory, can be explicitly derived in the
holonomy picture through a Legendre transform of the length formulation. Classically forbidden geometries appear
naturally as analytic continuations of classically allowed geometries. In the length picture, lengths remain real,
while the dual variables (dihedral angles) become purely imaginary, leading to geometries with negative squared
volumes embeddable in Minkowski space.
In contrast, in the dual picture, boundary holonomies remain realSU (2) elements, describing parallel transport
between triangles of the spatial slice and preserving the reality of the dihedral angles, even for classically forbidden
geometries. However, lengths become imaginary, corresponding to timelike edge lengths embedded in Minkowski
space. In this representation, geometries again exhibit negative squared volumes, highlighting the duality and
consistency between the length and holonomy formulations of spinfoam models.
In the length picture, tunneling trajectories correspond to Lorentzian tetrahedra with a spacelike boundary.
In the angle picture, by contrast, we find Lorentzian tetrahedra with a timelike boundary, which are classically
forbiddenconfigurations. Itwouldbeinterestingtoinvestigatetheconditionsunderwhichbothlengthsanddihedral
angles become generically complex. Such situations should correspond to fully generic Lorentzian tetrahedra,
potentially revealing a richer structure of quantum transitions.
This mechanism is what is likely to govern the black-to-white hole tunneling process in Covariant Loop Quantum
Gravity [25], which provides one of the motivations for the present work. Calculations in the literature have relied
heavily on coherent boundary states [35, 38]. This approach has limitations when describing classically forbidden
transitions, particularly within minimal discretizations. We have demonstrated that interpreting exponential sup-
pression solely as tunneling events can be misleading, since a similar suppression naturally arises due to kinematical
mismatches in boundary momenta. The black-to-white hole transition is characterized by its extrinsic curvature
flip; the best way to characterize it is to focus on boundary states that are eigenstates of the extrinsic curvature.
Our analysis confirms that holonomies almost completely specify classical geometries, including classically for-
bidden ones, by fixing the shape of the tetrahedron but not its scale. As a consequence, the amplitude is dominated
by an infinite number of classical geometries differing by an overall scale factor. At each fixed scale, classically
forbidden configurations contribute an exponentially suppressed term proportional to the product of lengths and
extrinsic curvature. We also note that the need to understand the analytic continuation of the Ponzano–Regge
amplitude in terms of complex dihedral angles was emphasized in [77], where the generating function for the6j
symbol is interpreted as a Ponzano–Regge amplitude with a scale-invariant boundary state defined solely by di-
hedral angles. This also leads to an infinite number of classical geometries differing by an overall scale factor,
precisely as discussed in the present manuscript.
Extending these insights to four-dimensional Lorentzian models suggests that the suppression of tunneling
amplitudes should take the formexp(−m2Φ), wherem relates to the black hole mass andΦ to the traversal time
of the black-to-white hole spacetime. However, considerable additional work is required to completely validate this
scenario.
We also identified a critical issue in prescribing boundary states solely by extrinsic curvature in the black-
to-white transition. The scale ambiguity inherent in this formulation complicates interpretation, as the scale is
directly tied to the black hole’s mass, a physically significant parameter.
These challenges suggest that we may need to reassess the current calculation and refine the discretization strat-
egy to ensure it accurately captures the essential physical features of the black-to-white hole transition. Specifically,
future discretization schemes must account for: (1) the classically forbidden nature of the transition region; (2)
the relationship between the intrinsic geometry of the discretization and the black hole mass; and (3) the mirrored
intrinsic geometries and flipped extrinsic curvatures of black and white hole regions.
Addressing these considerations will be crucial for future theoretical and numerical advances in quantum grav-
itational descriptions of black hole transitions. A possible solution could be to consider a hybrid boundary state.
We might construct a boundary state that is an eigenstate of the length operator (area in 4D) for the perimeter
links, and an eigenstate of the holonomy (extrinsic curvature) for the remaining links. Such a hybrid state could
naturally fix the scale, perhaps directly in terms of the physical parameters of the black hole, and simultaneously
characterize the spatial surfaces of both the black and white holes purely through their extrinsic curvature. This
approach would allow the use of necessary symmetries. However, this proposal remains speculative, and a detailed
analysis, possibly involving a comprehensive rethinking of the triangulation scheme, is left for future work.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Additionally, it would be interesting to extend our analysis to Lorentzian models. We limited our study to
the Euclidean model for simplicity. However, several Lorentzian (2+1) spinfoam models exist [19, 53, 78–80].
Investigating how our results generalize to these cases would be beneficial and is expected to yield similar insights.
In this context, a natural extension is the possible connection to the BTZ black hole [81]. Could similar
techniques be employed to study a quantum version of the BTZ black hole [82]? Specifically, does it also tunnel
into a BTZ white hole? Notably, this scenario requires a cosmological constant, suggesting the need to explore
quantum group formulations of spinfoam theory [83–86]. A positive aspect here is that curved geometry naturally
fixes the scale due to the inherent cosmological length scale.
Finally, similar methods could be utilized in studying bouncing cosmology within spinfoam cosmology frame-
works [87, 88]. Our insights might help characterize the spinfoam equivalent of the Hartle–Hawking state, poten-
tially leading to interesting cosmological applications of the theory.
7 Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the ID# 62312 grant from the John Templeton Foundation, as part of the “The Quantum
Information Structure of Spacetime (QISS)” Project (qiss.fr). H.M.H. and C.R. acknowledge support from the
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics through its affiliation program and its distinguished research chair
program, respectively. Research at Perimeter Institute is supported by the Government of Canada through the
Department of Innovation, Science, and Economic Development, and by the Province of Ontario through the
Ministry of Colleges and Universities.
Appendices
A Dihedral angles giving rise to tetrahedra and the Gram matrix
The geometric interpretation of the Gram matrix and its structure provides a useful technique for reconstructing
simplices from angular data. In particular, when the Gram matrix satisfies a specific set of algebraic properties,
it encodes the complete geometry of ann-simplex. This appendix makes these connections precise. We focus on
zero-curvature simplices, though many of the useful properties of Gram matrices generalize to simplices of non-zero
constant curvature [89, 90]. The utility of Gram matrices, using a variety of formulations, has been a recurring
theme in the quantum gravity literature, e.g. [91–93].
For ann-simplex embedded in a space of Euclidean signature, the Gram matrixG is defined by the cosines of
the dihedral angles between its(n−1)-dimensional facets:
Gij = cosϕij, with ϕii = 0, (26)
where ϕij is the external angle between thei-th andj-th facets. More generally, the precise form of the Gram
matrix depends on the metric signature of the embedding space, but the closure condition
n+1X
i=1
Ai ˆni = 0 (27)
imposes a universal geometric constraint. HereAi is the (n− 1)-volume (e.g., area forn = 3, volume forn = 4) of
the i-th facet, and⃗ ni is its unit outward-pointing normal vector.
As a consequence, the Gram matrix is always singular, with rankn, for a closed simplex. Its one-dimensional
kernel corresponds precisely to the vector of facet volumes. In other words, the kernel ofG is spanned by a single
positive vector
A = (A1,A 2,...,A n+1), (28)
encoding the magnitude of the facets, for example, in 3D, the areas for a tetrahedron. This geometric interpretation
holds regardless of the metric signature of the space (e.g., Euclidean, Lorentzian). Hence, the closure condition and
corresponding rank deficiency of the Gram matrix provide a signature-independent way of characterizing simplices.
To make this precise, consider a real, symmetric matrix of size(n+1)× (n+1) whose diagonal entries are1 and
such that:
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
A1 The matrix is singular with rankn.
A2 There exists apositive vectorA = (A1,...,A n+1) such thatGA = 0.
Because G is real and symmetric, it is diagonalizable by an orthogonal matrixQ,
G =Q ˜GQ⊤, (29)
with ˜G the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues ofG. The condition rank(G) =n implies that one of these eigenvalues
is zero, reflecting the fact that the simplex satisfies closure.
A real, symmetric matrixG that satisfies the conditions described above can be taken to be the Gram matrix
of a geometricaln-simplex. However, for this simplex to be embeddable in a metric space, the matrix must admit
a factorization consistent with the metric of the embedding space. This is formalized by the condition thatG can
also be written as
G =P⊤ηP, (30)
whereη is the metric tensor of the ambient space andP is a matrix whose columns represent the normal vectors to
the facets of the simplex, appropriately normalized. This condition is what properly generalizes Equation (26) to
arbitrary signature and guarantees that the simplex can be embedded in a space with the appropriate Euclidean
or Lorentzian signature. Forn> 3, general metric signatures are possible, though with less clear physical interpre-
tations. The proof below is equivalent to the singular value decomposition proofs of [94, 95], and, in this context,
was inspired by the work [66].
Euclidean case. A tetrahedron is embeddable in Euclidean space if its Gram matrixG is positive semi-definite
with signature (n, 0, 1), that is, withn positive eigenvalues and one zero eigenvalue corresponding to closure. In
this case, the diagonalized form of the Gram matrix, the˜G of (29), has non-negative entries with a single zero.
Because ˜G is positive semi-definite, we can define a square root matrix˜G1/2, and rewrite the diagonalization as
G =Q ˜G1/2η ˜G1/2Q⊤, (31)
with η = I the Euclidean metric. IdentifyingP = ˜G1/2Q⊤, this confirms thatG admits the required factorization
(30), and thus corresponds to a Euclidean simplex. (Of course, here and below, the last row of zeroes inP can be
dropped to recover the standard form of the normal vectors.)
Lorentzian case. In contrast, a tetrahedron is embeddable in Minkowski space if the Gram matrix has signature
(n− 1, 1, 1): n− 1 positive eigenvalues, one negative, and one zero. While there is no general constructive theorem
that guarantees a decomposition of the form (30) in the Lorentzian case, the same diagonalization ofG as a
symmetric matrix (29) still holds. Let us order the eigenvalues in˜G such that the first entry is the negative one.
We can then define a matrixP such that
P =| ˜G|1/2Q⊤, (32)
and use the identity| ˜G|1/2η| ˜G|1/2 = ˜G, whereη = diag(−1, 1,..., 1, 0) is the Minkowski metric in a basis adapted
to the eigenvalue signature. This leads to the identity
P⊤ηP =Q ˜GQ⊤ =G, (33)
thus establishing thatG corresponds to a realizable tetrahedron in Minkowski space.
This decomposition provides a clear and coordinate-independent criterion: the signature of the Gram matrix
determines the embeddability of the simplex, and whether the corresponding geometry is Euclidean or Lorentzian.
Assumptions A1 and A2 have another important consequence for the realizability of given data: they determine
the structure of the cofactors of a related area Gram matrix, and this, in turn, can be used to fix the scale of the
embedded simplex.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Gram matrix cofactors. Given a matrixM, itsij-th minor, denoted ˆMij, is the determinant of the matrix
obtained by removing thei-th row andj-th column ofM. The ij-th cofactor is this minor adjusted by a sign,
ˆCij = (−1)i+j ˆMij. Define a matrixA = diag(A1,...,A n+1), and a new area Gram matrix by
GA = AGA⊤ = AGA. (34)
The cofactors of the area Gram matrix have a special structure.
Consider the sum of the entries of thei-th row ofGA. Let ⃗Ai =Aiˆni, then this sum is given by
⃗Ai·
X
j
⃗Aj =Aiˆn⊤
i η
X
j
Aj ˆnj

= 0 (fixed i), (35)
where, again,η is the metric of the embedding space; the sum vanishes due to closure. BecauseGA is symmetric,
this also holds for all of the columns. In mathematics, a square matrix all of whose rows and columns sum to the
same value is called semi-magic.4 Hence, GA is semi-magic. The importance of this is that semi-magic matrices
with vanishing row and column sums have all cofactors identically equal. For a proof, see [96], but the physical
implication is immediate: each cofactor ofGA is simply a different way of computing the volumeV of then-simplex
to a power, specificallyV 2(n−1). ForGA, and henceG, to correspond to a geometricaln-simplex it is essential that
all of these ways of computing the volume must agree. The specific power2(n− 1) can be proven by induction or
by dimensional analysis. Here we forgo the induction, choosing instead to illustrate the simplest non-trivial case
in the hope that that will best serve the reader’s intuition.
Given the normal vectorsˆni to the triangles of the tetrahedron and the null vector of areas(A1,...,A 4), we
can construct the area Gram matrixGA out of the matrix whose columns are the area vectors⃗Ai =Aiˆni and its
transpose
GA =


⃗A1
⃗A2
⃗A3
⃗A4

.
⃗A1 ⃗A2 ⃗A3 ⃗A4

. (36)
Theij-th area cofactor, call itˆCij, is obtained by removing thei-th entry from the row matrix and thej-th entry
from the column matrix. As an example,
ˆC12 = (−1)1+2



⃗A2
⃗A3
⃗A4

.
⃗A1 ⃗A3 ⃗A4


= (−1)3



⃗A2
⃗A3
⃗A4



.
⃗A1 ⃗A3 ⃗A4
 , (37)
here the determinant function distributes over the3× 3 matrices of the vectors that were not omitted. But, the
determinant of the matrix of 3 area vectors of a tetrahedron has a geometrical meaning
⃗Ai ⃗Aj ⃗Ak
 = ⃗Ai· (⃗Aj× ⃗Ak) = 9
2V 2 , (38)
whereV 2 is the (signed) squared volume of the tetrahedron. The cofactor sign ensures that all of the triple products
are computed with the same orientation and so all cofactors give strictly the same positive result
ˆCij = 81
4 V 4 . (39)
This illustrates the general result of the previous paragraph.
Afirstmethodforfixingthephysicalscaleandalloweddihedralangles. Theresultsofthelastsubsection
have two important consequences: they provide a natural way to fix the physical scale in the angle description in
this paper, and they illustrate an important consistency check needed when taking the angle approach. We discuss
each of these consequences in turn.
As was emphasized in Section 4, the description of zero-curvature tetrahedra in terms of dihedral angles is
necessarily scale invariant. A particular physical scenario will usually fix this overall scale, and it is important to
4If the diagonal and anti-diagonal also sum to the same value, the matrix is termed magic.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
have a mechanism to fix the scale in the model. The result above on cofactors furnishes a simple way to do this
if the physical scenario fixes the volume of the model building blocks, i.e., the tetrahedra in the Ponzano-Regge
model. Concretely, this can be achieved by the following algorithm: Specify your angles, e.g., along the lines of the
example in Section 4, and compute the null vector of the resulting angle Gram matrix. If the entries of the null
vector are not all positive, this is not a good angle configuration (this is the criterion that leads to no constructible
tetrahedra below the diagonal in Figure 2). If they are positive, then use them to form the area Gram matrix and
compute any cofactor. Scale this cofactor to reach the desired physical volume scale. Because the cofactor involves
V 4, this uniformly works for both classically allowed and forbidden configurations with the same sign.
This short algorithm highlights another feature of the cofactor result: by selecting only angle Gram matrices
with completely positive null vectors, we are picking out the physical dihedral angles that lead to constructible
tetrahedra, both Euclidean and Lorentzian. Indeed, in [90], Feng Luo proves that dihedral angles leading to a
Euclidean simplex must satisfy three conditions on their angle Gram matrix: (a)detG = 0, (b) all angle cofactors
ˆGij must be positive, and (c) all principal submatrices ofG must be positive definite. Principal submatrices are
those that arise by deleting the same row and column, and an effective way of determining whether one is positive
definite is by checking that all of its principal minors are positive. Our assumption A1 agrees with (a), and it is
now apparent that our assumption A2 is a more physical manifestation of Luo’s (b).
There is a good reason that we have no condition corresponding to Luo’s condition (c). Relaxing this condition
is exactly what allows for the classically forbidden Lorentzian tetrahedra. Nonetheless, this condition plays an
interesting role in our analysis too. The curious reader will find several efforts in the literature to directly charac-
terize the angles giving rise to Euclidean tetrahedra via inequalities on these angles and their cosines. The angle
Gram matrix conditions above are by far the most efficient way of doing this. However, through a bit of exper-
imentation, one will quickly find that these conditions are often redundant if all you want is to determine which
regions in the angle space correspond to Euclidean tetrahedra. With our richer dynamical perspective, however,
the vanishing of any principal minor carries interesting information, often signalling a transition between different
kinds of Lorentzian tetrahedra as in the example at the end of Section 4.
The angle Gram matrix is the essential tool for characterizing the space of geometrical tetrahedra in terms of
dihedral angles.
A second method: the circumradius as scale factor.Many of the computations familiar from length Regge
calculus can also be done completely in the angle formulation. Here we lay out these formulas and explore a second
method of setting the physical scale using the circumradius of a tetrahedron.
Following [65] at the outset, we use Jacobi’s formula for the derivative of the determinant of the Gram matrix
to find d detG
dϕij
=− sinϕij ˆGij , (40)
where ˆGij is theij-th cofactor of the angle Gram matrix. From Equations (38) and (39) we get
ˆGij = 81
4
V 4
(A1A2A3A4)2AiAj (41)
and substituting this into (40), we get
d detG
dϕij
=−81
4
V 4
(A1A2A3A4)2AiAj sinϕij =−81
4
V 5
(A1A2A3A4)2
AiAj sinϕij
V =−35
23
V 5
(A1A2A3A4)2lij , (42)
where lij is the edge length around which the dihedral angleϕij is measured.
We can rewrite this relation using a scale unique to a tetrahedron. One convenient, and seemingly embedding
independent choice (if we limit ourselves to real dihedral angles) is the tetrahedron’s circumradiusR. From [97]
and [98], we have
R2
− detM = 22
310
(A1A2A3A4)4
V 10 , and (A1A2A3A4)3 = (6V )8
84( ˆG11 ˆG22 ˆG33 ˆG44)1/2 , (43)
whereR is the circumradius of the tetrahedron andM is related to the Hadamard square of the Gram matrix and
is defined by
Mij = sin2ϕij = 1−G2
ij , with ϕii = 0 . (44)
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
Therefore,
d detG
dϕij
=− 1
4R
√
− detMl ij . (45)
Using the above formulas, we derive the squared edge lengths in terms of the circumradius
l2
ij = 16R2
− detM sin2ϕij·
ˆGij
ˆGkl
·
q
ˆG11 ˆG22 ˆG33 ˆG44 , (46)
wherekl denotes the pair of indices disjoint toij, e.g. ifij = 12, thenkl = 34. We observe that classically forbidden
tetrahedra, when parametrized in terms of real dihedral angles, are such thatR > 0, ˆGij > 0 and detM > 0.
Therefore, lij is imaginary, and all the edges of the tetrahedron are timelike.
Similarly, the volume of the tetrahedron expressed in terms of the dihedral angles and the circumradiusR is
given by [98]
V = 32
3 ·
ˆG11 ˆG22 ˆG33 ˆG44
(− detM)3/2 ·R3 . (47)
At first glance, the formula for the lengths (46) looks quite distinct from that derived from the Regge action (14).
However, using these results, we can show that (15) is equivalent to (46):
l2
ij = 16R2
− detM sin2ϕij·
ˆGij
ˆGkl
·
q
ˆG11 ˆG22 ˆG33 ˆG44
= 16R2
− detM sin2ϕij· AiAj
AkAl
·
q
ˆG11 ˆG22 ˆG33 ˆG44
=
2
3
2AiAj
V
2
sin2ϕij , (48)
where we used (41) in the second equality and applied (43) to derive the result.
B Spin networks in the semiclassical regime
In this appendix, we present a detailed derivation of the asymptotic expression for the spin network wavefunction
of Equation (6)
Ψjab
v (hab) =
O
n
in
O
(ab)
Djab(hab) , (49)
here we omit the magnetic indices, which are contracted and summed according to the connectivity of the graph
in Figure 1. The intertwineria of a three-valent nodea, and acting as the source of three links, is
|ia⟩ =imabmacmad|jabmab⟩|jacmac⟩|jadmad⟩ , with imabmacmad =
jab jac jad
mab mac mad

, (50)
here imabmacmad is the Wigner3j-symbol andb,c,d ̸=a. Similarly, the Wigner matrix
Djab
nabmab(hab) =⟨jab,nab|Djab(hab)|jab,mab⟩ , (51)
represents the SU(2) holonomy associated with the group variablehab. We indicate a spinor and its conjugate
transpose by|z⟩ and⟨z|, with
|z⟩ :=
 z0
z1

, ⟨z| := (¯z0, ¯z1) . (52)
This Dirac notation simplifies the bookkeeping of spinorial indices. Spinor space is equipped with a natural inner
product given by⟨w|z⟩ := ¯w0z0 + ¯w1z1 and a duality mapJ : C2→ C2, given by
J|z⟩ =|z] :=
 −¯z1
¯z0

. (53)
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
Moreover, a spinor and its dual form an orthogonal basis of C2 and represent a vector in R3 built from the
matrix elements of the Pauli matrices⟨z|⃗ σ|z⟩ =−⃗ nand [z|⃗ σ|z] =⃗ n. We work with unit norm spinors to simplify
calculations (and without loss of generality). The degrees of freedom of the holonomy hab can be effectively
parametrized using the twisted geometry parametrization introduced in [99–101] and recently used to describe the
emergence of geometries from locally flat spin foam theories [61]. This parametrization reads
hab = ei
ϕab
2 |zba]⟨zab| −e−i
ϕab
2 |zba⟩[zab| . (54)
The spinors represent the normals to the sides of the triangles within their respective planes, thereby encoding the
intrinsic geometry (i.e., the edge shapes) of the source and target triangles of the holonomy. The angleϕab encodes
the rotation between the source and target, capturing the extrinsic curvature between the source and the target
triangles.
To derive the asymptotic expression for (49), we replace the resolution of the identity over the orthonormal
basis|jabmab⟩ with the one over the overcomplete spinorial basis
X
mab
|jabmab⟩⟨jabmab| −→
Z
dµ(wab)|jabwab⟩⟨jabwab| , (55)
where dµ(wab) is the normalized Gaussian measure onC2 [101]. In terms of the spinorial basis, the Wigner matrix
becomes exponential
⟨jab,wba|Djab(hab)|jab,wab⟩ =⟨wba|hab|wab⟩2jab =e2jab log⟨wba|hab|wab⟩ , (56)
while the intertwiner becomes a coherent intertwiner sharply peaked around the classical geometry of a triangle
[71]: jab describes the length of edges of the triangle while the spinorswab describe the unit normalsˆni to these
edges in the plane of the triangle. The norm of the coherent intertwiner,ca(wab), is given by
ca(wab) =⟨ia|

|jabwab⟩|jacwac⟩|jadwad⟩

=⟨ia|
Z
SU (2)
dg g▷|jabwab⟩|jacwac⟩|jadwad⟩ , (57)
and is exponentially suppressed unless the normals to the edges satisfy the closure condition [71]. Geometrically,
this means that the spinors must be compatible with the intrinsic geometry (shape) of the triangle determined by
the spins, or equivalently, by the edge lengths.
We perform the spinorial integration using the complex Laplace method (saddle-point method). We focus
solely on the integral of the Wigner matrix, which we assume dominates. The coherent intertwiner also contains
an oscillatory part, however, to simplify the calculation, we neglect it and assess its impact a posteriori.
For each link, there are two integrals: one overwab and one overwba. We represent the contributions from the
nodes using a generic function,f(wab,wba) as a placeholder:
Z
dµ(wab)dµ(wba)f(wab,wba)e2jab log⟨wba|hab|wab⟩ . (58)
We parametrize the holonomy as in (54), and take it to be fixed. The stationary phase equations are
hab|wab⟩ =e
iα
2|wba⟩ , h ab|wab] =e−iα
2|wba] . (59)
These have two possible solutions
|wab⟩ =eiβ|zab⟩ and|wba] =eiβ′
|zba⟩ , or |wab] =eiχ|zab⟩ and|wba⟩ =eiχ′
|zba⟩ . (60)
The integral (58) is peaked when the spinorsw are aligned or anti-aligned with the source and target spinors
associated with the SU(2) holonomyhab assigned to the link(ab). The phasesβ and χ remain arbitrary and are
completely redundant due to the invariance of the original expression. We fix these phase factors to1. As a result,
the integral extracts the extrinsic geometry (specifically, the dihedral angleϕab) from the holonomy and encodes
it as a phase
Z
dµ(wab)dµ(wba)f(wab,wba)e2jab log⟨wba|hab|wab⟩≈f(zab,zba) (2π)2
p
|HS(z)|
e−ijabϕab +inverted orientation. (61)
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
The Hessian,|HS(z)|, can also be computed at the stationary points (59). From (56) the exponent is
Sst = 2jab log⟨wba|hab|wab⟩ := 2jab logT . (62)
Thus, the first and second variations are
δSst = 2jab
1
TδT and δ2Sst = 2jab
 1
Tδ2T− (δT )2
T 2

. (63)
In our case, the spinors vary in such a way that they preserve their (unit) norms, and so
|wab⟩−→ |wab⟩ +ϵ|vab⟩
|||wab⟩ +ϵ|vab⟩|| ≈|wab⟩ +ϵ|vab⟩− 1
2ϵ2(⟨vab|vab⟩)|wab⟩ +O(ϵ3) . (64)
and similarly for|wba⟩. Plugging in T = ⟨wba|hab|wab⟩ and the variation of the spinors|wab⟩ and|wba⟩ and
collecting terms with one and two powers ofϵ, we get
δT =⟨wba|hab|vab⟩ +⟨vba|hab|wab⟩ , and δ2T = 2⟨vba|hab|vab⟩−⟨ wba|hab|wab⟩ (⟨vab|vab⟩ +⟨vba|vba⟩) . (65)
The Hessian Matrix of the functionSst (62) can then be derived from (63) decomposing the perturbation spinorsvab
andvba in the respectivewab andwba spinorial basis. We can write the Hessian in the basis(|wab⟩,|wab],|wba⟩,|wba])
and get:
HS =


0 0 −jab 2jab
[wba|hab|wab]
⟨wba|hab|wab⟩
0 0 0 −jab
−jab 0 0 0
2jab
[wba|hab|wab]
⟨wba|hab|wab⟩ −jab 0 0

 . (66)
The Hessian evaluated at the stationary point(s) is thus
|HS| = (jab)4 , (67)
or at the same level of approximation that we are working in the large scaling limit,(ℓab)4. If we now reassemble the
six Wigner matrices on the links of our spin network with the four coherent state norms (coming from the nodes),
we observe that each functionca(wab) gets evaluated at the spinors associated with the holonomies, denotedzab.
Notice that the closure condition imposed by the intertwiners forces the saddle points found in the link integrals
to be synchronized. Therefore, there are only two contributing saddle points altogether.
Moreover, the asymptotic form ofca(zab) is known, as it was explicitly computed in [71], and it is non-oscillatory
provided the spinors are compatible with the spins. The assumption of computing the link integrals independently is
justified: the only additional constraint introduced by the intertwiners is the closure condition, which is independent
of the equations governing the link integrals.
Thus the asymptotic expansion of the spin network wavefunction is
Ψv(hab)jab≈N (ℓab)e−i P
abℓabϕab +inverted orientation, (68)
where the multiplicative factor is
N (jab) = (2π)12
Q
ncn(zab)Q
ab(ℓab)2 . (69)
C The discrete Laplace method
The Laplace method is a technique for approximating integrals that depend on a large-scale parameter [72, 73]. It
is widely used in physics and, in its complex, steepest-descent form, in spin-foam calculations [102–109]. The same
idea can also be applied to derive the asymptotic expansion of sums. We briefly review this version of the method
here. Suppose we wish to evaluate sums of the form
S =
bX
k=a
g(k)ef (k) , (70)
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
wheref is assumed to be a smooth, homogeneous function, attaining its unique global maximum at some pointk0
in the intervala<k 0 <b , andg(k) varies slowly in comparison to the rapid exponential growth induced byef (k).
Introducing a large parameterλ≫ 1 and using homogeneity off, we can write
S =
bX
k=a
g(k) exp
 
λf(k/λ)

. (71)
Intuitively, asλ→∞ , terms in the sum for whichx =k/λ lies far fromx0 =k0/λ become exponentially small, so
the main contribution arises fromk near tok0. We assumexa = a/λ < x0 < xb = b/λ. By expanding both the
exponent and the prefactor in a neighborhood ofx0, one replaces the discrete sum by a Gaussian-type sum, which
in turn is approximated by a Gaussian integral.
In practice, the procedure unfolds in three stages. First, one locates the saddle point by solving
f′(x0) = 0 , f ′′(x0)< 0 , (72)
confirming a local maximum. Next, Taylor expansion gives
f(x) =f(x0) + 1
2f′′(x0) (x−x0)2 +··· , (73)
while takingg(k) =g(λx)≈g(λx0) at leading order:
S≈
bX
k=a
g(λx0) exp
h
λf(x0) + λ
2f′′(x0) (x−x0)2
i
. (74)
Factoring out constants and writing the sum as a Riemann sum inx =k/λ,
S≈λg (λx0)eλf (x0)
bX
k=a
1
λ exp
h
λ
2f′′(x0)
 k
λ−x0
2i
, −→ λg (k0)ef (k0)
Z xb
xa
e
λ
2 f ′′(x0)(x−x0)2
dx . (75)
Finally, by extending the integral to±∞ (the error is exponentially small [72, 73]), one obtains the leading-order
approximation
S≈g(k0)ef (k0)
s
2πλ
−f′′(k0/λ) . (76)
Higher-order corrections arise systematically by retaining further terms in the Taylor expansions and by account-
ing for boundary effects whenk approaches the summation limits. The generalization to many dimensions and
to complex-valued functions proceeds analogously to the steepest-descent extension of the Laplace method for
integrals.
As an example, consider the sum (which we know exactly)
Tn =
nX
k=0
n
k
2
=
2n
n

. (77)
Using Stirling’s formula n
k
2
∼ 1
2πnx (1−x)enf (x) , (78)
where x =k/n, and
f(x) =−2x log(x)− 2(1−x) log(1−x) . (79)
This gives
Tn≈
nX
k=0
1
2πnx (1−x)enf (x) , with x = k
n . (80)
First, we locate the saddle by solving
f′(x) = 2 log 1−x
x = 0 → x0 = 1
2 , → f′′(x0) =−8< 0 , f (x0) = 2 log 2. (81)
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
Next, we apply the Laplace method to the sum to find
S≈n 1
2πnx 0(1−x0)enf (x0)
s
2π
−nf′′(x0) = en2 log 2
√πn = 4n
√πn . (82)
Finally, one can also check the approximation via Stirling’s formula directly on the exact summation (77)
2n
n
2
∼ 4n
√πn , (83)
in perfect agreement with the leading order of the Laplace-method approximation.
References
[1] E. Merzbacher, “The early history of quantum tunneling,”Physics Today, vol. 55, pp. 44–49, 08 2002.
[2] R. Ramos, D. Spierings, I. Racicot, and A. M. Steinberg, “Measurement of the time spent by a tunnelling
atom within the barrier region,”Nature, vol. 583, no. 7817, pp. 529–532, 2020.
[3] V. Sharoglazova, M. Puplauskis, C. Mattschas, C. Toebes, and J. Klaers, “Energy–speed relationship of
quantum particles challenges bohmian mechanics,”Nature, vol. 643, no. 8070, pp. 67–72, 2025.
[4] A. Vilenkin, “Creation of universes from nothing,”Physics Letters B, vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 25–28, 1982.
[5] J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, “Wave function of the universe,”Physical Review D, vol. 28, no. 12, p. 2960,
1983.
[6] J.-L. Lehners, “Review of the no-boundary wave function,”Physics Reports, vol. 1022, pp. 1–82, 2023. Review
of the No-Boundary Wave Function.
[7] J. Feldbrugge, J.-L. Lehners, and N. Turok, “No smooth beginning for spacetime,”Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 119,
p. 171301, Oct 2017.
[8] J.Feldbrugge, J.-L.Lehners, andN.Turok, “Lorentzianquantumcosmology,” Phys. Rev. D,vol.95, p.103508,
May 2017.
[9] J. Feldbrugge, J.-L. Lehners, and N. Turok, “Inconsistencies of the New No-Boundary Proposal,”Universe,
vol. 4, no. 10, p. 100, 2018.
[10] S. Coleman, “Fate of the false vacuum: Semiclassical theory,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 15, pp. 2929–2936, May
1977.
[11] C. G. Callan and S. Coleman, “Fate of the false vacuum. ii. first quantum corrections,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 16,
pp. 1762–1768, Sep 1977.
[12] S. Coleman and F. De Luccia, “Gravitational effects on and of vacuum decay,”Physical review d, vol. 21,
no. 12, p. 3305, 1980.
[13] G. Ponzano and T. Regge, “Semiclassical limit of racah coefficients,”pp 1-58 of Spectroscopic and Group
Theoretical Methods in Physics. (Block ed.) North-Holland, 10 1969.
[14] C. Rovelli, “The Basis of the Ponzano-Regge-Turaev-Viro-Ooguri quantum gravity model in the loop repre-
sentation basis,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 48, pp. 2702–2707, 1993.
[15] P. Dona, H. M. Haggard, C. Rovelli, and F. Vidotto, “Tunneling of quantum geometries in spinfoams,”Phys.
Rev. D, vol. 109, no. 10, p. 106016, 2024.
[16] M. Han, Z. Huang, H. Liu, D. Qu, and Y. Wan, “Spinfoam on a Lefschetz thimble: Markov chain Monte
Carlo computation of a Lorentzian spinfoam propagator,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 103, no. 8, p. 084026, 2021.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
[17] M. Han, Z. Huang, H. Liu, and D. Qu, “Complex critical points and curved geometries in four-dimensional
Lorentzian spinfoam quantum gravity,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 106, no. 4, p. 044005, 2022.
[18] B. Dittrich and J. Padua-Argüelles, “Lorentzian quantum cosmology from effective spin foams,”Universe,
vol. 10, no. 7, 2024.
[19] J. Borissova, B. Dittrich, D. Qu, and M. Schiffer, “Spikes and spines in 3D Lorentzian simplicial quantum
gravity,” Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 42, no. 5, p. 055016, 2025.
[20] J. Borissova, B. Dittrich, D. Qu, and M. Schiffer, “Spikes and spines in 4D Lorentzian simplicial quantum
gravity,” JHEP, vol. 10, p. 150, 2024.
[21] C. Rovelli and F. Vidotto, “Planck stars,”Int. J. Mod. Phys. D, vol. 23, no. 12, p. 1442026, 2014.
[22] C. Rovelli, “Planck stars as observational probes of quantum gravity,”Nature Astron., vol. 1, p. 0065, 2017.
[23] H. M. Haggard and C. Rovelli, “Quantum-gravity effects outside the horizon spark black to white hole
tunneling,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 92, no. 10, p. 104020, 2015.
[24] T. De Lorenzo and A. Perez, “Improved Black Hole Fireworks: Asymmetric Black-Hole-to-White-Hole Tun-
neling Scenario,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 93, no. 12, p. 124018, 2016.
[25] M. Christodoulou, C. Rovelli, S. Speziale, and I. Vilensky, “Planck star tunneling time: An astrophysically
relevant observable from background-free quantum gravity,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 94, no. 8, p. 084035, 2016.
[26] E. Bianchi, M. Christodoulou, F. D’Ambrosio, H. M. Haggard, and C. Rovelli, “White Holes as Remnants:
A Surprising Scenario for the End of a Black Hole,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 35, no. 22, p. 225003, 2018.
[27] A. Ashtekar, J. Olmedo, and P. Singh, “Quantum transfiguration of kruskal black holes,”Physical review
letters, vol. 121, no. 24, p. 241301, 2018.
[28] J. Lewandowski, Y. Ma, J. Yang, and C. Zhang, “Quantum Oppenheimer-Snyder and Swiss Cheese Models,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 130, no. 10, p. 101501, 2023.
[29] K. Giesel, M. Han, B.-F. Li, H. Liu, and P. Singh, “Spherical symmetric gravitational collapse of a dust cloud:
Polymerized dynamics in reduced phase space,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 107, no. 4, p. 044047, 2023.
[30] P. Martin-Dussaud, “The lifetime of white hole remnants isM 5.” https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.05492, 4 2025.
[31] M. Christodoulou, A. Perez, and C. Rovelli, “Detecting Planck-Scale Dark Matter with Quantum Interfer-
ence,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 133, no. 11, p. 111001, 2024.
[32] B. Carr and F. Kuhnel, “Primordial Black Holes as Dark Matter: Recent Developments,”Ann. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci., vol. 70, pp. 355–394, 2020.
[33] A. M. Green and B. J. Kavanagh, “Primordial Black Holes as a dark matter candidate,”J. Phys. G, vol. 48,
no. 4, p. 043001, 2021.
[34] C. Rovelli,Quantum gravity. Cambridge university press, 2004.
[35] M. Christodoulou and F. D’Ambrosio, “Characteristic time scales for the geometry transition of a black hole
to a white hole from spinfoams,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 41, no. 19, p. 195030, 2024.
[36] F. D’Ambrosio, M. Christodoulou, P. Martin-Dussaud, C. Rovelli, and F. Soltani, “End of a black hole’s
evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 103, no. 10, p. 106014, 2021.
[37] F. Soltani, C. Rovelli, and P. Martin-Dussaud, “End of a black hole’s evaporation. II.,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 104,
no. 6, p. 066015, 2021.
[38] M. Christodoulou, F. D’Ambrosio, and C. Theofilis, “Geometry transition in spinfoams,”Class. Quant. Grav.,
vol. 41, no. 19, p. 195029, 2024.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
[39] P. Frisoni, “Numerical approach to the black-to-white hole transition,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 107, no. 12,
p. 126012, 2023.
[40] M. Han, D. Qu, and C. Zhang, “Spin foam amplitude of the black-to-white hole transition,”Phys. Rev. D,
vol. 110, no. 12, p. 124055, 2024.
[41] S. K. Asante, B. Dittrich, and J. Padua-Argüelles, “Complex actions and causality violations: applications
to Lorentzian quantum cosmology,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 40, no. 10, p. 105005, 2023.
[42] B. Dittrich and J. Padua-Argüelles, “Lorentzian Quantum Cosmology from Effective Spin Foams,”Universe,
vol. 10, no. 7, p. 296, 2024.
[43] M. Bojowald and B. Jones, “Tunneling dynamics in cosmological bounce models,”JCAP, vol. 11, p. 037,
2021.
[44] M. Motaharfar and P. Singh, “Tunneling wave function proposal with loop quantum geometry effects,”Phys.
Rev. D, vol. 107, no. 6, p. 066026, 2023.
[45] R. L. Jaffe, “Reflection above the barrier as tunneling in momentum space,”American Journal of Physics,
vol. 78, pp. 620–623, 06 2010.
[46] T. Thiemann, “Complexifier coherent states for quantum general relativity,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 23,
pp. 2063–2118, 2006.
[47] E. Bianchi, E. Magliaro, and C. Perini, “Coherent spin-networks,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 82, p. 024012, 2010.
[48] C. Morette, “On the definition and approximation of Feynman’s path integrals,”Phys. Rev., vol. 81, pp. 848–
852, 1951.
[49] C. DeWitt-Morette, “The Semiclassical Expansion,” Annals Phys., vol. 97, pp. 367–399, 1976. [Erratum:
Annals Phys. 101, 682 (1976)].
[50] R. D. Carlitz and D. A. Nicole, “Classical Paths and Quantum Mechanics,”Annals Phys., vol. 164, p. 411,
1985.
[51] J. Roberts, “Classical 6j-symbols and the tetrahedron,”Geom. Topol., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 21–66, 1999.
[52] L. Freidel and D. Louapre, “Ponzano-Regge model revisited I: Gauge fixing, observables and interacting
spinning particles,” Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 21, pp. 5685–5726, 2004.
[53] L.FreidelandE.R.Livine, “Ponzano-ReggemodelrevisitedIII:Feynmandiagramsandeffectivefieldtheory,”
Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 23, pp. 2021–2062, 2006.
[54] J. W. Barrett and I. Naish-Guzman, “The Ponzano-Regge model,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 26, p. 155014,
2009.
[55] C. Rovelli and F. Vidotto, Covariant Loop Quantum Gravity: An Elementary Introduction to Quantum
Gravity and Spinfoam Theory. Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics, Cambridge University
Press, 11 2014.
[56] L. Freidel and S. Speziale, “Twisted geometries: A geometric parametrisation of SU(2) phase space,”Phys.
Rev. D, vol. 82, p. 084040, 2010.
[57] L. Freidel and S. Speziale, “From twistors to twisted geometries,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 82, p. 084041, 2010.
[58] M. Dupuis, J. P. Ryan, and S. Speziale, “Discrete gravity models and Loop Quantum Gravity: a short
review,” SIGMA, vol. 8, p. 052, 2012.
[59] V. K. Khersonskii, A. N. Moskalev, and D. A. Varshalovich,Quantum Theory Of Angular Momentum. World
Scientific Publishing Company, 1988.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
[60] E. R. Livine and S. Speziale, “Physical boundary state for the quantum tetrahedron,”Class. Quant. Grav.,
vol. 25, p. 085003, 2008.
[61] P. Donà, “Geometry from local flatness in Lorentzian spin foam theories,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 107, no. 6,
p. 066011, 2023.
[62] J. W. Barrett, “First order Regge calculus,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 11, pp. 2723–2730, 1994.
[63] B. Dittrich and P. A. Hőhn, “Canonical simplicial gravity,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 29, p. 115009, 2012.
[64] B. Bahr and B. Dittrich, “Regge calculus from a new angle,”New J. Phys., vol. 12, p. 033010, 2010.
[65] S. K. Asante, B. Dittrich, and H. M. Haggard, “The degrees of freedom of area regge calculus: dynamics,
non-metricity, and broken diffeomorphisms,”Classical and Quantum Gravity, vol. 35, no. 13, p. 135009, 2018.
[66] S. K. Asante and B. Borgolte, “Causal structure and topology change in (2+1)-dimensional simplicial gravity,”
arXiv:2507.10697, 2025.
[67] P. Donà, H. M. Haggard, and G. Sreeram, “Angles gram matrix and tetrahedron reconstruction.”https:
//github.com/qg-cpt-marseille/AnglesGramMatrixTetrahedron, 2025. Version 1.0.
[68] M. Dupuis and E. R. Livine, “Pushing Further the Asymptotics of the 6j-symbol,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 80,
p. 024035, 2009.
[69] V.Aquilanti, H.M.Haggard, A.Hedeman, N.Jeevanjee, R.G.Littlejohn, andL.Yu, “Semiclassicalmechanics
of the wigner 6j-symbol,”Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, vol. 45, no. 6, p. 065209, 2012.
[70] P. Donà, F. Gozzini, and G. Sarno, “Searching for classical geometries in spin foam amplitudes: a numerical
method,” Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 37, no. 9, p. 094002, 2020.
[71] E. R. Livine and S. Speziale, “A New spinfoam vertex for quantum gravity,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 76, p. 084028,
2007.
[72] N. G. de Bruijn,Asymptotic Methods in Analysis. New York, NY: Dover Publications, 1981.
[73] C. M. Bender and S. A. Orszag,Advanced Mathematical Methods for Scientists and Engineers, vol. 1 of
Applied Mathematical Sciences. New York, NY: Springer, 1999.
[74] J. S. Engle, W. Kaminski, and J. R. Oliveira, “Addendum to ‘EPRL/FK asymptotics and the flatness
problem’,” Class.Quant.Grav., 12 2020. [Addendum: Class.Quant.Grav. 38, 119401 (2021)].
[75] F. D’Ambrosio, Semi-Classical Holomorphic Transition Amplitudes in Covariant Loop Quantum Gravity.
PhD thesis, Marseille, CPT, 2020.
[76] B. Dittrich, L. Freidel, and S. Speziale, “Linearized dynamics from the 4-simplex Regge action,”Phys. Rev.
D, vol. 76, p. 104020, 2007.
[77] V. Bonzom and E. R. Livine, “Self-duality of the6j-symbol and Fisher zeros for the tetrahedron,”Ann. Inst.
H. Poincare D Comb. Phys. Interact., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 73–119, 2022.
[78] S. Davids,A State sum model for (2+1) Lorentzian quantum gravity. Other thesis, University of Nottingham,
10 2000.
[79] L. Freidel, “A Ponzano-Regge model of Lorentzian 3-dimensional gravity,”Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl., vol. 88,
pp. 237–240, 2000.
[80] J. D. Simão, “A new 2+1 coherent spin-foam vertex for quantum gravity,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 41,
no. 19, p. 195015, 2024.
[81] M. Banados, C. Teitelboim, and J. Zanelli, “The Black hole in three-dimensional space-time,”Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol. 69, pp. 1849–1851, 1992.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
[82] M. Geiller and K. Noui, “BTZ Black Hole Entropy and the Turaev-Viro model,”Annales Henri Poincare,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 609–640, 2015.
[83] H. M. Haggard, M. Han, and A. Riello, “Encoding Curved Tetrahedra in Face Holonomies: Phase Space of
Shapes from Group-Valued Moment Maps,”Annales Henri Poincare, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 2001–2048, 2016.
[84] H. M. Haggard, M. Han, W. Kamiński, and A. Riello, “Four-dimensional Quantum Gravity with a Cosmo-
logical Constant from Three-dimensional Holomorphic Blocks,”Phys. Lett. B, vol. 752, pp. 258–262, 2016.
[85] M. Han, “Four-dimensional spinfoam quantum gravity with a cosmological constant: Finiteness and semi-
classical limit,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 104, no. 10, p. 104035, 2021.
[86] M. Han and Q. Pan, “Complex Chern-Simons theory with k=8N and an improved spinfoam model with a
cosmological constant,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 112, no. 2, p. 026015, 2025.
[87] E. Bianchi, C. Rovelli, and F. Vidotto, “Towards Spinfoam Cosmology,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 82, p. 084035,
2010.
[88] F. Vidotto, “Many-nodes/many-links spinfoam: the homogeneous and isotropic case,”Class. Quant. Grav.,
vol. 28, p. 245005, 2011.
[89] H. M. Haggard, M. Han, and A. Riello, “Encoding curved tetrahedra in face holonomies: phase space of
shapes from group-valued moment maps,”Annales Henri Poincaré, vol. 17, pp. 2001–2048, 2016.
[90] F. Luo, “On a problem of fenchel,”Geometriae Dedicata, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 277–282, 1997.
[91] L. Freidel and D. Louapre, “Asymptotics of 6j and 10j symbols,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 20, pp. 1267–1294,
2003.
[92] B. Dittrich and S. Speziale, “Area-angle variables for general relativity,”New J. Phys., vol. 10, p. 083006,
2008.
[93] V. Bonzom and E. R. Livine, “A New Recursion Relation for the 6j-Symbol,”Annales Henri Poincare, vol. 13,
pp. 1083–1099, 2012.
[94] H. M. Haggard and R. G. Littlejohn, “Asymptotics of the wigner 9j-symbol,”Classical and Quantum Gravity,
vol. 27, no. 13, p. 135010, 2010.
[95] H. M. Haggard, Asymptotic analysis of spin networks with applications to quantum gravity. University of
California, Berkeley, 2011.
[96] Julien, “Question on cofactors.” Mathematics Stack Exchange. https://math.stackexchange.com/q/406132
(version: 2013-05-29).
[97] G. Richardson, “The trigonometry of the tetrahedron,”The Mathematical Gazette, vol. 2, no. 32, pp. 149–158,
1902.
[98] Y. Cho, “Volume of a tetrahedron in terms of dihedral angles and circumradius,”Applied Mathematics Letters,
vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 45–47, 2000.
[99] L. Freidel and E. R. Livine, “U(N) Coherent States for Loop Quantum Gravity,”J. Math. Phys., vol. 52,
p. 052502, 2011.
[100] E. F. Borja, L. Freidel, I. Garay, and E. R. Livine, “U(N) tools for Loop Quantum Gravity: The Return of
the Spinor,” Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 28, p. 055005, 2011.
[101] E. R. Livine and J. Tambornino, “Spinor Representation for Loop Quantum Gravity,”J. Math. Phys., vol. 53,
p. 012503, 2012.
[102] J. W. Barrett, R. J. Dowdall, W. J. Fairbairn, F. Hellmann, and R. Pereira, “Lorentzian spin foam amplitudes:
Graphical calculus and asymptotics,”Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 27, p. 165009, 2010.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
[103] M. Han and M. Zhang, “Asymptotics of Spinfoam Amplitude on Simplicial Manifold: Euclidean Theory,”
Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 29, p. 165004, 2012.
[104] M. Han and M. Zhang, “Asymptotics of Spinfoam Amplitude on Simplicial Manifold: Lorentzian Theory,”
Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 30, p. 165012, 2013.
[105] J. Engle, I. Vilensky, and A. Zipfel, “Lorentzian proper vertex amplitude: Asymptotics,” Phys. Rev. D,
vol. 94, no. 6, p. 064025, 2016.
[106] B. Bahr and S. Steinhaus, “Investigation of the Spinfoam Path integral with Quantum Cuboid Intertwiners,”
Phys. Rev. D, vol. 93, no. 10, p. 104029, 2016.
[107] P. Donà, M. Fanizza, G. Sarno, and S. Speziale, “SU(2) graph invariants, Regge actions and polytopes,”
Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 35, no. 4, p. 045011, 2018.
[108] P. Donà, M. Fanizza, G. Sarno, and S. Speziale, “Numerical study of the Lorentzian Engle-Pereira-Rovelli-
Livine spin foam amplitude,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 100, no. 10, p. 106003, 2019.
[109] P. Donà and S. Speziale, “Asymptotics of lowest unitary SL(2,C) invariants on graphs,”Phys. Rev. D, vol. 102,
no. 8, p. 086016, 2020.
26
