===== PAGE 1 =====
An interpretation-independent formulation
of the measurement problem
Antoine Soulas ∗1 2
1Quantum Optics, Quantum Nanophysics and Quantum Information, Faculty of Physics,
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
2Institute for Quantum Optics and Quantum Information (IQOQI), Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria
Abstract
In this paper, we do not try to solve the measurement problem, but rather to properly formulate it.
One of the reasons why it still lacks a precise, agreed definition is that the problem may take very different
aspects depending on the interpretation of quantum mechanics embraced. Inspired by the methodology
of theory-independent results like Bell’s theorem, we propose to identify the common root of the puzzle
in an interpretation-independent wayi.e. as a property of the empirical statistics only, before deriving
its philosophical consequences. The key observation is that quantum matter can not be described by a
Kolmogorovian probabilistic theory. Arguing that the Kolmogorov axioms of probability theory are the
postulates of epistemic uncertainty leads us to reformulate the measurement problem as the impossibility
to build an ontology independent of epistemology for quantum matter. Said differently, there exists no
God’s-eye view on quantum systems. Although it is meaningless to solve the measurement problem as
defined in this way, insofar as it is a feature of the universe’s statistics, such a formulation may on the
other hand bring side benefits. In particular, we argue that it allows to: (i) shed a new light on the variety
of interpretations; (ii) propose a fundamental reason why quantum mechanics and general relativity are
so incompatible, not relying on purely mathematical or technical arguments; (iii) guide the quest for
quantum gravity.
Contents
1 Introduction 2
2 No God’s-eye view on quantum matter 3
2.1 Quantum statistics are non-Kolmogorovian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.1.1 The LTP and quantum (de)coherence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.1.2 Boole and Bell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.1.3 Formulation of the measurement problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2 The philosophical significance of non-Kolmogorovianity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2.1 Observers: when the philosophical difficulty worsens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3 Applications 8
3.1 Comparing the main interpretations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 Why is quantum gravity so hard? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4 Conclusion 10
∗antoine.soulas@univie.ac.at
1
arXiv:2609.03409v1  [quant-ph]  3 Sep 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
A Appendix 11
A.1 Proof of ‘Boole’s theorem’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1 Introduction
Despite a century of controversy, the quantum measurement problem remains as far as it gets from a con-
sensual solution within the quantum foundations community; see for instance Schlosshauer (2011)’s com-
pilation of the views of 17 physicists and philosophers on the topic, or the broader surveys (Schlosshauer
et al., 2013; Sivasundaram and Nielsen, 2016; Gibney, 2025). The theory of decoherence and several
no-go theorems have certainly provided some important new insights, but have not ended the debates —
quite the contrary. An important difficulty is that the problem still lacks a precise, universally accepted
definition that would constitute a starting point from which to discuss. Indeed, authors generally don’t
spend much time defining it, but rather quickly embark in an explanation of their own solution or related
thoughts. Moreover, the puzzle may manifest itself in various ways depending on the interpretation of
quantum mechanics (QM) embraced, leading to divergent opinions, not only on what can be considered
as an acceptable answer, but also on the very question to address (Rovelli, 1996; Schlosshauer, 2011;
Muller, 2023). This lead Feynman (1982) to admit: ‘I cannot define the real problem, therefore I suspect
there’s no real problem, but I’m not sure there’s no real problem’. That’s why, before even trying to solve
the measurement problem (whatever this might mean), it seems reasonable to first properly formulate
what the issue is, and to do so in an interpretation-independent way.
Upon reviewing the dedicated literature, it turns out that, although the proposed solutions may
differ widely, almost all definitions of the problem can roughly be cast into two categories. The most
frequently encountered one expresses it as the conflict between unitary evolution and collapse (Everett III,
1957; Peres, 1986; Albert, 2009; Griffiths, 2013; Bacciagaluppi, 2013; Zwirn, 2014; Gisin, 2018; Barrett,
2019; Mermin, 2022; Cuffaro, 2023). This can also include authors like Bell (1990) and Brukner (2017)
relating the issue to the ill-defined notion of ‘measurement’, as it is clear that they too have in mind the
absence, in textbook QM, of a clear rule prescribing when to apply either one or the other postulate.
The predominance of this definition in the literature probably owes to the major historical influence of
Von Neumann (1932)’s book in shaping standard paradigms for quantum physics, including his classic
presentation of the measurement problem (section VI.1. in the reference). However, this century-old
textbook formulation can not be taken as a universal definition. Indeed, most of the currently existing
interpretations of QM do not even have a notion of collapse in the first place: had physicists first
formulated quantum theory in the terms of Bohmian mechanics or many-worlds for instance, the problem
would never have been phrased this way. Furthermore, QM is a probabilistic theory, hence it is absolutely
normal that it involves an update of the probabilities when new information is acquired. The coexistence
of such a discontinuous epistemic update together with a law governing the evolution of the probabilities
is a natural feature of any dynamical probability theory, as was already emphasised by Brukner (2017);
Mermin (2022) and many others.
A second category of authors express the problem as the puzzle that only one outcome (or possibly
any outcome at all) occurs during a quantum measurement (Dieks, 1989; Saunders, 1994; Leggett, 2005;
Healey, 2012; Bub, 2020; Vaidman, 2022; Adlam, 2023; Karlsson, 2025; Goldstein, 2025). A closely related
variant, found for example in Zeh (1970), Fine (1993), Bassi et al. (2013) or Myrvold (2022), reckons
that the problem arises when considering superpositions of macroscopic states; here too, the mystery
seems to lie in some apparent conflict with the uniqueness of experiences at our scale. This formulation,
though, can not serve as a satisfying definition either. Again, since QM is a probabilistic theory, it is
normal that it involves a variety of potential outcomes, althoughof courseonly one is to be observed by
an experimentalist. In fact, if one day a physicist were to obtain several outcomes in a single experiment,
or none,thiswould be a much bigger mystery than what the measurement problem already is!
At least three presentations stand out of this classification. Rovelli (1996), aware that the mea-
surement problem ‘assumes different faces within different interpretations’, explains that ‘a complete
description of the problem can only be based on a survey of already proposed solutions’. Such a survey
allows him to conclude, beyond any specific choice of interpretation, that there exists indeed an unsolved
problem. He further claims that the issue arises from a misplaced use of observer-independent physical
states in quantum theory, and can thus be solved by embracing a relational view on quantum systems.
Despite being more accurate than the previous cited works, we will in the sequel depart from Rovelli’s
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
stance on two important aspects: first, we will argue that the problemcanbe described without refer-
ring to how the different interpretations encounter it; and second, that the measurement problem is a
philosophical astonishment entailed by some empirical fact about the universe, hence it is hopeless to
‘solve’ it in the usual sense of the term.
The most interpretation-independent characterisation of the problem we could find is due to Maudlin
(1995), who proposed an interesting way to frame it as an incompatibility between three assumptions1.
His approach is precious insofar as it really allows to take a step back and compare or classify the
different interpretations (although we will in the sequel disagree with Maudlin’s conclusion that some
interpretations manage to solve the problem, while others fail). One can only regret that it does not
provide apositivedefinition of the puzzle, so that the reader might be left with a feeling of not grasping
exactlywhatis weird with QM. Yes, we learn that one assertion has to be dropped, but what can we do of
this? Thispossiblyexplainswhy, 30yearsafterthepublicationofMaudlin’sarticleandalthoughitiswell-
known in the community, his proposal did not have a major influence in the debate on the measurement
problem. Notably, most of the abovementionned papers do not even cite Maudlin’s definition.
Finally, Wallace (2016) provides an analysis of the QM formalism and concludes that ‘we are led to
paradox if we think of [the quantum state] as either representational or probabilistic’, two notions that
are normally well-distinguished in classical mechanics. In short,|ψ⟩can not be representational because
it is unclear what a superposition of eigenstates should represent, but it can not either be treated as
probabilistic because the statistics in an interference experiment does not fit with ‘the basics of the
probabilistic conception’. This proposal shares some similarities with the approach that we are going to
pursue in this paper, especially an effort to exhibit the patterns of quantum probabilities that distinguish
them from standard probability theory. We will try to go further, though, in order to make the idea more
compelling, in particular without relying on the concept of quantum state nor on any specific feature of
the standard formulation of QM.
The strength of Bell’s theorem and other theory-independent no-go results resides in the fact that
they would still hold and remain relevant even though QM were to be superseded tomorrow by a new
theory. They tell us something about the world that physics will never forget. To achieve this, they stick
to the experimental inputi.e.they merely constrain which kinds of probabilistic theories are compatible
with the observed empirical statistics. In this spirit, our strategy to formulate the measurement problem
in an interpretation-independent way will be to express the latter purely as a property of the empirical
statistics. In section 2.1, we identify this property and show that it constitues the common root of the
main weirdnesses of QM. We then discuss its philosophical implications in section 2.2, with a special
focus on its relation with the notion of observer in section 2.2.1. Finally, we motivate the interest of
such an interpretation-independent formulation by showing two of its possible applications: it allows
to compare under a new light the different interpretations (section 3.1), and to propose a fundamental,
non-technical reason why QM and general relativity (GR) are so irreconcilable (section 3.2).
2 No God’s-eye view on quantum matter
2.1 Quantum statistics are non-Kolmogorovian
Classical probabilistic phenomena are usually well described by the Kolmogorov axioms (Kolmogorov,
1933). Let’s recap them briefly. The basic mathematical landscape of probability theory is that of a
measured space, that is a setΩequipped with aσ-algebraT(a subset ofP(Ω)containingΩand closed
under complementation and countable union) plus a mapp:T →[0,1], called probability measure, that
satisfies the following two axioms:
•Axiom 1.p(Ω) = 1.
•Axiom 2(σ-additivity). For all(E n)n∈N∈T N disjoint,
p
 ∞[
n=0
En
!
=
∞X
n=0
p(En).
1Initsfirstvariant, thosethreeassumptionsarebasically: (i)|ψ⟩isacompleterepresentationofasystem; (ii)theSchrödinger
equation is universal; (iii) measurements have definite outcomes.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
On top of that are usually defined measurable functions fromΩtoRcalled random variables. The
measurepallows to associate a probability for any random variableAto take a particular valuea∈Rby
computingp(A−1(a)). An immediate consequence of Kolmogorov’s axioms is thelaw of total probability
(LTP): for any pair of random variablesAandB, we have:
p(A=a) =
X
b
p(A=a|B=b)p(B=b).(1)
This equation simply follows from:p(A=a) =p
 
∪b{A=a,B=b}

=P
bp(A=a,B=b), which
translates the possibility of conditioning on all the values thatBcan take, and to obtain the probabilities
ofAas a marginal.
Inthispaper, wewillspecificallybeconcernedwithphysicalprobabilistictheories. By‘Kolmogorovian
theory’, we will therefore mean a probability space as defined above, equipped with physically meaningful
random variables, one for each quantity that can in principle be measured in the experimental situation
that the theory models. For physical theories describing the mechanics of particles, this should at least
includethepositionandmomentumvariablesX(t)andP(t)atdifferenttimes. Givenasetofprobabilities
or empirical statistics, we will say that they are Kolmogorovian if there exists a Kolmogorovian theory
reproducing them, and non-Kolmogorovian otherwise2.
Now,the statistics observed in quantum experiments are non-Kolmogorovian3. Indeed:
1. they do not satisfy the LTP, as any quantum interference confirms. For example, in a double-slit
setup, one can not condition on the particle going through one slit or the other when computing
the probabilities, because:
p(x)̸=p(x|right)p(right) +p(x|left)p(left).
In this respect, the first implementation of a quantum interference experiment (perhaps Taylor
(1909)’s double-slit experiment?) was a landmark in human’s history because, for the first time, it
was realised that we live in a non-Kolmogorovian universe;
2. they violate the Leggett and Garg (1985) inequality (see Emary et al. (2014) for a theoretical and
experimental review);
3. they violate Bell-type inequalities.
In the following sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, we elaborate more on these two aspects of non-Kolmogorovianity
that are the violation of the LTP and of the Bell inequality.
2.1.1 The LTP and quantum (de)coherence
Although non-Kolmogorovianity is a theory-independent fact about quantum matter’s empirical statis-
tics, QM correctly predicts them, so the deviation from the LTP can also be traced back in the QM
formalism. When written in an orthonormal basisB= (|i⟩)i (whose elements we call ‘potentialities’, as
well as their corresponding events), it is well-known that the diagonal part of a density matrix accounts
for the LTP when conditioning on the potentialities ofB, while the off-diagonal terms are responsible for
the quantum interferencesi.e.the depart from the LTP. In a nutshell, this is because the probability to
obtain an outcomexwhile being in stateρis, according to the Born rule4:
2Interestingly, in the case of probabilistic theories defined by a von Neumann algebra, Kolmogorovianity is equivalent to
the commutativity of the algebra (Rédei and Summers, 2007).
3It should be stressed that the statistics collected by an experimentalist after many runs of theexact sameexperiment
(without parameter choices) are always Kolmogorovian, because this data automatically defines a joint probability distribution
for the set of random variables measured in the experiment, in agreement (by definition) with the empirical results (Szabó,
2007, Section 3). However, the existence of a Kolmogorovian model is not guaranteed anymore ifnot allvariables are measured
in each run.
4Quantum coherence could even be defined as the ability for a physical system to deviate from the LTP. For instance, one
can show that:
tr(ρΠ ˆA=a)−
X
b
tr(Π ˆB=bρΠ ˆB=bΠ ˆA=a)
 ⩽rank(Π ˆA=a)CB ˆB
(ρ),
whereΠ ˆA=a andΠ ˆB=b are eigenprojectors of ˆAand ˆBassociated to the eigenvaluesaandb, andC B ˆB
(ρ)denotes the 2-norm
of coherence ofρin the eigenbasisB ˆB of ˆB(Soulas, 2025).
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
tr(ρ|x⟩⟨x|) =
nX
i,j=1
ρij⟨j|x⟩⟨x|i⟩=
nX
i=1
ρii|⟨x|i⟩|2
| {z }
p(i)p(x|i)
+
X
1⩽i<j⩽n
2Re(ρij⟨j|x⟩⟨x|i⟩)| {z }
interferences
.
Consequently,decoherence in a basisBcan be understood as the process after which the LTP (approxi-
mately) holdswhen conditioning on the potentialities ofB.
The crucial importance of the LTP in QM has long been recognised. In fact, the latter is ubiquitous
in the quantum foundations literature, where it is often used to translate mathematically an idea of
objectivity or, more precisely, of variables having absolute values independently of being observed. For
instance, the very definition of a hidden variable is an unknown quantityλ∈Λhaving probability
distributionµ(dλ), with respect to which any observableAcan be conditioned so as to satisfy the LTP:
p(A) =
Z
Λ
p(A|λ)µ(dλ),
wherep(A|λ)is less indeterministic thanp(A), the extreme case being a Dirac distributionδ(A=f(λ)).
This property is already present in Bell’s seminal papers (Bell, 1964, equation (2)) (Bell, 1981, equation
(12)), as well as in the more modern formulation of Bell’s theorem in terms of causal models (Wood
and Spekkens, 2015, equation (13)). It is also at the basis of the ontological models program (Harrigan
and Spekkens, 2010, Definition 1) (Leifer, 2014, equation (7)). Similarly, the assumption of Macroscopic
Realism, used to derive the Leggett-Garg inequalities, translates mathematically as a LTP (Leggett and
Garg, 1985, equation (1)) and the assumption of Absoluteness of Observed Events, on which relies the
Local Friendliness inequality (Bong et al., 2020), is among other things the assumption of a LTP when
conditioning on the events observed by the friends. Furthermore, the very motivation for introducing the
decoherence functional in the consistent histories framework is to quantify the deviation from the LTP
given a certain set of successive events (Griffiths, 1984, equation (2.17)). More recently, (Di Biagio and
Rovelli, 2021, equation (2)) have remarked that, in relational QM, the possible violation of the LTP can
be understood as a mark of the relativity of facts, while QBists have been interested in re-expressing the
Born rule in order to study how closely it can resemble the LTP (Fuchs, 2023, equation (12)).
Remark 2.1. On Schrödinger’s cat.Rigorously speaking, the only thing that can be said to describe
Schrödinger’s cat puzzling situation is: ‘the statistics of a measurement of the cat in a complementary
basis would not satisfy the LTP when conditioning on the cat being alive or dead’. Asserting that
the cat is both alive and dead is clearly a misleading abuse, given that QM unsurprisingly predicts a
1
2 probability to observe the cat either alive or dead when opening the box. Admittedly, though, this
widespread expression is of course not totally ungrounded. Indeed, the LTP (1) can be interpreted as (or
at least is compatible with) the fact that one can sum independently the contribution of each potentiality
{B=b}, even thoughBis not observed, because one—and exactly one—occur each time the experiment
is reproduced. Alternatively, a violation of the LTP may give a certain taste of having all the different
potentialities apparently contributing to the statistics, in each single run.
Remark 2.2. Why is classical optics a wave theory?The fundamental reason why light, ultimately
made of photons, apparently behaves as a wave is the following. Since photons have no electric charge,
they interact and decohere very little5. As bosons, they are in addition not subject to Pauli’s exclusion
principle. Consequently, a ‘classical’ optics experiment is best understood as many single-photon experi-
ments in parallel, in which each photon violates the LTP. Because of this, all the different potentialities of
each photon (in this case: the different optical trajectories) seem to contribute to the observed statistics,
leading after application of the law of large numbers to an emergent classical wave behaviour. Besides,
the supposedly ‘classical’ fact that 2 consecutive polarisers oriented asθ1 = 0◦ andθ 2 = 90◦ does not
transmit a laser beam, whereas adding a supplementary polariser—a device than can onlyabsorben-
ergy—between them withθ3 = 45◦ doeslet some photons passing through, is another illustration of the
violation of the LTP in optics.
2.1.2 Boole and Bell
As a preliminary remark for this section, note that any Kolmogorovian theory trivially admits a hidden
variable model: the sampleω∈Ωis obviously a hidden variable, so that any random variableApossesses
5See for instance the Hanbury Brown and Twiss (1979) effect, employing quantum superpositions of different photon paths
on astronomical scales in order to measure the size of stars!
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
in fact a definite valueA(ω)in each trial. This is the core intuition of Kolmogorovian probabilities.
Now, although he obviously did not use these terms, Boole (1862) remarked more than 150 years ago
that Kolmogorovian probabilities are constrained to form a polytope. He called this set of inequalities
‘conditions of possible experience’ (Pitowsky, 1994). One could thus retrospectively attribute to Boole
the following theorem (even though he certainly did not prove this particular statement) whose proof is
straightforward and reproduced in the annex A.1.
Theorem(‘Boole’).LetA 1,A 2,B 1,B 2 be four±1-valued random variables. Then:
|⟨A1B1⟩+⟨A 1B2⟩+⟨A 2B1⟩−⟨A 2B2⟩|⩽2
The reader will have immediately recognised the CHSH inequality. Importantly, though, it does not
stem here from an assumption about locality, but only as a basic property of±1-valued Kolmogorovian
random variables.
A century later, Bell (1964) (resp. Bell (1976)) showed that deterministic (resp. factorizable stochas-
tic) hidden variable models generate probabilities which are constrained by some kind of inequality like
CHSH, where:
•‘deterministic’ means that the hidden variable entirely determines the values of the physical ob-
servablesi.e.p(A=a|λ)∈{0,1}or equivalentlyA=f(λ);
•‘factorizable stochastic’ merely assumes thatp(A=a,B=b|λ) =p(A=a|λ)p(B=b|λ).
At that point, it seems natural to ask whether Bell, despite introducing those complex assumptions
about hidden variable theories, has proved anything more than the elementary theorem above. In other
words, does Bell’s theorem rule out a larger class of probabilistic theories candidate to reproduce the
quantum statistics than Boole’s theorem?
This question has been answered by Fine (1982). He proved that, ifA1,A 2,B 1,B 2 are four±1-valued
physical observables, and if we are given a table of statistics (the ‘probabilities of the experiment’) ob-
tained after performing some repeated measurements of allAi,B j and all pairs(Ai,B j), the following are
equivalent: (i) there exists a deterministic hidden variable model reproducing those statistics; (ii) there
exists a factorizable stochastic hidden variable model reproducing those statistics; (iii) those statistics
satisfy the CHSH inequality; and (iv) those statistics are Kolmogoroviani.e.there exists a joint prob-
ability distribution for the four observables. Consequently, this means that, mathematically speaking,
Bell’s assumptions are nothing but a very complicated way to re-express Kolmogorovianity. At the strict
level of the statistical predictions, the probabilistic theories ruled out by Bell’s theorem to reproduce
quantum physics are exactly those ruled out by Boole’s: the Kolmogorovian theories6. It also means
that Kolmogorovianity is equivalent, probabilistically speaking, to the existence of underlying hidden
variables, hence Kolmogorovianity appears again as the mathematical implementation of the idea of an
absolute ontology independent of epistemology.
2.1.3 Formulation of the measurement problem
As a conclusion of sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, we now see that non-Kolmogorovianity is associated with
some idea of non-absoluteness, and that it constitutes the root of the two main weirdnesses of QM:
1. superposition/coherence/interferencesviathe violation of the LTP;
2. entanglement/Bell non-localityviathe violation of Bell-type inequalities.
We therefore propose the following interpretation-independent formulation:
6At the level ofphysicaltheories, though, Bell’s theorem tells us something more than Boole’s. Indeed, our theories are not
a bare collection of variables, but the latter refer to entities that exist and interact within a spacetime. Bell has shown that
quantum non-Kolmogorovian statistics can not even be reproduced by a local mechanism, based for example on a conspiratorial
particle carrying to Bob the information of Alice’s choice. This is why, to Fine (1982) claiming: ‘hidden variables and the
Bell inequalities are all about (...) imposing requirements to make well defined precisely those probability distributions for
noncommuting observables whose rejection is the very essence of quantum mechanics’, Shimony (1984) commented in these
words: ‘he has, in my opinion, neglected the diversity of hidden variables theories and the diversity of the aims of different
programmes. (...) the results of research on hidden variables theories are too intricate to be characterized accurately by his
condensed statements.’
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
the measurement problem is the fact that quantum matter
cannot be described by a Kolmogorovian theory.
In the next section, we examine the philosophical consequences of this definition.
Remark 2.3. Why has it been called the ‘measurement’ problem?The more one thinks about
it, the less it seems to have anything to do with measurements... The only explanation we could think
of is historical, due to the primacy of the Copenhagen interpretation, whose most obvious weakness lies
in the collapse, which was associated with the act of measurement. A better phrasing would certainly
be ‘non-Kolmogorovianity problem’ or ‘quantum non-absoluteness’.
2.2 The philosophical significance of non-Kolmogorovianity
Our key argument can be cast into the standard form of theory-independent no-go results that Shimony
(1984) called ‘experimental metaphysics’ (see also Cavalcanti (2008)), albeit in a very simplistic version.
Consider the following metaphysical assumption (epistemic uncertainty):
(EU)All uncertainty is epistemic: even though the actual value of a variable is not known, it still has
a single definite value among the possible ones.
Motivated by section 2.1, we claim thatKolmogorov axioms are the axioms of epistemic uncertainty; in
other words Kolmogorovian probability theory constitutes the mathematical implementation of(EU).
Experimentally, we observe that the universe’s statistics violate these axioms. Hence we must reject
(EU): this is the main philosophical consequence of the measurement problem.
Let’s try to reformulate what the rejection of(EU)entails philosophically. We have already seen
in section 2.1, through considerations on the LTP and on the equivalence between Kolmogorovianity
and hidden variables, that Kolmogorov axioms are associated with a notion of ontology independent
of epistemology7. The negation of(EU)can be further rephrased as the impossibility to build such
an absolute ontology for quantum matter, supporting Zurek (2022)’s intuition: ‘I strongly suspect that
the ultimate message of quantum theory is that the separation between what exists and what is known
to exist – between the epistemic and the ontic – must be abolished.’ Said differently, there exists no
God’s-eye view on quantum systems, no ‘view from nowhere’ (Nagel, 1989; Latour, 2017). By God’s-eye
view, we mean a description of the entire universe in a well-definite configuration, perhaps inaccessible
to actual observers but true for everyone. It depicts ‘all there is’, so that in particular every internal,
partial perspective can be derived from it—the paradigmatic example being of course classical physics.
In the history of science, the fact that the measurement problem was deemed a problem may just be
the symptom of a physics that took itself too much for God. Isn’t the measurement ‘problem’, indeed,
only an issue for physicists too reluctant to abandon the God’s-eye view? Not exactly. In response to
someone arguing: ‘I have accepted that the universe is non-Kolmogorovian and I feel comfortable with
the absence of absolute ontology; at the end of the day, is there any problem?’, two questions can be put
forward.
1.The physical problem:how to explain that we do not experience non-Kolmogorovianity at
our scale, to such an extent that no human ever had any reason to doubt of the applicability of
Kolmogorov axioms in physics before the advent of QM? This is a central aim of the research on
the quantum-to-classical transition; see for instance Gell-Mann and Hartle (1993); Zurek (2003);
Kofler and Brukner (2007) among many others.
2.The philosophical problem:which ontology should we adopt in a non-Kolmogorovian universe?
This is the question that every interpretation of QM is trying to address.
The former problem clearly lies outside the scope of this paper. In the following sections 2.2.1 and 3.1,
we comment on the latter.
7The link between our proposed formulation of the measurement problem and the usual textbook presentation (the conflict
between unitary evolution and collapse) is the following. Any probabilistic theory naturally involves an epistemic update of the
probabilities when new information is acquired. However, in a non-Kolmogorovian theory where ontology can not be clearly
separated from epistemology, this supposedly epistemic operation takes a puzzling ontic flavour. It may therefore be tempting
to consider it as as genuine physical process, granted with the same status as the time evolution law, but doing so leads to
apparently ill-defined conditions of applicability.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
2.2.1 Observers: when the philosophical difficulty worsens
A growing number of works in the field of quantum foundations focus on introducing the 1st person
point of views in the description, as exemplified by the recent surge of interest in Wigner’s friend thought
experiment (Schmid et al., 2023), by the rise of quantum reference frames (Angelo et al., 2010; Giacomini
et al., 2019), as well as a myriad of other approaches (Fuchs, 2016; Frauchiger and Renner, 2018; Mueller,
2020; Fankhauser et al., 2025). This should not come as a surprise once it is understood that, in a non-
Kolmogorovian universe, ontology can not be independent of epistemology, as argued above. The view
from nowhere must be replaced byin situperspectives.
Wigner’s friend precisely captures a philosophical tension that makes it harder—although not im-
possible—to build a satisfying ontology in presence of non-Kolmogorovianity. Ask yourself: what is so
special when a human being (or possibly a cat) is inserted into the description, instead of particle?
Manifestly, no one was shocked by the experimental violation of the Local Friendliness inequality when
Charlie and Debbie were taken to be single photons (Proietti et al., 2019; Bong et al., 2020). So what
is more troubling with an actual human being? We propose the following: the philosophical problem
becomes even more severe when the system that deviates from Kolmogorovianity is itself an observer,
which we define here asany physical system granted with subjectivity, because of the tension between:
(i) the multiplicity of potentialities apparently contributing to the statistics when the LTP is violated,
and (ii) the unicity of the subjective experience. Wigner (1995) insisted that ‘my friend [should have] the
same types of impressions and sensations as I’, in particular she should have unique experiences, so how
come the other potentialities still contribute to the statistics when Wigner performs a supermeasurement
on her? In a non-Kolmogorovian ontology, even 1st person perceptions can not be absolute.
An important related question is of course to determine which systems can be treated as observers.
This is a currently hot debate: Fields (2012) has for exemple proposed to define an observer through its
information-processing abilities, when Brukner (2021) has argued that ‘qbits are not observers’. Stoica
(2025) has defended the idea that structures alone are insufficient to determine the sentient observers of
quantum theory, while Wiseman et al. (2023) have discussed the validity of the Friendliness assumption,
granting a system with ‘thoughts (...) as real as any communicable thought of my own’, for instance in
the case of an AI running on a quantum computer.
3 Applications
3.1 Comparing the main interpretations
We have now exposed the difficulties faced by anyone willing to interpret QMi.e.endeavouring to build an
ontology compatible with what we know of quantum matter. A virtue of our interpretation-independent
formulation of the measurement problem is that it allows to identifya posteriorithe common question
that each interpretation actually attempted to address, and thereby to show them under a new light. In
full generality,one could define an interpretation of QM as an attitude towards non-Kolmogorovianity.
Below is a snapshot of the main attitudes that have been proposed so far.
•Copenhagen.Physics is first and foremost an activity of real humans in actual labs with virtually
infinite resource: a quantum state|ψ⟩does not make sense out of such a context. One must remain
agnostic about the ‘true nature of the electron’, hence the latter does not need to be Kolmogorovian.
•Collapse models.A modified Schrödinger dynamics causes an objective collapse (here a genuine
physical process, not an epistemic update) for large systems, which become Kolmogorovian in the
preferred basis of position. Before collapse, the stance on non-Kolmogorovianity may vary from one
author to the other.
•Bohmian mechanics.Non-Kolmogorovianity is repressed: Bohmian mechanics (BM) is the ul-
timate attempt to save the God’s-eye view. The ontology reduces to a collection of particles with
definite positions and velocities. Despite absolute trajectories, though, the non-Kolmogorovian
quantum statistics are successfully reproduced (see remark 3.1 below).
•Many-worlds.As an attempt to save a meta-God’s-eye view, one postulates that, ontologically,
theuniverseis|ψ⟩. Non-Kolmogorovianityarisesbecauseallpotentialitiesdohappenandcontribute
to the statistics. Decoherence produces branches that satisfy the LTP.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
•QBism.There is no objective, outside world, but only a myriad of 1st person point of views. Each
agent has their own|ψ⟩, merely encoding their degrees of belief, and non-Kolmogorovianity becomes
unproblematic as soon as measurement outcomes cease to be considered as objective features of the
world.
•Relational quantum mechanics.Any physical interaction between two systems may establish
a fact for them. However, a linguistic effort is required: one mustn’t talk about the value of a
variableper se, but onlyrelativeto another system which has decohered it. So, whenever the LTP
is violated, the conditioning was made on something which is not a fact for anyone: this is not
permitted.
Remark 3.1. Does Bohmian mechanics contradict our argument?Because it reproduces the
quantum statistics, BM is certainly not a Kolmogorovian theory. The fact that it involves a probability
distribution over the positions of particulesx(t), and that the velocities are defined asv(t) = ˙x(t),
may give the feeling that BM has the characteristics of a Kolmogorovian model as we defined it in
section 2.1. This is not correct, though: in BM, only the position variable (and functions thereof) is
a genuine physically meaningful random variable. Studying the random variablep(t) =mv(t)fails to
yield the correct probabilities for a momentum measurement. To predict these, it is instead necessary to
include a full description of the measurement apparatus’ dynamics, in which the measurement outcome
is ultimately encoded, as everything else, in terms of positions of particles (in this case, in the position
of the apparatus’ pointer). Consequently, there exists no random variable describing momentum in BM,
nor spin. For the same reason, although uncertainty in BM might at first glance seem purely epistemic,
the theory actually rejects(EU), in accordance with our claim of section 2.2, because momentum or
spin do not have any value at all: it is simply meaningless to talk about them. Let’s mention in passing
that the situation is quite similar for Spekkens (2007)’s toy model: it is a non-Kolmogorovian theory
(it reproducese.g.quantum interference, hence violates the LTP) that rejects(EU)since measurable
quantities do not have a pre-existing value in general (the ontic state merely dictates their probabilities).
The same can be said of Barandes (2025) indivisible stochastic approach: as a reformulation of QM, it is
non-Kolmogorovian; and because the configuration space corresponds in the Hilbert space to the vectors
of a preferred-basis, only one set of commuting observables is assigned well-definite values, hence(EU)
is not satisfied.
IndefenseofBM,onemayinsistandarguethatthetheoryproposesanontologyinwhichonlyposition
exists, so it could seem unfair to demand it to provide random variables with well-defined underlying
values for the other variables as well. Leaving aside the conspiratorial flavour of such an ontology8, even
the epistemic nature of the position uncertainty is questionable in BM. Indeed, one can ask why, in spite
of being a deterministic theory, it will ultimately never have more predictive power than QM (Colbeck
and Renner, 2011). It is because perfect knowledge (or simply more knowledge than what is given by
the Born rule|ψ(x)|2) of initial conditions of Bohmian particles is in principle inaccessible, a fact known
as the quantum equilibrium hypothesis (QEH), necessary to ensure no-signalling (Valentini, 2002). The
problem is that such a hypothesis is not easily justified. Heisenberg microscope-type arguments may
well qualitatively explain an irreducible epistemic uncertainty, but they fail to quantitatively reproduce
the quantum uncertainties where theˆXand ˆPdistributions are precisely related by a Fourier transform
(BrownandRedhead,1981). Moreover, althoughDürretal.(1992)haveshownthattheuncertaintytends
to converge to the QEH, it remains unclear why it is in principle impossible to reduce one’s epistemic
uncertainty by more than|ψ(x)| 2, be it for a short time, be it in a single non-typical experiment.
Consequently, considering how this irreducible Bohmian uncertainty seems to need to be imposed byfiat,
one may wonder to what extent it can accurately be deemed ‘epistemic’. Interestingly, Dürr et al. (1992)
themselves call it ‘absolute uncertainty’. Furthermore, BM’s trajectories have a gauge indeterminacy
because the probability current ⃗jguiding the particles is only defined up to a divergence-free field
(Fankhauser, 2025), since it is constrained solely by the equation∂t|ψ|2 + div(⃗j) = 0. Although this
gauge under-determinacy makes no difference at the level of the predictions, BM still does not tell us
which trajectory is the actual one, hence it does not really let us see what God’s eye sees.
8Considering that we are able to build such a wide variety of measurement devices probing plenty of different physical
quantities which exhibit strong regularities, and among which position does not dramatically stand out, is it reasonable to
believe that all these other variables are in fact mere hallucinations caused by patterns in the behaviour of the positions of the
devices’ particles?
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
3.2 Why is quantum gravity so hard?
In addition to its interpretational benefit, the proposed formulation of the measurement problem might
also be fruitful in the context of quantum gravity (QG). Indeed, as we shall argue now,formulating why
QM is so weird helps understanding why QG is so hard. It turns out that it is not easy to exhibit a
compelling reason for why QM and GR are so incompatible, without relying on purely technical, mathe-
matical arguments (e.g.non-renormalisability) and without presupposing the form of the sought theory
(e.g.quantized metric field, superpositions of spacetimes...). Let’s therefore start with this astonishing
observation: how come Einstein was able to formulate a backgroundless theory of classical matter as
soon as 1915, and no one has been able to do so for quantum matter for more than a century?
Einstein’s theory of relativity is deemed relativistic because lengths and durations are relative to the
observer. However, his ‘relativistic’ spacetime is still very absolute. Mind that one possible formulation
of Einstein’s principle of relativity is the requirement that the laws of physics should take the same form
in all admissible reference frames: shouldn’t it rather be called the principle of absoluteness? In fact,
Einstein (2009) himself was unsatisfied with the name ‘relativity’ and would have preferred ‘invariance
theory’. This flavour of absoluteness can be traced back in the mathematics of the theory: in differential
geometry, although the charts account for the 1st person perspectives,the manifold inevitably pictures
a God’s-eye view. In essence, a manifold is an absolute structure: true for everyone, containing all
the geometrical information possessed by the different 1st person perspectives, and from which any of
them can be derived—something that quantum matter can not admit, as we have seen. Now, as long
as they remain decoupled, an absolute spacetime can very well host some quantum matter, as is the
case in quantum field theory. However, in a theory like GR where spacetime and matter co-emerge,
and where they get equatedviaEinstein equation, the absoluteness of the former would clash with the
non-absoluteness of the latter, if it were quantum. Here is, we propose, the fundamental tension between
QM and GR.
The challenge of QG could then be: which mathematics can supersede differential geometry, and de-
scribe spacetime without allowing for any God’s-eye view? Which mathematical structure could account
for the non-Kolmogorovianity of the spacetime variables? Superposition of classical spacetimes as vectors
in a Hilbert space might be a way to do so, but a very restrictive one. In particular, it only allows for a
global violation of the LTP at the level of the entire spacetime, but not for a locally-dependent violation.
It could be argued that fixing a bare topological manifold almost doesn’t fix anything geometrically,
and that the non-absoluteness of spacetime’s geometry could be accounted for by simply upgrading the
metric field to an operator field, as is done in standard approaches to quantize GR. However, such a
structure already presupposesthe absoluteness of the notion of event, namely the fact that there exists
an objective collection of points, common to all, each of which can be referred to by everyone, and where
something happens. QG invites us to question this: when is it admissible to say that something actually
does happen, and where, and who can say so? This is precisely the kind of questions approached by the
field of quantum causality (Brukner, 2014; Goswami and Romero, 2020), for instance with the study of
indefinite causal orders, process matrices or the quantum switch.
4 Conclusion
Here is what quantum mechanics (QM) tells us about the world: the universe is not Kolmogorovian.
There is no way to ‘solve the measurement problem’ simply because it is an empirical fact. This poorly-
named problem is neither a physical nor a mathematical problem, but it motivates a philosophical one:
the task of building an ontology compatible with the experimental violation of Kolmogorov axioms. Like
any other philosophical question, this does not admit a definite, universal solution; in fact, there are as
many answers as there are interpretations of QM. On the one hand, none of them succeed to solve the
measurement problem, in the sense that they do not change how the empirical statistics behave; on the
other hand, all of them succeed in proposing an interesting attitude towards non-Kolmogorovianity.
While the measurement problem does not have a universal solution, itdoeshowever admit a definition,
and formulating it in an interpretation-independent way could be fruitful for physics. Once the common
root of the puzzle has been identified, one can hope for a better dialogue between the different schools
of interpretations of QM. It might also guide the search for quantum gravity, by highlighting the deep
source of tension between QM and general relativity.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
The God’s-eye view has been one of the pillars of modern physics since the scientific revolution
(Daston and Galison, 2021). It lies at the heart of classical physics, but also of Einstein’s relativity,
where the spacetime manifold is seen from nowhere. It is the lesson of the measurement problem, and
the challenge of quantum gravity, to finally get rid of it. The quest against absoluteness is still ongoing.
Acknowledgements
During the course of this 5-years long project, countless discussions with colleagues, multiple feedbacks
received from re-readers, and sharp questions received in seminars and conferences were the main driv-
ing forces to gradually improve the quality of this article over the successive rewritings. The author
would like to thank in particular Emily Adlam, Luis C. Barbado, Veronika Baumann, Časlav Brukner,
Lin-Qing Chen, Dmitry Chernyak, Michael Cuffaro, Maxime Devin–Pinson, Andrea Di Biagio, Gyözö
Egri, Johannes Fankhauser, Guilherme Franzmann, Simon Fuchs, Alexei Grinbaum, Sebastian Horvat,
Charlène Laffond, Baptiste Le Bihan, Niels Linnemann, Antoine Pinochet–Lobos, Carlo Rovelli, Alberto
Spalvieri, László E. Szabó, Anderson A. Tomaz, Lev Vaidman, David Wallace, Christian Wüthrich and
his students, as well as Anton Zeilinger.
This research was funded by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [10.55776/F71] and [10.55776/COE1],
and by BeyondC [10.55776/RG3] (Research Group 3). For open access purposes, the authors have applied
aCCBYpubliccopyrightlicensetoanymanuscriptversionarisingfromthissubmission. Thispublication
was made possible through the financial support of the WOST (WithOutSpaceTime) grant from the John
Templeton Foundation. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton Foundation.
A Appendix
A.1 Proof of ‘Boole’s theorem’
We present here the proof of the theorem introduced in 2.1.2 and somewhat cheekily attributed to Boole.
Theorem(‘Boole’).LetA 1,A 2,B 1,B 2 be four±1-valued random variables. Then:
|⟨A1B1⟩+⟨A 1B2⟩+⟨A 2B1⟩−⟨A 2B2⟩|⩽2
Proof.Notice that|A 1|=|A 2|=|B 1|=|B 2|= 1, and compute:
|⟨A1B1⟩+⟨A 1B2⟩+⟨A 2B1⟩−⟨A 2B2⟩|=|⟨A 1(B1 +B 2)⟩+⟨A 2(B1−B 2)⟩|
⩽
D
|A1||B1 +B 2|
E
+
D
|A2||B1−B 2|
E
⩽
D
|B1 +B 2|+|B 1−B 2|
E
⩽2
D
max(|B1|,|B 2|)
E
⩽2,
where we have used the fact that∀x,y∈R,|x+y|+|x−y|⩽2 max(|x|,|y|).
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
References
Emily Adlam. Do we have any viable solution to the measurement problem?Foundations of Physics, 53
(2):44, 2023.
David Z Albert.Quantum mechanics and experience. Harvard University Press, 2009.
R. Angelo, N. Brunner, S. Popescu, A. J. Short, and Paul Skrzypczyk. Physics within a quantum
reference frame.Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 2010. doi: 10.1088/1751-8113/
44/14/145304.
Guido Bacciagaluppi. Measurement and classical regime in quantum mechanics. InThe Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy of Physics. Oxford University Press, 2013.
Jacob A Barandes. The stochastic-quantum correspondence.Philosophy of Physics, 3(1):8, 2025.
Jeffrey A. Barrett. The quantum measurement problem. InThe Conceptual Foundations of Quantum
Mechanics. Oxford University Press, 2019. doi: 10.1093/oso/9780198844686.003.0007.
Angelo Bassi, Kinjalk Lochan, Seema Satin, Tejinder P Singh, and Hendrik Ulbricht. Models of wave-
function collapse, underlying theories, and experimental tests.Reviews of Modern Physics, 85(2):
471–527, 2013.
John Bell. Against ‘measurement’.Physics world, 3(8):33–41, 1990.
John S Bell. On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox.Physics Physique Fizika, 1(3):195, 1964. doi:
10.1103/PhysicsPhysiqueFizika.1.195.
John S Bell. The theory of local beables.Epistemological Letters, 9:11–24, 1976.
John S Bell. Bertlmann’s socks and the nature of reality.Le Journal de Physique Colloques, 42(C2):
C2–41, 1981.
Kok-Wei Bong, Aníbal Utreras-Alarcón, Farzad Ghafari, Yeong-Cherng Liang, Nora Tischler, Eric G
Cavalcanti, Geoff J Pryde, and Howard M Wiseman. A strong no-go theorem on the Wigner’s friend
paradox.Nature Physics, 16(12):1199–1205, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41567-020-0990-x.
George Boole. On the theory of probabilities.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
(152):225–252, 1862.
Harvey R Brown and Michael LG Redhead. A critique of the disturbance theory of indeterminacy in
quantum mechanics.Foundations of Physics, 11(1):1–20, 1981.
Časlav Brukner. Quantum causality.Nature Physics, 10(4):259–263, 2014.
Časlav Brukner. On the quantum measurement problem.Quantum [un]speakables II: half a century of
Bell’s theorem, pages 95–117, 2017.
Časlav Brukner. Qubits are not observers–a no-go theorem.arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03513, 2021.
Jeffrey Bub. In defense of a “single-world” interpretation of quantum mechanics.Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: studies in history and philosophy of modern physics, 72:251–255, 2020.
EricGCavalcanti.Reality, locality and all that: “experimental metaphysics” and the quantum foundations.
PhD thesis, The University of Queensland, 2008.
Roger Colbeck and Renato Renner. No extension of quantum theory can have improved predictive power.
Nature communications, 2(1):411, 2011.
Michael E Cuffaro. The measurement problem is a feature, not a bug–schematising the observer and
the concept of an open system on an informational, or (neo-)bohrian, approach.Entropy, 25(10):1410,
2023.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Lorraine Daston and Peter L Galison.Objectivity. Princeton University Press, 2021.
Andrea Di Biagio and Carlo Rovelli. Stable facts, relative facts.Foundations of Physics, 51(1):1–13,
2021. doi : 10.1007/s10701-021-00429-w.
DennisDieks. Resolutionofthemeasurementproblemthroughdecoherenceofthequantumstate.Physics
Letters A, 142(8-9):439–446, 1989.
Detlef Dürr, Sheldon Goldstein, and Nino Zanghì. Quantum equilibrium and the origin of absolute
uncertainty.Journal of Statistical Physics, 67(5):843–907, 1992.
Albert Einstein. Letter to Eberhard Zschimmer — September 30, 1921. InThe Collected Papers of Albert
Einstein, Volume 12 (English): The Berlin Years: Correspondence, January-December 1921 (English
Translation Supplement). Princeton University Press, 2009.
Clive Emary, Neill Lambert, and Franco Nori. Leggett–Garg inequalities.Reports on Progress in Physics,
77(1):016001, 2014.
Hugh Everett III. ‘Relative state’ formulation of quantum mechanics.Reviews of modern physics, 29(3):
454, 1957.
Johannes Fankhauser. The (un)detectability of trajectories in pilot-wave theory. In Andrea Oldofredi,
editor,Guiding Waves in Quantum Mechanics: One Hundred Years of de Broglie-Bohm Pilot-Wave
Theory. Oxford University Press, 2025. doi: 10.1093/oso/9780198901853.003.0010.
Johannes Fankhauser, Tomáš Gonda, and Gemma De les Coves. Epistemic horizons from deterministic
laws: lessons from a nomic toy theory.Synthese, 205(4):136, 2025.
Richard P Feynman. Simulating physics with computers.International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
21(6/7), 1982.
Chris Fields. If physics is an information science, what is an observer?Information, 3(1):92–123, 2012.
doi: 10.3390/info3010092.
Arthur Fine. Hidden variables, joint probability, and the Bell inequalities.Physical Review Letters, 48
(5):291, 1982.
Arthur Fine. Measurement and quantum silence. InCorrespondence, Invariance and Heuristics: Essays
in Honour of Heinz Post, pages 279–294. Springer, 1993.
Daniela Frauchiger and Renato Renner. Quantum theory cannot consistently describe the use of itself.
Nature communications, 9(1):3711, 2018.
Christopher A Fuchs. On participatory realism. InInformation and interaction: Eddington, Wheeler,
and the limits of knowledge, pages 113–134. Springer, 2016.
Christopher A Fuchs. Qbism, where next? InPhenomenology and QBism, pages 78–143. Routledge,
2023.
Murray Gell-Mann and James B Hartle. Classical equations for quantum systems.Physical Review D,
47(8):3345, 1993.
Flaminia Giacomini, Esteban Castro-Ruiz, and Časlav Brukner. Quantum mechanics and the covariance
of physical laws in quantum reference frames.Nature communications, 10(1):494, 2019.
Elizabeth Gibney. What does quantum mechanics say about reality?Nature, 643:1175, 2025.
Nicolas Gisin. Collapse. What else? InCollapse of the wave function, pages 207–224. Cambridge
University Press Cambridge, 2018.
Sheldon Goldstein. Bohmian Mechanics. In Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman, editors,The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Fall 2025 edition, 2025.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
K Goswami and J Romero. Experiments on quantum causality.AVS Quantum Science, 2(3), 2020.
Robert B Griffiths. Consistent histories and the interpretation of quantum mechanics.Journal of Sta-
tistical Physics, 36(1):219–272, 1984.
Robert B Griffiths. A consistent quantum ontology.Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part
B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 44(2):93–114, 2013.
Robert Hanbury Brown and Richard Q Twiss. A test of a new type of stellar interferometer on Sirius.
InA Source Book in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 1900–1975, pages 8–12. Harvard University Press,
1979.
Nicholas Harrigan and Robert W Spekkens. Einstein, incompleteness, and the epistemic view of quantum
states.Foundations of Physics, 40:125–157, 2010.
Richard Healey. Quantum decoherence in a pragmatist view: Resolving the measurement problem.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1207.7105, 2012.
Erik B Karlsson. The quantum measurement problem.Quantum Reports, 2025. doi: 10.3390/
quantum7020028.
Johannes Kofler and Časlav Brukner. Classical world arising out of quantum physics under the restriction
of coarse-grained measurements.Physical Review Letters, 99(18):180403, 2007.
Andrey Kolmogorov.Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Springer, 1933.
Bruno Latour.Facing Gaia: Eight lectures on the new climatic regime. John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
Anthony J Leggett. The quantum measurement problem.Science, 307(5711):871–872, 2005.
Anthony J Leggett and Anupam Garg. Quantum mechanics versus macroscopic realism: Is the flux there
when nobody looks?Physical Review Letters, 54(9):857, 1985.
Matthew Saul Leifer. Is the quantum state real? An extended review ofψ-ontology theorems.Quanta,
3:67–155, 2014.
Tim Maudlin. Three measurement problems.topoi, 14(1):7–15, 1995.
N David Mermin. There is no quantum measurement problem.Physics Today, 75(6):62–63, 2022.
Markus P Mueller. Law without law: from observer states to physics via algorithmic information theory.
Quantum, 4:301, 2020.
Fred A Muller. Six measurement problems of quantum mechanics. InNon-reflexive logics, non-
individuals, and the philosophy of quantum mechanics: Essays in honour of the philosophy of Décio
Krause, pages 225–259. Springer, 2023.
Wayne C Myrvold. Philosophical issues raised by quantum theory and its interpretations. In Olival
Freire, editor,The Oxford Handbook of the History of Quantum Interpretations. Oxford University
Press, 2022. doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198844495.013.0003.
Thomas Nagel.The view from nowhere. Oxford university press, 1989.
Asher Peres. When is a quantum measurement?American Journal of Physics, 54(8):688–692, 1986.
Itamar Pitowsky. George Boole’s ‘conditions of possible experience’ and the quantum puzzle.The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 45(1):95–125, 1994.
Massimiliano Proietti, Alexander Pickston, Francesco Graffitti, Peter Barrow, Dmytro Kundys, Cyril
Branciard, Martin Ringbauer, and Alessandro Fedrizzi. Experimental test of local observer indepen-
dence.Science Advances, 5(9):eaaw9832, 2019.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Miklós Rédei and Stephen Jeffrey Summers. Quantum probability theory.Studies in History and Phi-
losophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 38(2):390–417, 2007.
Carlo Rovelli. Relational quantum mechanics.International journal of theoretical physics, 35(8):1637–
1678, 1996.
Simon Saunders. What is the problem of measurement?The Harvard Review of Philosophy, 4(1):4–22,
1994.
Maximilian Schlosshauer.Elegance and enigma: The quantum interviews. Springer, 2011.
Maximilian Schlosshauer, Johannes Kofler, and Anton Zeilinger. A snapshot of foundational attitudes
toward quantum mechanics.Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 44(3):222–230, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.shpsb.2013.04.004.
David Schmid, Yìlè Y¯ ıng, and Matthew Leifer. A review and analysis of six extended Wigner’s friend
arguments.arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16220, 2023.
Abner Shimony. Contextual hidden variables theories and Bell’s inequalities.The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 35(1):25–45, 1984.
Sujeevan Sivasundaram and Kristian Hvidtfelt Nielsen. Surveying the attitudes of physicists concerning
foundational issues of quantum mechanics.arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.00676, 2016. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.1612.00676.
Antoine Soulas. Quantifying quantum coherence and the deviation from the total probability formula.
International Journal of Quantum Information, page 2550005, 2025.
Robert W Spekkens. Evidence for the epistemic view of quantum states: A toy theory.Physical Review
A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, 75(3):032110, 2007.
Ovidiu Cristinel Stoica. What makes you an observer? InJournal of Physics: Conference Series, volume
3017, page 012038. IOP Publishing, 2025.
László E Szabó. The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen argument and the Bell inequalities.arXiv preprint
arXiv:0712.1318, 2007.
GI Taylor. Interference fringes with feeble light.Proc. Cambridge, pages 114–115, 1909.
Lev Vaidman. Why the many-worlds interpretation?Quantum Reports, 4(3):264–271, 2022.
Antony Valentini. Signal-locality in hidden-variables theories.Physics Letters A, 297(5-6):273–278, 2002.
John Von Neumann.Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Springer, 1932.
DavidWallace. Philosophyofquantummechanics. InThe Ashgate companion to contemporary philosophy
of physics, pages 22–104. Routledge, 2016.
Eugene P Wigner. Remarks on the mind-body question. InPhilosophical reflections and syntheses, pages
247–260. Springer, 1995.
Howard M Wiseman, Eric G Cavalcanti, and Eleanor G Rieffel. A "thoughtful" local friendliness no-go
theorem: a prospective experiment with new assumptions to suit.Quantum, 7:1112, 2023.
Christopher J Wood and Robert W Spekkens. The lesson of causal discovery algorithms for quantum
correlations: causal explanations of Bell-inequality violations require fine-tuning.New Journal of
Physics, 17(3):033002, 2015.
H Dieter Zeh. On the interpretation of measurement in quantum theory.Foundations of Physics, 1(1):
69–76, 1970.
Wojciech Hubert Zurek. Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical.Reviews of
modern physics, 75(3):715, 2003. doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.75.715.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Wojciech Hubert Zurek. Emergence of the classical world from within our quantum universe. InFrom
Quantum to Classical, pages 23–44. Springer, 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-88781-0_2.
Herve Zwirn. Decoherence and the measurement problem.Proceedings of “Frontiers of Fundamental
Physics, 14, 2014.
16
