===== PAGE 1 =====
Vol.:(0123456789)
Journal of Molecular Evolution (2024) 92:87–92 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00239-024-10163-2
COMMENTARY
Assembly Theory: What It Does and What It Does Not Do
Johannes Jaeger1,2,3 
Received: 13 November 2023 / Accepted: 27 February 2024 / Published online: 7 March 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
A recent publication in Nature has generated much heated discussion about evolution, its tendency towards increasing diver-
sity and complexity, and its potential status above and beyond the known laws of fundamental physics. The argument at the 
heart of this controversy concerns assembly theory, a method to detect and quantify the influence of higher-level emergent 
causal constraints in computational worlds made of basic objects and their combinations. In this short essay, I briefly review 
the theory, its basic principles and potential applications. I then go on to critically examine its authors’ assertions, conclud-
ing that assembly theory has merit but is not nearly as novel or revolutionary as claimed. It certainly does not provide any 
new explanation of biological evolution or natural selection, or a new grounding of biology in physics. In this regard, the 
presentation of the paper is starkly distorted by hype, which may explain some of the outrage it created.
Keywords Assembly theory · Complexification · Evolutionary innovation · Natural selection · Darwinian evolution
A commotion
There has been a lot of agitation over the past few weeks 
about a paper that recently appeared in Nature (Sharma 
et al. 2023; see also the news & views feature by Ellis 2023). 
Many of my fellow evolutionary biologists felt compelled 
to express their disgust and outrage on social media. Sadly, 
there is much shouting but little serious argumentation on 
display.1 Evolutionary biology is being grossly misrepre-
sented, they say. Even worse: the perpetrators are chemists 
and physicists who are claiming that there is an explanatory 
gap between physics and evolution. Accusations of “non -
sense,” “mumbo jumbo,” “word salad,” creationist intent, 
and (perhaps most surprising of all) injecting wokeness into 
evolutionary theory soon started flying from all kinds of 
directions.
But what is all the fuss about? It’s about something called 
assembly theory, which was created by Sara Walker, Lee 
Cronin, and colleagues.  It has been around for a few years 
(Marshall et al. 2017, 2021, 2022; Liu et al. 2021), and has 
ruffled some feathers previously within the communities of 
combinatorial chemistry 2 and complexity science 3 (Utha-
macumaran et al. 2022). So what exactly is going on?
To get straight to the point: I find assembly theory intrigu-
ing and worth considering. Originally developed to detect 
signatures of alien life in the atmosphere of faraway exo-
planets4 (Marshall et al. 2017, 2021), it is a neat and sim-
ple model for the combinatorial generation of innovation 
in rule-based abstract “worlds” of recombining objects. 
Arguably, it is a prime example of classic computational 
Handling editor: Robert Noble.
 * Johannes Jaeger 
 yoginho@ronininstitute.org
1 Department of Philosophy, University of Vienna, 
Universitätsstraße 7, 1010 Vienna, Austria
2 Complexity Science Hub (CSH) Vienna, Josefstädter Straße 
39, 1080 Vienna, Austria
3 Ronin Institute, Montclair, USA
1 The replies to this post on X/Twitter https:// twitt er. com/ Nature/ sta-
tus/ 17098 00557 25730 6572?s= 20, present a fairly representative sam-
ple of the kinds of reactions the paper generated online.
2 See this thread on X/Twitter, for example: https://x. com/ mitom aths/ 
status/ 17113 20060 19773 6918?s= 20.
3 A blog post by Hector Zenil (https:// hecto rzenil. medium. com/ test- 
8f0be 54817 c4) identifies no less than eight fallacies of assembly 
theory. Scroll to the section “Original Post” for the actual beginning 
of the article. A video essay by the same author (https:// www. youtu 
be. com/ watch?v= 078EX ZeS8Y0) summarizes these fallacies, and 
highlights conceptual/methodological limitations, and the pervasive 
failure by the proponents of assembly theory to acknowledge relevant 
previous work in the field of complexity science.
4 The original aim was to classify molecules present in an exoplanet 
atmosphere into those that are likely to be of organic and biological 
origin. See also Zenil et al (2018).

===== PAGE 2 =====
88 Journal of Molecular Evolution (2024) 92:87–92
complexity theory. Applied to the natural world, the met-
rics it proposes may allow us to detect whether levels of 
organization above the basic laws of physics have emerged in 
an observed system, and to estimate the causal influence of 
these higher levels on the underlying dynamics. As an added 
bonus, assembly theory manages all this without having to 
assume anything specific about what those higher levels of 
organization actually are. To me, this sounds interesting and 
potentially useful. We should not dismiss the work outright 
and, despite our skepticism, give the theory a fair chance to 
prove its worth.
On the downside, there are several serious problems that 
stem from the framing and presentation of the argument in 
the paper, the hype the authors have generated around it 
(online and in peer-reviewed print), and their problematic 
and overextended interpretation of the model.
The first major issue is that the paper is entitled “Assem-
bly theory explains and quantifies selection and evolution” 
(Sharma et al. 2023) when it does absolutely no such thing. 
In fact, assembly theory is not specifically about Darwinian 
evolution by natural selection and, besides, the paper uses 
the term “selection” in a very broad sense that no biologist 
would recognize. This leads to unnecessary confusion, as is 
evident from the angry online comments. To make things 
worse, the abstract is a textbook example of how not to write 
an abstract. It is phrased in vague and hyperbolic terms that 
are misleading. We will come back to that later.
At this point, let me make one point very clear: it is not 
fair or proper to dismiss a paper based on its abstract alone, 
which is exactly what a surprising number of online com-
menters did who obviously (and sometimes admittedly) did 
not bother to read the whole paper.
That’s why I did read the paper carefully (plus some of its 
predecessors and criticisms as well). This helped me clarify 
what assembly theory is good for, and what its limitations 
are. Let me share these insights with you, and then quickly 
review the entire controversy within the context of contem-
porary scientific publishing and career structures.
Some Assembly Required
The fundamental idea behind constructing an assembly 
theory model is that you define an “assembly universe,” 
which consists of a finite set of distinct basic building blocks 
(colored bricks in Fig. 1) and another finite set of rules that 
allow you to assemble them into more complex composite 
objects. This universe, in principle, can contain all possible 
combinations of building blocks that do not violate your 
basic assembly rules. If you want to simulate real-world 
chemistry, for example, you can derive all kinds of compos-
ite molecules by recombining atoms with their correspond-
ing chemical bonds.
So far so good. Now you introduce a dimension of time 
to the model, which is implemented by recursivity. In other 
words, at each step of the assembly process, you can use all 
objects that are already assembled (not just the basic build-
ing blocks you started with) for further assembly. Thus, at 
each step, you get a bigger choice of objects to build with. 
In fact, the number of possible rule-based combinations 
will increase hyper-exponentially with each step. This way, 
you can see what kinds of composites emerge over time. An 
example of such a process is depicted in Fig. 2.
Recursivity makes the dynamics of the model historically 
contingent. In the end, the kinds of objects that you actually 
can assemble are not only restricted by the rules of your 
universe, but also by the starting point and trajectory you 
actually chose to take. This renders the whole model compu-
tationally tractable, because it greatly reduces the combina-
tions of possible composites you can get. You don’t have to 
deal with all possible combinations of building blocks, just 
the ones that are actually present in whatever “world” (a mix 
or “ensemble” of different objects) that you are simulating 
or observing. For instance, you can start with a given set of 
substrates, and simulate what kind of products you can get 
from there, given all possible chemical reactions plus the 
relative abundances of the substrates.
You can consider such a system a kind of a null model: 
given your basic building blocks and the assembly rules you 
defined, you can calculate how many steps you need to take 
before a specific composite object can arise. That minimal 
path to construct a composite object is called its assembly 
index. If your rules have specific weights or probabilities of 
application, you can also predict the expected abundance 
(copy number) for any composite object in your mix. This 
may not be easy to do in practice, but the authors at least 
show that it is possible in principle for any well-defined 
world with finite sets of building blocks and rules.
Fig. 1  Building blocks of an assembly universe

===== PAGE 3 =====
89Journal of Molecular Evolution (2024) 92:87–92 
By the way, these metrics are not particularly novel. They 
are special cases of classical measures of algorithmic or 
computational complexity (especially Huffman 1952; Ben-
nett 1988), which are used in a peculiar combination here, 
tailored to the context of assembly theory. We will come 
back to this point later.
Things become truly interesting once your model pro -
duces very complex composites. The higher the complexity 
of a composite, the longer it will take to appear, and the 
more unlikely it is to appear by chance, especially after just 
a minimal number of steps. Based on this, you would gener-
ally expect many different complex composites to be present 
at very low abundance at later steps. Yet, if you find certain 
complex composites enriched, especially early on, that’s a 
sign that things are not just based on the random interplay of 
the basic rules in your system. Figure 3 illustrates the point.
Put simply: finding composites with high complexity at 
high abundance means the basic rules of your “world” have 
probably been skewed in some way that is not built into the 
basic rules. That’s what the authors mean by “selection” 
(Fig. 3). This concept is, of course, a whole lot broader and 
more generic than what evolutionary biologists mean by the 
term. And the bias that assembly theory calls “selection” 
could be caused by processes that are very different from 
Darwinian evolution (many of them not selective at all). 
We’ll come back to that shortly. For now, let me reiterate 
that “selection” in the context of assembly theory simply 
means that the basic rules of the world you have defined 
have been constrained or channeled in some way to lead to 
an unexpected outcome.
This conception of bias is not mysterious at all. It simply 
means that you can use assembly theory to check whether 
Fig. 2  An assembly process 
(adapted from Sharma et al. 
2023)
Fig. 3  “Selection” in assembly 
theory means bias in outcome 
(adapted from Sharma et al. 
2023)

===== PAGE 4 =====
90 Journal of Molecular Evolution (2024) 92:87–92
something unexpected is going on  in a very broad range 
of computational model “worlds” or “universes” defined 
by different building blocks and rules. If that “something” 
is present, then more than just your basic rules must be 
at work. As a practical example, the authors suggest that 
assembly theory can be used to analyze mass spectrographs 
of exoplanet atmospheres in search for complex molecules 
at high abundance, which would mean something more than 
just the laws of chemistry are at work there (Marshall et al. 
2017, 2021). Likewise, you could monitor the complexity 
and abundance of some technology, let’s say Schnitzel ham-
mers5 in Austria, to infer that this technology must have been 
selected for in a particular environment. It did not just pop 
up randomly, but co-evolves with its substrate, the Viennese 
Schnitzel. So far, so good.
At this point it’s important to reiterate that assembly 
theory does not (and need not) make any assumptions as to 
what is being “selected,” and in what way. On the one hand, 
this is bad: it is one of the things that is confusing to evolu-
tionary biologists complaining about the model. Assembly 
theory is not specifically about Darwinian evolution. It does 
not care about populations, individuals, genes, and so on. 
It does not fit into the conceptual framework of traditional 
evolutionary theory, that is for sure. And it almost certainly 
won’t help you to measure selective pressures in the wild. 
On the other hand, its lack of specificity is also a strength 
of assembly theory: it is very broadly applicable to all kinds 
of “worlds” and “selection” biases (if you can formulate 
an appropriate “world” and figure out how to measure the 
assembly index, which is far from trivial in most cases).
In other words, assembly theory is a tool to detect the 
emergence of new levels of organization and their causal 
influence on lower-level phenomena in the world you are 
observing . If the outcome you are detecting is biased, the 
underlying rules must have been constrained or channeled 
in some way to generate that bias. Philosophers call this 
“downward causation,” and keep on arguing about it. In par-
ticular, some reductionists find it objectionable, but for rea-
sons that really don’t hold up to closer scrutiny. To explain 
why would take another paper-length argument. Suffice it 
to say that the problem goes away if you consider that pro-
cesses and relations (i.e., the rules that are affecting your 
objects) are fundamental, and not only the objects with their 
intrinsic properties themselves.
All you need to know about downward causation in 
this context is that it does not change the underlying rules. 
Instead, it constrains and channels the underlying processes 
in unexpected ways. And, if you think about it, that’s exactly 
what evolution does with the laws of physics: natural selec-
tion never alters the rules of physics and chemistry underly-
ing the processes that compose your body, but constrains and 
channels the direction of these processes in ways that you 
fundamentally cannot predict from the underlying physics or 
chemistry alone. This is why (evolutionary) biology is (and 
will always remain) an independent science after all. And in 
this sense, there undoubtedly is an explanatory gap between 
physics and biology, as the authors rightly point out.
It is in this very general and roundabout way that assem-
bly theory can indeed be useful for evolutionary biology. It 
may allow us to establish, once and for all, that biology is  
more than just chemistry and physics. More specifically, it 
provides us with a potentially useful perspective on what 
may be driving innovation and complexification in evolu-
tion (and other higher-level processes) at a very fundamen-
tal level: it’s the emergence of ever new combinations of 
(chemical and higher-level cell-, tissue-level, or organismic) 
components. It’s the constant growth of a co-evolving pos-
sibility space, something which biologist Stuart Kauffman 
(2000) has called the adjacent possible. This should make 
us reconsider how we formally describe what is possible in 
evolution, and it adds a temporal directionality to the random 
effects of mutations: for a mutation to produce a complex 
outcome, more time will be required than for simple ones.
Arguably, this is not exactly rocket science and assembly 
theory oversimplifies the complexity of real-world evolu-
tionary innovation to the point of potentially losing its con-
nection with reality altogether. Yet, I would say it is a step 
forward compared to accounts of evolution that simply take 
the emergence of complexity for granted or assume a global 
preexisting space of possibilities for evolution. Such views 
are outdated and unhelpful, but still surprisingly common 
among reductionist evolutionary biologists and traditional 
complexity scientists, and that is a problem, in my opinion.
For this reason, it would definitely not hurt if some of the 
people disparaging assembly theory as a matter of principle 
would profit from engaging with it in a more good-faith and 
open-minded manner. A new perspective, even if controver-
sial and not yet thoroughly worked out, can be inspiring and 
useful. Give it some slack! Personally, I find it enriching to 
engage with a different point of view every once in a while, 
because it allows me to see the advantages and limitations of 
my own approach more clearly. Judging from what is going 
on online or when I get my papers or grants reviewed, this is 
not a common attitude in our field. And that is a real shame, 
in my opinion. It clearly limits the ways we think about the 
incredible richness of evolutionary phenomena. And this, I 
firmly believe, is hampering conceptual progress in our field 
right now (Fig. 4).
5 Because of their locally restricted occurrence, the Wikipedia page 
for Schnitzel hammers only exists in German: https:// de. wikip edia. 
org/ wiki/ Fleis chklo pfer.

===== PAGE 5 =====
91Journal of Molecular Evolution (2024) 92:87–92 
A Flurry of Hype
Having said all this, it is time to turn to some of the issues 
surrounding the paper. The main problem is that it is 
wrapped in a misleading package, while much of the actual 
substance of the work is hidden in the technical appendi-
ces. Let me emphasize again that assembly theory is not  a 
new theory of Darwinian evolution, nor is it a new inter -
pretation of the concept of “selection” used in Darwinian 
theory. The title raises expectations the paper simply can-
not meet. The authors do not even bother to explain how 
assembly theory could be applied in the context of genes, 
organisms, or populations. Granted, assembly theory can  
be applied to detect the signature of Darwinian evolution, 
but that requires all sorts of auxiliary hypotheses. For 
instance, the presence of specific chemical signatures in 
an exoplanet’s atmosphere only indicate the presence of 
alien life if we can confidently exclude potential sources 
for the detected bias other than biological evolution.
What are such alternative higher-level constraints? 
They can arise through self-organization, such as that 
observed in far-from-equilibrium (dissipative) systems, 
e.g., hurricanes, eddies, and candle flames, which can 
form highly complex and improbable structures. It can 
also arise through the peculiar self-referential organization 
of living matter, which goes beyond mere self-organiza-
tion in non-living systems (see Jaeger 2024a, 2024b, and 
references therein). Yet, deviations from expected out -
comes can also occur for much more mundane reasons. 
For instance, kinetic energy barriers can heavily alter the 
rates of chemical reactions influencing what steady states 
will be reached. Furthermore, stochastic phenomena such 
as founder effects and random drift will play a role at early 
stages, especially in relatively small worlds. Or bias can 
be due to some hidden or neglected causal factor that was 
omitted from the basic rules when formulating the model.
Therefore, how we interpret bias in outcomes largely 
depends on auxiliary hypotheses and the very assump-
tions we put into the model of our rule-based world in 
the first place. This kind of circularity is not necessarily 
vicious, and is common in scientific modeling practice, 
but it clearly begs the question the paper is claiming to 
address. To say it again: assembly theory cannot tell us 
whether some bias is due to natural selection or not. It 
only tells us whether the bias is there, and how much of it 
is there, given the basic assumptions underlying the rule-
based world we are modeling with assembly theory.
Of course, this also means that all the talk about bio-
logical function  in the paper remains completely vacuous. 
If you cannot tell whether some bias in your outcome is the 
product of actual natural selection, you cannot tell whether 
it is functional in a sense of the term any biologist would 
recognize. As a matter of fact, assembly theory does not 
deal with biological function at all. So why do the authors 
bring it up?
Are these various blind spots of assembly theory known 
to the authors? I would strongly hope so. Otherwise, they 
would be rather fundamentally misinterpreting the nature 
and reach of their own model. I choose to give them the ben-
efit of doubt, and will assume that they realize they are using 
the term “selection” in a broad and vague sense, including 
biases that are not selective at all. But if they realize this, 
how can they not see that their use of the term “selection” 
is grossly misleading?
Based on the evidence presented so far, I cannot help 
but conclude that we are dealing with a rather disingenu-
ous presentation of what the paper actually achieves. What 
assembly theory really does is to detect and quantify bias 
caused by higher-level constraints in some well-defined 
rule-based worlds. That’s it! Even if Darwinian selection 
may contribute to such bias, assembly theory cannot tell 
you if it does, how much it does, or if other factors play a 
role as well.
Fig. 4  Assembly theory is surrounded by hype

===== PAGE 6 =====
92 Journal of Molecular Evolution (2024) 92:87–92
Why this kind of packaging? It seems to do so much more 
harm than good. In fact, there is much food for thought hid-
den behind a thick smokescreen of impenetrable language 
and implausible claims. But it is probably exactly the glitzy 
packaging that got the paper into Nature in the first place. 
This highlights well-known weaknesses and failures in the 
editorial and peer-review processes of high-profile scientific 
journals. Exposure in high-profile journals still counts for far 
too much social capital in today’s scientific career and fund-
ing market, and selling assembly theory for what it really is 
was evidently not sexy enough to get that kind of exposure.
All this reflects rather unfavorably both on the authors and 
the scientific publication system in general. Unfortunately, 
failures like this one abound in our field and beyond. What 
we need more of are substantive theoretical discussions, but 
they keep on getting overshadowed by false or shallow con-
troversies, as well as self-serving public-relations campaigns 
without much intellectual depth or substance. It is high time 
we focus on what really matters again. Conceptual progress 
is at stake.
But let me finish on a more positive note: shortly after the 
publication of the paper discussed here, another publication 
came out in PNAS, which is similar in spirit, tackling the 
problem of increasing complexification in general evolution-
ary processes (Wong et al. 2023). Just like assembly theory, 
it takes a very broad picture of evolution and “selection,” 
going far beyond the biological realm of Darwinian evolu-
tion by natural selection. In contrast to the paper discussed 
here, it does not overstate its case, defines its terms precisely 
(especially when concepts are employed in unusual ways), 
and frames its discussion in terms of a specific notion of 
“function.” I have some criticisms regarding these authors’ 
approach as well, but reading this paper will be a good use 
of your time. Please engage its ideas with an open mind! 
They are well worth considering, and may even inspire you 
to think differently, or reflect on some of the aspects of your 
own approach to evolution.
Acknowledgements An expanded but also cruder version of this com-
mentary was first published as a blog post: http:// www. johan nesja eger. 
eu/ blog/ assem bly- theory- is- cool. Disclosure: I am funded by the John 
Templeton Foundation, project “Pushing the Boundaries” (grant ID: 
62581). The funders had absolutely no influence on the content of this 
commentary. Figures drawn by Marcus Neustetter.
Funding Open access funding provided by University of Vienna.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The Author declares that there is no conflict of in-
terest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Bennett CH (1988) Logical depth and physical complexity. In: Herken 
R (ed) The universal turing machine a half-century survey. 
Springer, Vienna, pp 207–235
Ellis GFR (2023) How purposeless physics underlies purpose-
ful life. Nature 622:247–249. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/  
d41586- 023- 03061-y
Huffman D (1952) A method for the construction of minimum-redun-
dancy codes. Proc IRE 40:1098–1101. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ 
JRPROC. 1952. 273898
Jaeger J (2024a) The fourth perspective: evolution and organismal 
agency. In: Mossio M (ed) Organization in biology. Springer, 
Berlin, pp 159–186. https:// doi. org/ 10. 31219/ osf. io/ 2g7fh
Jaeger J (2024b) Artificial intelligence is algorithmic mimicry: why 
artificial “agents” are not (and won’t be) proper agents. Neurons, 
Behavior, Data Analysis, and Theory, pp 1–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
51628/ 001c. 94404
Kauffman SA (2000) Investigations. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Liu Y, Mathis C, Bajczyk MD, Marshall SM, Wilbraham L, Cronin 
L (2021) Exploring and mapping chemical space with molecu-
lar assembly trees. Sci Adv 7:eabj2465. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1126/ 
sciadv. abj24 65
Marshall SM, Murray ARG, Cronin L (2017) A probabilistic frame-
work for identifying biosignatures using pathway complexity. 
Philos Trans R Soc Math Phys Eng Sci 375:20160342. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1098/ rsta. 2016. 0342
Marshall SM, Mathis C, Carrick E, Keenan G, Cooper GJT, Graham H, 
Craven M, Gromski PS, Moore DG, Walker SI, Cronin L (2021) 
Identifying molecules as biosignatures with assembly theory and 
mass spectrometry. Nat Commun 12:3033. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/ s41467- 021- 23258-x
Marshall SM, Moore DG, Murray ARG, Walker SI, Cronin L (2022) 
Formalising the pathways to life using assembly spaces. Entropy 
24:884. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ e2407 0884
Sharma A, Czégel D, Lachmann M, Kempes CP, Walker SI, Cronin 
L (2023) Assembly theory explains and quantifies selection 
and evolution. Nature 622:321–328. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
s41586- 023- 06600-9
Uthamacumaran A, Abrahão FS, Kiani NA, Zenil H (2022) On the sali-
ent limitations of the methods of assembly theory and their clas-
sification of molecular biosignatures. arXiv [it] preprint: https://  
arxiv. org/ abs/ 2210. 00901. https:// doi. org/ 10. 48550/ arXiv. 2210. 
00901
Wong ML, Cleland CE, Arend D, Bartlett S, Cleaves HJ II, Demar -
est H, Prabhu A, Lunine JI, Hazen RM (2023) On the roles of 
function and selection in evolving systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
120:e2310223120. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1073/ pnas. 23102 23120
Zenil H, Kiani NA, Shang MM, Tegnér J (2018) Algorithmic com-
plexity and reprogrammability of chemical structure networks. 
Parallel Process Lett 28:1850005. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1142/ S0129 
62641 85000 56
