===== PAGE 1 =====
Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy of Electrons from Tritium Beta Decay
and 83mKr Internal Conversion
A. Ashtari Esfahani, 1, a S. B¨ oser,2 N. Buzinsky,3, b M. C. Carmona-Benitez, 4 C. Claessens,1, 2, c L. de Viveiros,4
P. J. Doe,1 M. Fertl,2 J. A. Formaggio,3 J. K. Gaison, 5 L. Gladstone,6 M. Guigue,7 J. Hartse,1 K. M. Heeger, 8
X. Huyan,5, d A. M. Jones, 5, e K. Kazkaz,9 B. H. LaRoque, 5 M. Li,3 A. Lindman,2 E. Machado,1 A. Marsteller,1
C. Matth´ e,2 R. Mohiuddin,6 B. Monreal,6 R. Mueller,4 J. A. Nikkel, 8 E. Novitski,1 N. S. Oblath, 5
J. I. Pe˜ na,3 W. Pettus,10 R. Reimann,2 R. G. H. Robertson, 1 D. Rosa De Jes´ us,5 G. Rybka,1 L. Salda˜ na,8
M. Schram,5, f P. L. Slocum,8 J. Stachurska,3 Y.-H. Sun,6 P. T. Surukuchi,8 J. R. Tedeschi,5 A. B. Telles,8
F. Thomas,2 M. Thomas,5, g L. A. Thorne, 2 T. Th¨ ummler,11 L. Tvrznikova,9, h W. Van De Pontseele, 3
B. A. VanDevender,1, 5 J. Weintroub,12 T. E. Weiss,8, i T. Wendler,4 A. Young,12, j E. Zayas,3 and A. Ziegler 4
(Project 8 Collaboration)
1Center for Experimental Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics and Department
of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
2Institute for Physics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany
3Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
4Department of Physics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
5Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99354, USA
6Department of Physics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
7Laboratoire de Physique Nucl´ eaire et de Hautes ´Energies, Sorbonne
Universit´ e, Universit´ e Paris Cit´ e, CNRS/IN2P3, 75005 Paris, France
8Wright Laboratory and Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
9Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
10Center for Exploration of Energy and Matter and Department of Physics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA
11Institute of Astroparticle Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
12Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
(Dated: December 27, 2023)
Project 8 has developed a novel technique, Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy (CRES),
for direct neutrino mass measurements. A CRES-based experiment on the beta spectrum of tritium
has been carried out in a small-volume apparatus. We provide a detailed account of the experiment,
focusing on systematic effects and analysis techniques. In a Bayesian (frequentist) analysis, we
measure the tritium endpoint as 18553+18
−19 (18548+19
−19) eV and set upper limits of 155 (152) eV (90%
C.L.) on the neutrino mass. No background events are observed beyond the endpoint in 82 days
of running. We also demonstrate an energy resolution of 1 .66± 0.19 eV in a resolution-optimized
magnetic trap configuration by measuring 83mKr 17.8-keV internal-conversion electrons. These
measurements establish CRES as a low-background, high-resolution technique with the potential to
advance neutrino mass sensitivity.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction 2
a Present Address: Department of Physics, Sharif University of
Technology, P.O. Box 11155-9161, Tehran, Iran
b Present Address: Center for Experimental Nuclear Physics and
Astrophysics and Department of Physics, University of Washing-
ton, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
c claesc@uw.edu
d Present Address: LeoLabs, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
e Present Address: Ozen Engineering, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA
f Present Address: Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facil-
ity, Newport News, VA 23606, USA
g Present Address: Booz Allen Hamilton, San Antonio, Texas,
78226, USA
h Present Address: Waymo, Mountain View, CA 94043
i talia.weiss@yale.edu
j Present Address: Department of Astrophysics/IMAPP, Rad-
boud University, PO Box 9010, 6500 GL Nijmegen, The Nether-
lands
II. Apparatus 3
A. Magnetic trap 4
B. Gas system 5
C. Radio-frequency system 6
III. CRES data features 6
A. Electron event properties 6
B. Data set features 7
C. Scattering 7
D. Mean track duration τ 9
IV. Simulated CRES data 10
A. CRES signal generation with Locust 10
B. Signal frequency and power 10
C. Simulated event properties 10
V. CRES spectrum analysis 11
A. CRES energy spectrum model 13
B. Instrumental resolution I 13
C. Energy loss spectra L∗j
tot 14
arXiv:2303.12055v3  [nucl-ex]  23 Dec 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
D. Scatter peak amplitudes Aj 15
VI. Calibration with 83mKr 15
A. Test of the frequency-energy relation 15
B. 83mKr fit procedure with CRES spectrum
model 16
C. Instrumental resolution I 17
1. SNR scaling optimization 17
2. Uncertainties on I propagated to 83mKr
fit results 17
D. Field-shifted 83mKr data analysis 18
1. Measurement of detection efficiency vs.
frequency 18
2. Extraction of statistical trap weights 18
E. 83mKr shallow trap data and fits 19
F. 83mKr pre-tritium and post-tritium quad
trap data and fits 19
VII. Tritium models 20
A. Detailed tritium model for MC data
generation 20
B. Approximate tritium model for analysis 20
1. Tritium beta decay analysis model 21
2. Tritium energy response function analysis
model 21
C. Event rate model 22
VIII. Tritium parameter estimates and uncertainties 22
A. Mean magnetic field B 23
B. Energy resolution σ 23
C. Scatter peak amplitudes Aj(p,q ) 24
D. Energy-dependent efficiency ϵ 25
1. Efficiency correction for energy
dependence 25
2. Extraction of SNR dependence on
frequency 27
3. Efficiency correction for slope variation 27
4. Efficiency binning 28
E. Frequency dependence of energy response
functionRPSF 28
F. Summary of parameter probability
distributions 29
IX. Tritium data analysis 29
A. Tritium analysis procedures 29
1. Bayesian analysis procedure 29
2. Frequentist analysis procedure 30
3. Frequency variation of scatter peak
amplitudes 31
B. Monte Carlo studies 31
1. Generating ensembles of MC spectra 32
2. Coverage and bias tests 32
X. Results 33
A. Tritium endpoint and neutrino mass limit 33
B. Background 34
C. Neutrino mass sensitivity 34
XI. Conclusions and outlook 36
Acknowledgments 37
References 37
A. The effect of track duration distribution 39
B. Illustration of full analysis procedure 39
C. Validating 83mKr scatter peak amplitudes with
simulation 39
D. Determining parameters for the reduced
resolution model 41
I. INTRODUCTION
The neutrino comes in three flavors—electron, muon,
and tau—associated with the charged leptons. Super-
Kamiokande [1] and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory
[2] showed that these flavors mix and oscillate, explaining
the anomalies in atmospheric and solar neutrino fluxes.
Oscillation between neutrino flavors requires that neutri-
nos have mass, in contradiction with the Standard Model
of particle physics wherein neutrinos are massless. It is
now clear that neutrino mass eigenstates mi=1,2,3 exist,
of which at least two have non-zero mass. The flavor
eigenstates are linear combinations of mi, with ampli-
tudes given by elements of a unitary matrix U, the Pon-
tecorvo–Maki–Nakagawa–Sakata (PMNS) matrix [3, 4].
Oscillation experiments can determine only the differ-
ences of the squares m2
i−m2
j, not the mass scale. It is
known from solar neutrino oscillations [2] that m2 >m 1,
but whether m3 is the lightest mass eigenstate (“in-
verted ordering”) or the heaviest (“normal ordering”)
is presently unknown. Oscillation experiments also con-
strain the sum of the three neutrino masses, Σ mi, to be
at least 0.05 eV [5] because masses are positive definite.
The neutrino constitutes the first and, so far, the only
identified dark matter in the cosmos. Limits on Σmi have
been obtained from observations of the cosmic microwave
background and large-scale cosmic structure (see, for ex-
ample, the Planck collaboration [6] who reported a limit
of<0.12 eV within the framework of the ΛCDM model).
The most sensitive technique for a direct and model-
independent neutrino mass determination is the analysis
of the endpoint region of the tritium beta decay spec-
trum [7]. The signal for neutrino mass emerges as a
phase-space modification of the spectral shape close to
the beta endpoint. This signal is independent of whether
neutrinos are Majorana or Dirac particles. When the
energy resolution in a beta spectroscopy experiment is
larger than the neutrino mass splittings, the experiment
measures the electron-weighted neutrino mass,
mβ =
vuut
3X
i=1
|Uei|2m2
i . (1)

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
Neutrino oscillation experiments impose an ultimate
lower bound of mβ≥0.009 eV (mβ≥0.05 eV) for the case
of normal (inverted) mass ordering [5].
Recently, the KATRIN experiment has set a new upper
limit on mβ of 0.8 eV at 90 % confidence level [8]. KA-
TRIN’s design goal is a 0.2-eV mass sensitivity limit [9],
if the mass is not larger. KATRIN is expected to either
exhaust the quasidegenerate range of neutrino masses, or
to measure the neutrino mass if it lies in that range.
The neutrino mass might turn out to be smaller than
the state-of-the-art experiment KATRIN can discover.
While there may be ways to extend the reach of KA-
TRIN somewhat [10], this type of experiment approaches
a fundamental limit as a result of its sheer size and use
of molecular tritium (T 2). With T 2, one relies on a the-
oretical prediction of the spectrum of excited molecular
states produced in beta decay, which broadens the spec-
tral response [11, 12]. The neutrino mass effect is spread
over a range of slightly differing endpoints for the excita-
tions, exacting both a statistical and a systematic price.
An independent direct measurement of this spectrum of
excited states is not possible, although specific tests can
be performed [13] and agree with theory at the percent
level. To advance significantly beyond KATRIN’s design
sensitivity—which is the goal of a next-generation tritium
endpoint experiment—requires a different approach. An
experiment that sets a limit ofmβ < 0.04 eV would reach
the full range of masses allowed for the inverted order-
ing, so this experiment would either measure the neutrino
mass scale or exclude the inverted ordering [14, 15].
The Project 8 Collaboration has devised a new
method called Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spec-
troscopy (CRES) [14, 16] to reach this goal. In CRES,
the emitted beta electron’s energy is measured by de-
tecting its cyclotron radiation as it spirals in a magnetic
field. In special relativity, the cyclotron frequency fc in
a magnetic field B is related to kinetic energy Ekin as
follows:
fc = 1
2π
eB
me +Ekin/c2, (2)
where e is the magnitude of the electron charge, me is
the mass of the electron, and c is the speed of light in
vacuum. Project 8 aims to combine CRES with the use
of atomic tritium as the beta decay source, to remove
uncertainty from molecular states.
CRES was first demonstrated with a precision mea-
surement of the energies of single electrons from 83mKr
decay by the Project 8 collaboration in 2014 [17]
(Phase I). Subsequently, Project 8 has performed a
CRES-based tritium experiment (Phase II), the subject
of this paper. We report details of tritium endpoint
and neutrino mass results obtained from the small-scale
Phase II apparatus. These results rely on the first mea-
surement of the continuous tritium spectrum using CRES
and the first quantitative exploration of systematic effects
in CRES. A companion Letter [18] provides a high-level
overview of Project 8’s Phase II results.
gas port RF terminator
trap coilsRF window RF window
field-shifting solenoid
B
FIG. 1. Cutaway of the cryogenic CRES cell, where electrons
are produced in radioactive decay and magnetically trapped.
The cell waveguide has a cold interior diameter of 10.03 mm
and length of 132 mm (distance between RF windows). Cy-
clotron radiation travels axially up the waveguide (left in ro-
tated view), toward the amplifiers and readout electronics.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the ap-
paratus and data-taking conditions are described in suf-
ficient detail to give context to the analysis. A more
comprehensive paper on the apparatus is in preparation.
Sec. III describes the general features of CRES data and
the data sets to be analyzed. In Sec. IV, CRES signals
are reproduced in simulation and compared to experi-
mental data. Sec. V provides an overview of the analysis
approach, including a general CRES signal model and
all its inputs. Sec. VI presents calibration measurements
with 83mKr that produce inputs to tritium data analysis.
83mKr data are also used to validate the frequency-energy
relation in Eq. 2 and to demonstrate the high-resolution
capabilities of CRES. Sec. VII presents two models of tri-
tium spectra: one for Monte Carlo data generation and
one for tritium data analysis. These models build on the
general CRES signal model. Sec. VIII describes param-
eter inputs and systematic uncertainties for the tritium
analysis. Sec. IX then describes procedures for analyz-
ing tritium data using both Bayesian and frequentist ap-
proaches. In Sec. X, we present endpoint and neutrino
mass results. In addition, a search for events above the
endpoint produces a stringent limit on the background
rate. The sensitivity of this Phase II experiment to the
neutrino mass is compared to an analytic prediction.
II. APPARATUS
In the Project 8 Phase II apparatus, molecular tritium
or 83mKr is confined in a cryogenic gas cell (the “CRES
cell”) within the field of a commercial warm-bore super-
conducting magnet. The cell, mechanically supported
on an experimental insert, is positioned in the vertical
magnetic field of 0 .959 T, which induces cyclotron mo-
tion and confines electrons radially. The CRES cell is
shown in Fig. 1. Electrons emitted in radioactive decay
are trapped axially in dips in the magnetic field created
by coils wound around the gas cell. The trap geome-
try affects resolution, event rate, and event characteris-
tics. For Phase II, electrons are trapped in multiple short

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
traps where the electrons’ axial motion is near-harmonic,
rather than in a single longer trap—both because of non-
uniformity in the background field, and because of a
Doppler shift, as explained below. Currents can be varied
independently in the five coils to create traps of varying
geometries. Cyclotron radiation emitted by the electrons
then propagates through a waveguide, is amplified in two
low-noise cryogenic amplifiers in series, and passes on to
room-temperature elements of the detection chain.
The 1.6-m insert which supports the CRES cell is
cooled by a Cryomech AL-60 Gifford-McMahon cry-
ocooler. The cell temperature is controlled by a heater
on a PID loop. The dominant noise source in the exper-
iment is thermal, set by the temperature of a custom-
made radio-frequency (RF)-absorbing terminator at the
lower end of the cell. To reduce noise, the cell is kept as
cold as possible. A lower limit on the cell temperature
of 85 K is set by the requirement that a sufficient density
of 83mKr remains in the gas phase. This temperature is
maintained during all data taking to avoid altering sys-
tematic effects between 83mKr and T 2.
The Phase II apparatus was previously described
in [14]. Further details on the apparatus and tests thereof
will be reported in a paper in preparation.
A. Magnetic trap
The criterion for adiabatically trapping a charged par-
ticle in a magnetic trap is [19]
θ0 ≥ sin−1
 r
B0
Bmax
!
, (3)
where θ0 is the pitch angle at B0, the lowest-field point,
and Bmax is the smaller of the maximum field values on
either side of B0. Pitch angle is defined as the angle
between the electron’s momentum and the local field di-
rection.
Cyclotron radiation propagates along the waveguide
axis toward the detection system. Because the trapped
electrons undergo axial motion, their cyclotron radiation
is Doppler-shifted at twice the axial frequency fa. The
maximum Doppler shift is proportional to the electron’s
axial velocity as it passes through the trap minimum.
The resulting frequency modulation creates sidebands to
the mean cyclotron frequency (termed the ‘carrier’). The
modulation indexh is the ratio of the peak shift in carrier
frequency to the modulation (here, axial) frequency:
h = βcfc
vϕfa
cosθ0, (4)
where βc is the electron’s speed and vϕ is the phase ve-
locity in the waveguide. There is also a frequency shift
associated with the magnetic field variation along the
electron’s trajectory, but it is much smaller and neglected
here. For large h, sidebands proliferate and the carrier
becomes too weak to be detected [20]. Our noise thresh-
old for detecting the carrier corresponds approximately
to h≤ 1. In magnetic traps this condition translates
directly to a lower limit on the axial frequency, which
dictates short traps. For a given value ofh, the magnetic
field at the turning point is:
Bm =B0
"
1−
hvϕfa
βcfc
2#−1
. (5)
To increase statistics, several short traps are spaced along
the cell in the most uniform region of the background
field.
Data were taken in two trap configurations. A shallow
double trap was used to demonstrate the high resolution
capability of the CRES technique; this trap is shown in
Fig. 2(b). A deep ‘quad’ trap with the magnetic field
shown in Fig. 2(a) was used to maximize the number of
trapped electrons and to increase effective volume Veff in
this small apparatus. For a single trap,
Veff = 2π
Z rmax
0
Z zmin+am
zmin−am
s
1− B(z,r )
Bm(r)rdrdz, (6)
where rmax is the waveguide radius, zmin is the location
of the trap minimum, and am is the axial distance be-
tween fieldsB0 andBm. Fig. 2(a) illustrates the defined
fields for trap 4, with Bm shown for h = 1 at 1-mm dis-
placement from the axis.
Four of the trap coils shown in Fig. 1 were used; the
fifth was not used because the background field varies
too steeply there to form a trap. The 0.959-T background
field is also shown in Fig. 2. It deviates from homogeneity
at the 5×10−4 level because of a non-functional trim coil
of the superconducting magnet, which causes the slope
and curvature seen in the figure.
Table I lists parameters for the traps. In the table,zmin
is the location of the trap minimum relative to the lower
CRES cell window. Estimates of B0 are also included;
calibrations with 83mKr produced more precise field es-
timates, as discussed in Sec. VI F and Sec. VIII A. The
angle θ0(h = 1) is the minimum detectable pitch angle
at trap center. The effective volume Veff of each trap is
calculated numerically with the aid of Eq. 6 for rmax =
5.02 mm (the waveguide radius), and for am, Bm corre-
sponding to h = 1. Other sources of inefficiency, such as
the Larmor radius limitation, mode-coupling threshold,
and track and event reconstruction, are not included in
Veff. Those effects are treated as efficiency terms, de-
scribed and tabulated in Sec. X C. Also shown in the
table is the minimum trapped pitch angle θ0(min).
A long additional copper coil called the “field-shifting
solenoid” (FSS) was inserted into the superconducting
solenoid’s warm bore that encompasses the CRES cell
(Fig. 1). The FSS was used to shift the homogeneous
magnetic field for studies of detection efficiency as a func-
tion of frequency. By running current through this ad-
ditional coil, the field was shifted in steps of ∆ BFSS =
0.07 mT over a range of±3 mT.

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
 Magnetic ﬁeld - 959 (mT)
120100806040200
 Distance from lower window (mm)
 WINDOW
 WINDOW
 275  288 252 180
 
 (a)
 Bmax
 Bm
 B0
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00  Magnetic ﬁeld - 959 (mT)
120100806040200
 Distance from lower window (mm)
 WINDOW
 WINDOW 12  17.85
 (b)
FIG. 2. (a) Calculated deep quad trap coil field. (b) Cal-
culated shallow double trap coil field. Note different scales
ony-axes. The background field from NMR measurements is
shown as a blue dotted line. The heavy solid blue lines are
for a radius 1 mm from the axis, and the fine red lines are for
2, 3, and 4 mm in turn. The coil currents are shown in mA
under each trap. Trap depths were equalized for the 1-mm
radius because the coupling to the waveguide’s TE 11 mode
maximizes on the axis.
A single-axis fluxgate magnetometer (Schonstedt In-
strument Co. DM2220) was used during the final 83mKr
calibration phase to assess the role of environmental mag-
netic field changes in the laboratory. Over a 3-day period,
peak-to-peak variations of 6 % in the 0.11-mT vertical
laboratory background field were observed at a distance
of 3 m from the magnet. These variations correspond
to a 0.3 eV difference in reconstructed electron energies,
much smaller than the 50-eV line width of the quad trap.
The variation within the magnet bore is expected to have
been even lower due to the self-shielding provided by a
superconducting magnet in persistent mode. While the
fluxgate magnetometer was not available during tritium
running, the influence of environmental field variations is
considered negligible at the relevant sensitivity level.
TABLE I. Calculated quad and shallow trap configurations.
Coil 1 Coil 2 Coil 3 Coil 4 Unit
Turns 64 63 64 65
Deep quad trap configuration parameters
Current 180 252 275 288 mA
zmin 11.9 34.4 56.7 78.6 mm
B0− 959 -1.21173 -1.21768 -1.22141 -1.21918 mT
Trap depth 0.45423 0.57720 0.70887 0.72418 mT
θ0(h = 1) 89.47 89.37 89.33 89.30 deg
θ0(min) 88.75 88.59 88.44 88.42 deg
Veff 3.0 3.6 3.9 4.1 mm 3
Shallow double trap configuration parameters
Current 12 17.85 mA
zmin 55.6 78.4 mm
B0− 959 0.084724 0.087937 mT
Trap depth 0.009905 0.036838 mT
θ0(h = 1) 89.89 89.84 deg
θ0(min) 89.82 89.64 deg
Veff 0.61 0.96 mm 3
B. Gas system
The radioactive gases were released into the apparatus
from a custom gas manifold. This manifold connected to
the CRES cell via a delivery line running along the in-
sert and through a grid of holes with diameter less than
0.1 wavelengths of the microwave radiation. The gas sys-
tem could be run in two modes. In neutrino mass data
acquisition mode, molecular tritium gas was delivered,
while in calibration mode, 83mKr gas was delivered. Tri-
tium was stored in a 0.5-g non-evaporable getter (SAES
ST 172/HI/7.5-7/150 C), the temperature of which was
controlled by an ion gauge to maintain the desired op-
erating pressure, usually 1.6–2.6× 10−6 mbar (calibrated
for H 2). Pressure could be maintained to ±3 % run-to-
run for the duration of data-taking. In later data sets, we
prevented accumulation of 3He (produced in tritium de-
cay) by extracting gas continually through a leak valve to
a getter-ion pump, which also lowered the concentration
of traces of methane, Ar, CO, and CO 2 impurities; this
is referred to as the “pumped” configuration. The ini-
tial 2-Ci inventory of tritium was sufficient for a ∼100-d
data-taking period and the gas was not recycled. Gas
composition could be monitored by two residual gas an-
alyzers: an SRS-100 close to the SAES getter, and an
Extorr XT100 at the getter-ion pump manifold.
For calibration studies, the 83mKr gas emanated from
83Rb (6 mCi on July 19, 2019), adsorbed on zeolite [21].
The Kr was mixed with H 2 to tune the mean time be-
tween electron-gas collisions to match that in tritium
data. The H 2 was stored in a separate getter and
pressure-controlled in the same way as the tritium.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
C. Radio-frequency system
The CRES cell forms the first section of the waveguide
through which cyclotron radiation travels toward the am-
plifiers (Low Noise Factory LNF-LNC22 40WA). For the
Phase II decay cell used in this work, a circular wave-
guide was chosen over the rectangular WR-42 used previ-
ously [17], to increase the volume and to accept circular
polarization. In the frequency range 25 .8 to 27.0 GHz,
waveguide of radius 5 .02 mm supports two propagating
modes, TE11 and TM01. The electron couples well to the
TE11 mode and only weakly to the TM 01 mode (Fig. 3).
The coupling is maximal on-axis and falls off to a small
value near the wall.
0 1 2 3 4 5
 (mm)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Power (fW)
(a)
TE11
TM01
23 24 25 26 27 28
Frequency (GHz)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700Mode impedance ( )
(b)
TE11
TM01
FIG. 3. (a) Coupling of an electron to the two propagating
modes as a function of the distance ρ from the axis. The
electron has energy 18.6 keV (fc≈ 25.9 GHz) and pitch angle
90◦. (b) Mode impedance for the two propagating modes.
The cyclotron radiation emitted by a trapped elec-
tron propagates both downward and upward, passing
through RF-transparent CaF2 windows (United Crystals
Inc.) that confine the radioactive gas (Fig. 1). This crys-
talline material has a coefficient of thermal expansion
that matches copper at low temperatures, and it is known
to have low permeability to tritium [22]. To minimize
interference from reflections, the downward-propagating
radiation is absorbed in a custom-made cryogenic RF ter-
minator. Beyond the uppermost window, the upward-
propagating circularly polarized radiation is converted
to linear polarization by a quarter-wave ‘plate.’ The
radiation is then transmitted via a WR-42 single-mode
rectangular waveguide, including a gold-coated stainless
steel section for thermal insulation, to cryogenic ampli-
fiers held at 30 K. Residual reflections from the windows,
joints, and transitions create weak resonant cavity modes
within the gas cell, which enhance spontaneous emission
at particular frequencies and locations within the trap.
These resonances significantly modify the response to sig-
nals from electrons as a function of trap position and
frequency, presenting a difficult analysis challenge.
After cryogenic and room-temperature amplification,
room-temperature RF electronics downmix the signal
by 24.5 GHz. The downshifted signal is digitized by a
ROACH2 DAQ system [23] at 3 .2 gigasamples per sec-
ond, with an FPGA performing digital downconversion
to 200 megasamples per second and Fast Fourier Trans-
forms (FFT) for three separate frequency windows with
independently-set center frequencies. When two 40.96-µs
bins within any 0.5-ms window exceed a signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) threshold, a compute node writes time-series
data to disk. We calculate SNR as the ratio of the power
in 24.4 kHz wide frequency bins to the average power of
all bins in a spectrogram. This SNR is used instead of
absolute power in all stages of data analysis (triggering,
event reconstruction, spectrum analysis) to avoid the ef-
fects of gain variation of the amplifiers and filters.
III. CRES DATA FEATURES
A. Electron event properties
Electron events may be displayed in a spectrogram
(or “waterfall plot”) of frequency vs. time, with pix-
els indicating signal power by color or intensity. Fig-
ure 4 shows a typical event, which is continuous in time
but discontinuous in frequency. Events are composed of
“tracks,” with jumps in frequency between tracks. The
frequency jumps are due to both energy loss and pitch
angle changes caused by collisions with gas molecules.
Pitch-angle changes cause the amplitude of the electron’s
axial motion to increase or decrease, so the average mag-
netic field experienced by the electron may increase or
decrease. Between collisions, signals continuously chirp
upward in frequency as the electrons radiate energy [20].
We use a point-clustering algorithm to identify high-
SNR bins occurring close together in time and frequency
as belonging to the same track [24]. A reconstruction
algorithm extracts the initial frequency of the first track
of each event, identifying it as the “start frequency” of the
event. It is this start frequency that is used to calculate
the kinetic energy at the time of decay via Eq. 2.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
Time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Power (arb. units)
0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 Time (ms)
916
917
918
919
920
921
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz) 
FIG. 4. Spectrogram of chirped electron signals of a single
radiating electron. The bin size is 24.4 kHz by 40.96 µs.
One of CRES’s promising features is its immunity to
background. Charged particles originating on the wall
are returned to the wall by the magnetic field within one
cyclotron orbit or one axial cycle, before they can be
observed. The interactions of cosmic rays and energetic
beta and gamma backgrounds with the gas can in princi-
ple lead to the production and trapping of an electron in
the right energy range, but this is a rare occurrence be-
cause of the low density of the gas. The dominant back-
ground is expected to be from RF noise fluctuations that
form false tracks. We distinguish electron events from
RF noise by searching for upward-sloping tracks and by
performing cuts as a function of three characteristics: the
number of tracks in a candidate event, the duration of the
first track, and the SNR of the first track. These char-
acteristics are distributed differently for electron events
and RF noise fluctuations. We set the threshold for this
cut before tritium data acquisition at a level expected to
allow less than one RF-noise-induced background event
beyond the endpoint per 100 days of run time at 90 %
confidence level.
Even with the successful elimination of false tracks, the
first track visible in an event is not necessarily the first
track following beta decay or internal conversion. Tracks
can be too short or too low in power to be detected. The
detector response function described later accounts for
such missed tracks.
B. Data set features
Studies of the efficiency, energy response, and magnetic
field were carried out with 83mKr during the second half
of 2019. Tritium data taking began in mid-December and
extended into March 2020, with several days of downtime
in February for laboratory maintenance. A final week
of 83mKr measurements concluded the data-taking cam-
paign in March as planned, just before a global pandemic
precluded further data-taking and laboratory work.
Properties of key data sets are summarized in Tab. II
in chronological order. 1 The mean number of electron
tracks per event, Ntrue
tracks, is determined from the post-
reconstruction tracks per event in data combined with
simulation studies of the relationship between true and
reconstructed tracks per event. Section VIII C describes
howNtrue
tracks is used in tritium data analysis. Section III D
describes howτ, the mean time between electron-gas col-
lisions, is extracted from the data and used in tritium
analysis. For tritium data, and for all data sets that
provide direct calibration input to the tritium analysis
(83mKr field-shifted, 83mKr pre-tritium, and 83mKr post-
tritium), the gas composition and electron-gas scattering
rate were kept as similar and stable as possible, despite
the absence of krypton and the presence of helium during
tritium data-taking.
83mKr data were acquired in periods lasting a few hours
each for deep quad trap data sets. Shallow-trap data sets
took several days to acquire adequate statistics. With
maximum event durations of <10 ms and rates of∼1 cps
(counts per second), pileup effects were negligible. 2 A
single 100-MHz-bandwidth DAQ channel was used to ac-
quire data on the 17 .8-keV K internal-conversion line,
and sometimes the second channel or both the second and
third channels simultaneously took data on the L lines
(30.4 keV) or the M and N lines (31.9 keV and 32.1 keV).
Tritium data were taken over 82 days in the deep
quad trap configuration, with a mean event rate of
0.5× 10−3 cps. The analysis window spanned 25 .81–
25.99 GHz, or 16.2–19.8 keV in electron energy. The three
DAQ windows overlapped to minimize efficiency varia-
tion with frequency due to windowing. Only the highest-
efficiency channel is analyzed in the overlap regions.
C. Scattering
Here we describe our assessment of the relative prob-
abilityγi for an electron to inelastically scatter with gas
species i. These probabilities are needed to model the
distribution of energy losses from missed tracks, since
the energy loss between two tracks depends on which gas
the electron scatters with.
We neglect elastic scattering as an energy-loss mech-
anism between tracks within an event because it tends
to produce pitch angle changes of ≥5◦ [25], ejecting
the electron from the trap and terminating the event.
By contrast, inelastic scatters produce ∼0.1◦ changes
[25]—generally small enough that the electron remains
trapped. In addition, elastic scattering cross sections are
an order of magnitude smaller than inelastic cross sec-
tions for the most prevalent gas species.
1 In the table and throughout the paper, 3.4(12) signifies 3.4 ±1.2.
2 Were pileup present, any two simultaneous electron events would
typically have distinct cyclotron frequencies and would therefore
be distinguishable in the data. The Project 8 collaboration is
studying potential pileup effects in future phases.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
TABLE II. Characteristics of key data sets. Nevents is the number of reconstructed events in a data set after all cuts. Ntrue
tracks
is the estimated mean number of electron tracks per event (including unreconstructed tracks). τ is the mean time between
electron-gas collisions. Tritium data were acquired in an energy range of 16.2-19.8 keV.
Data Set Purpose Magnetic field
configuration
Gas system
configuration Nevents Ntrue
tracks τ (ms) Section(s)
83mKr
shallow
Demonstrate best
resolution and probe
detector response
Shallow
double trap Not pumped 6831 1 .24(12) 0 .342(5) Sec. VI A,
Sec. VI E
83mKr
field-shifted
Measure frequency
dependence of
efficiency and
other characteristics
Deep quad trap &
deep single traps;
background B
field varied
Not pumped 9350 2 .73(24) 0 .173(3) Sec. VI D
83mKr
pre-tritium
Calibrate magnetic
field, scattering
environment
Deep quad trap Not pumped 87634 2 .40(27) 0 .162(1) Sec. VI F
Tritium Spectroscopy of
tritium endpoint
Deep quad trap Pumped 3770 2 .36(34) 0 .146(3) Sec. VIII,
Sec. IX
83mKr
post-tritium
Calibrate magnetic
field, scattering
environment
Deep quad trap Pumped 47426 3 .37(21) 0 .188(1) Sec. VI F
For key data sets, γi are derived from the mass com-
position measured with the quadrupole mass analyzer,
with
γi = σi,ECtemp,ipraw,i/siP
n(σn,ECtemp,npraw,n/sn), (7)
whereσi,E is the total inelastic scattering cross section of
an electron of energy E with gas i;Ctemp,i is a factor ac-
counting for gas freezing to CRES cell walls; praw,i is the
uncorrected partial-pressure reading of the quadrupole
mass analyzer; and si is the sensitivity factor of the
quadrupole mass analyzer to gas species i. The uncer-
tainty on each of these quantities is propagated through
to the uncertainty on γi in the standard way.
The inelastic scattering cross sections σi,E are derived
from literature values. Contributions to uncertainties on
σi,E include both uncertainties within and differences be-
tween published data sets. Values of σi,E for H2 and T2
come from a measurement at 18.6 keV [26] and are scaled
according to [27] for 17.8 keV. Cross sections on 3He, Kr,
and Ar are taken from [28], with uncertainties from [29–
32]. For CO, the cross section is evaluated using the
expression from [33], with uncertainties from [34, 35].
Because Kr is the only relevant gas species for which
significant adsorption to cold walls is expected at 85 K,
we take Ctemp,i=1 for all other species. The C temp,Kr
value of 0.90(5) is measured from temperature-varying
83mKr CRES data, taking advantage of the direct depen-
dence of event rate on Kr density in the cell.
The manufacturer of the quadrupole mass analyzer
used does not publish sensitivity factors for its product,
so we adopt sensitivity factors si from other quadrupole
mass analyzer manuals, with uncertainties estimated
from differences between different manufacturers’ values.
We measured the raw partial pressurespraw,i using the
quadrupole mass analyzer. Since 83mKr data sets were
completed in hours or at most a few days, gas condi-
tions were stable. Therefore, each data set’s praw,i mea-
surements are determined from a single representative
quadrupole mass analyzer scan. In contrast, tritium data
were taken over months, with some variation in condi-
tions, especially initially as pumping speed settings were
optimized. Gas composition for tritium data is therefore
an average: the sum of measurements taken in each state
weighted by the accumulated counts in that state.
One complication in interpreting praw,i values comes
from the inability to distinguish species with identical
charge-to-mass ratio using the available quadrupole mass
analyzers. This creates a challenge because deuterium
gas was used in the initial testing during commissioning
of the gas system, and was mistakenly allowed to con-
taminate the reservoir of H 2 used for 83mKr data. For
83mKr data sets, therefore, mass-3 signals due to 3He
and HD cannot be distinguished. This modest-quality
quadrupole mass analyzer also suffered from zero-blast,
making mass-1 and mass-2 measurements insufficiently
reliable to measure the relative partial pressures of H +
and D +. This mass-3 3He/HD uncertainty is reflected
in the larger error bars on gas composition in the 83mKr
data sets. In contrast, the tritium gas supply was not
deuterium-contaminated, so the tritium data do not suf-
fer from this uncertainty.
Table III shows the inelastic scattering fraction re-
sults, as derived from the mass composition measured
with the quadrupole mass analyzer and Eq. 7. For fits
to the 83mKr pre-tritium and post-tritium data sets, to
propagate uncertainties, we sampleγi from near-uniform
distributions defined according to the ranges in this ta-

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
Data set Tritium 83mKr shallow 83mKr field-shifted 83mKr pre-tritium 83mKr post-tritium
Hydrogen isotopes 91(5) 9-98 38-98 23-91 41-99
Helium-3 8(4) 0-99 0-59 0-67 0-58
Argon <1 <1 5-10 <1
Krypton 1-3 2-3 2-5 <1
Carbon monoxide 1(1) <1
TABLE III. Possible ranges of percentages of inelastic scatters due to each of the main gas species present during the tritium
data set and the primary 83mKr data sets. Scattering from all non-listed gases for a given data set is negligible. Values are
given as ranges with near-uniform probability (with sigmoid edges) for 83mKr data, where deuterium contamination interfered
with distinguishing 3He from hydrogen isotopes.
ble, requiring that the sampled fractions sum to 1. This
near-uniform shape, flat with sigmoid ends, reflects the
inability to distinguish 3He from HD in 83mKr data.
In tritium and 83mKr data, scattering from molecu-
lar hydrogen isotopes is dominant, and 3He scattering is
the next-largest contributor. The 3He gas is produced
by the decay of tritium in the storage getter and ad-
sorbed to the gas system walls. Tritium data include a
small contribution from a mass-28 gas species, likely CO.
83mKr data include contributions from krypton gas and,
in some cases, argon (the latter in data sets taken before
the pumped gas system configuration was set up, which
then enabled lower impurity levels).
D. Mean track duration τ
Track duration is the time between successive scatters
of an electron with gas molecules. The efficiency and
detector response function are affected by the interaction
of the track reconstruction process with the distribution
of track durations (See Appendix A for details), making
it necessary to assess this distribution for each data set.
The track duration distribution is modeled as follows.
Since track duration is determined by random scattering,
which is a Poisson process, the underlying probability
density function (PDF) is exponential. However, short
tracks are less efficiently detected, so the number N of
tracks detected with a duration t is given by
N(t) ∝ Pd(t)e−t/τ, (8)
where τ is the mean time between collisions with gas
molecules and Pd(t) is the relative probability of detec-
tion as a function of t. We use the following empirical
model forPd(t), which provides good fits to the data and
accounts for the roll-off in detection efficiency at low t:
Pd(t) = erfc
 
ψ−
r
ζ
t
!
. (9)
Here, erfc is the complementary error function andψ and
ζ are determined solely by conditions held constant for
all data sets (except the field-shifted data), such as SNR
and the event-reconstruction algorithm’s success rate at
reconstructing short-duration tracks.
To extract τ in the core tritium and 83mKr calibra-
tion data sets, we first determine ψ andζ independently
by analyzing reconstructed first-track-duration distribu-
tions of 83mKr data sets at five different pressures, and
therefore five values of mean track duration. We use the
Stan software package [36] to perform a Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) Bayesian analysis in which ψ and
ζ are shared for all data sets and τ is allowed to vary
between data sets, with weakly informative priors. The
best-fit values and uncertainties for ψ and ζ are deter-
mined from the resulting posterior distributions.
This information about ψ and ζ is used in track-
duration distribution fits, in which we extract τ for the
core tritium and 83mKr calibration data sets using neg-
ative log-likelihood minimization. Fig. 5 shows the fit
result for the tritium data set, and Tab. II lists the ex-
tracted mean track durations for all data sets.
100
102
Counts / 81.9 s
 Fit result
Tritium data
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75
First track duration t (ms)
0
5Residuals ( )
FIG. 5. Tritium data track duration fit using Eq. 8 and Eq. 9.
At low track durations (< 0.5 ms), the combination of binning
and duration-specific cut thresholds in event reconstruction
lead to variations in the track counts per bin in this histogram
that are not captured by the fitted model. For the analysis
in this paper, only the underlying mean track duration is
relevant, which is determined by the exponential behavior of
the data at long track durations.

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
IV. SIMULATED CRES DATA
Simulations are used to generate inputs to the analysis
model and to evaluate the performance of event detec-
tion and reconstruction methods. It is therefore crucial
that simulated events accurately reproduce the features
of real data, especially in the main properties relevant for
reconstruction: number of tracks per event, track dura-
tion, and SNR.
A. CRES signal generation with Locust
The Locust software package [37] simulates the detec-
tion of RF signals by modeling the response of an antenna
and receiver to time-varying electromagnetic fields. Lo-
cust can independently generate a custom signal to use
as input to its receiver chain algorithm, which processes
the signal prior to digitization and recording. We de-
veloped a Locust signal generator module that simulates
chirped data with typical electron event properties. The
Phase II waveguide and trap geometries are implemented
in this generator to create realistic Phase II-like event sig-
nals. Event starting conditions are sampled from prob-
ability density functions. The generated CRES signals
are added to Gaussian white noise. The relative am-
plitudes of event signals and noise are set to reproduce
the SNR observed in experimental data. Simulated and
experimental data are processed with the same event re-
construction methods.
We generate a set of simulated events to compare to ex-
perimental data. For this purpose, electrons are sampled
at the 83mKr K-line energy at different radial and axial
positions in the waveguide, and with different pitch an-
gles, generating trajectories in response to the magnetic
field map of a single-coil trap in the apparatus. To re-
produce multi-trap effects (e.g. SNR and field variation
differences between traps), the events from simulations
with different trapping fields are combined.
B. Signal frequency and power
The average CRES signal frequency and power are cal-
culated from the magnetic field along the electron’s tra-
jectory and the power coupled to the TE 11 mode. This
calculation accounts for the frequency modulation asso-
ciated with an electron’s pitch angle (Sec. II A). Smaller
pitch angles lead to reduced power in the carrier and
more power in sidebands. Only the carrier is detected
in this experiment. Field-shifting studies measured SNR
differences between the single traps (Sec. VI D 1). These
differences are accounted for by multiplying the signal
power in each trap with a relative SNR factor. For gener-
ating a simulated data set that can directly be compared
to recorded data, the overall SNR scale is determined
by iteratively adjusting the maximum coupled power un-
til the first-track SNR distribution after reconstruction
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reconstructed number of tracks per event
100
101
102
103
104
105
Counts
(a)
Simulated data with configured Ntrue
tracks = 5.0
Geometric fit: ptracks = 0.81 +/- 0.01
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Configured mean Ntrue
tracks
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
Geometric ptracks
(b)
83mKr post-tritium
83mKr pre-tritium
83mKr field-shifted
Tritium
Linear fit
Simulated data
FIG. 6. Procedure for extracting the underlying mean number
of tracks per event from simulations: (a) For each configured
value of Ntrue
tracks, the distribution of reconstructed number of
tracks per event is fitted with a geometric distribution of pa-
rameterptracks. The fit excludes the first bin since the counts
are reduced in this bin by event cuts. (b) The intercepts of
a linear fit to the fitted ptracks for all tested Ntrue
tracks allows
us to find the optimum configuration for each data set. The
uncertainty onptracks (horizontal bands) and the uncertainty
of the linear fit parameters are propagated to an uncertainty
on the extracted mean Ntrue
tracks (vertical bands).
matches that of real data. The maximum coupled power
corresponds to SNR max, the SNR of a 90 ◦ electron at
r = 0 mm in trap 3. This is the trap in which power is
coupled most effectively into the transporting waveguide
mode at the CRES frequency of the 83mKr K-line. Later,
this procedure for setting the SNR scale is replaced by
the method described in Sec. VI C 1.
C. Simulated event properties
To simulate multi-track events, a sequence of chirped
signals is generated with start frequency and power cal-
culated as described above. Track slopes are sampled
from a Gaussian distribution with a mean (352.3 MHz/s)
and standard deviation (54 .5 MHz/s) corresponding to

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
the mean and standard deviation observed in the deep
quad trap 83mKr data. The Gaussian assumption is only
approximately valid, but since reconstruction efficiency
is relatively insensitive to track slopes as long as they are
within several 100 MHz/s of the mean, achieving a better
agreement of the slope distribution is unnecessary.
The track durations are drawn from an exponential
distribution. For each event, the mean track duration τ
that defines this distribution is drawn from a Gaussian
with mean and width according to the fit results listed
in Tab. II. This way, the uncertainty on the mean track
duration is propagated to the simulated data.
The number of tracks per event is drawn from a geo-
metric distribution with a configurable expectation value.
The observed mean number of tracks after event recon-
struction does not correspond to the underlying truth
(Ntrue
tracks), because sometimes tracks are missed or two
tracks are combined into one during reconstruction. To
find the right Ntrue
tracks for all data sets, events of differ-
entNtrue
tracks are simulated and reconstructed. The recon-
structed number of tracks is then fitted with a geomet-
ric distribution, as shown in Fig. 6(a). The distribution
is characterized by its success probability ptracks, which
corresponds to the probability of a detected track to not
be followed by another track. The relation between the
reconstructed and the true mean number of tracks per
event was found to be linear in a separate study in prepa-
ration for publication. Figure 6(b) shows ptracks vs. in-
puttedNtrue
tracks. The underlying Ntrue
tracks for each data set
can be read off from the intersection of the linear fit with
the data set’sptracks. For each data set, vertical bands in-
dicate the uncertainty onNtrue
tracks from two contributions:
the linear fit uncertainty and the ptracks uncertainty.
The sizes of frequency jumps between tracks are drawn
from the energy loss function for electron-hydrogen scat-
tering, converted to frequency via Eq. 2. Since the dis-
tribution of first tracks is the only information from sim-
ulations that we use as analysis input (see Sec. V B),
there is little sensitivity to the loss function and hydro-
gen serves for all gases. It is only required that the jump
size be large enough to prevent the reconstruction algo-
rithm from joining tracks that are in fact separate. Pitch
angle changes during inelastic scatters are assumed to
be small and are ignored, and the power of consecutive
tracks in an event is kept constant. Despite these ap-
proximations, after processing with the Phase II trigger
and reconstruction methods, real data sets are well repro-
duced by simulated events in the main properties relevant
for reconstruction (Fig. 7).
V. CRES SPECTRUM ANALYSIS
This section describes the signal model of CRES spec-
tra used in the analysis, with an overview flow chart
in Fig. 8. Fig. 32 of Appendix B contains a detailed
flowchart that reflects all analysis steps and the interde-
pendence of the 83mKr and T 2 analyses.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
10 3
10 1
Density
Simulated events
Post-tritium 83mKr data
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
N tracks/event
2
1
0
1
2
Residuals ( )
(a)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
Density
Simulated events
Post-tritium 83mKr data
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
First track duration (ms)
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
Residuals ( )
(b)
6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
0.0
0.1
0.2Density
Simulated events
Post-tritium 83mKr data
6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
First track average SNR
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
Residuals ( )
(c)
FIG. 7. Comparison of simulated data to the post-tritium
83mKr data set after triggering and event reconstruction: (a)
number of tracks per event, (b) first track duration, and (c)
first track SNR. The simulations were optimized to reproduce
these data. The good agreement validates the simulations and
enables their use to generate input to the analysis. For this
purpose simulated data sets were generated to match each
data set listed in Tab. II.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
83mKr shakeup and shakeoff spectrum YKr [48]
Conversion electron spectrum model YKr:
Taken from literature/theory
Convolve with energy point-spread function RPSF:
RPSF is obtained from simulation and calibration data. Its composition is illustrated in Fig. 9.
CRES spectrum model for tritium ST2:
Fit to data to obtain results for parameters of interest. 
Signal model S for deep trap T2 data is described in 
Sec. VII. Tritium data analysis is presented in Sec. X.A.
Tritium beta spectrum YT2 [7] with molecular final states [12]
Tritium beta spectrum model YT2:
Taken from literature/theory
CRES spectrum model for 83mKr SKr:
Fit to data to obtain results for parameters of interest. 
Signal models S for shallow and deep trap 83mKr K-line data. The 
fit results are presented in Sec. VI.E and VI.F. 
The shallow-trap point-
spread function is used 
in the high-resolution Kr 
analysis (Sec. VI.E). The 
deep trap point-spread 
function is used for the 
calibration with 83mKr 
(Sec. VI.F and Sec. VIII) 
and the detailed tritium 
model (Sec. VII.A). 
The efficiency 𝜖 varies 
with frequency and 
energy. The 
construction of 𝜖(fc) 
and 𝜖(fc(Ekin)) are 
described in Sec. VI.D 
and VIII.D respectively.
Multiply with detection efficiency 𝜖:
𝜖 is obtained from analyzing field-shifted calibration data. 
0.01
0.1
1
10
 Intensity (%/eV)
1790017800177001760017500
 Energy (eV)
   Shakeoff
  Core + shakeup
        + shakeoff
FIG. 8. Flow chart of construction of Phase II CRES analysis models (Eq. 10). To obtain a full model spectrum S, the
underlying electron energy spectrum Y is convolved with the point spread function RPSF before being multiplied with the
detection efficiency ϵ.

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
A. CRES energy spectrum model
We model a generic detected CRES signal spectrumS
as
S = ϵ (Y∗R PSF), (10)
RPSF =
jmaxX
j=0
Aj

I∗L ∗j
tot

. (11)
Diagrams of these two equations are shown in Fig. 8 and
Fig. 9, respectively. In both equations, all variables are
functions of Ekin, as denoted by script lettering. The
symbol∗ represents convolution and ∗j represents self-
convolution j times. The efficiency function ϵ encodes
the probability of detecting electron events. The under-
lying true energy spectrum of the electrons is Y. RPSF
is the point-spread function, which represents the energy
response for mono-energetic electrons—in other words,
how reconstructed energies are shifted and broadened rel-
ative to true energies.
Equation 11 shows that the energy point-spread func-
tionRPSF is comprised of a sum of scatter peaksI∗L ∗j
tot
weighted by amplitudes Aj, as illustrated in Fig. 9.
These amplitudes describe the relative likelihood that an
electron will first be detected afterj scattering events. As
an example, for tritium data, the best estimates for the
first few Aj values areA0 = 1 (by definition), A1 = 0.41,
A2 = 0.24, and A3 = 0.15. We account for the possi-
bility of up to jmax scatters before the first detection.
We use jmax = 20 in both 83mKr and tritium fits, as in-
creasing jmax further has no observable effect on results
for Phase II conditions. The instrumental resolution I is
the spectrum that a source of mono-energetic electrons
would have if they were all detected before scattering.
The distribution of electrons’ energy losses between scat-
tersLtot depends on the gas composition, the differential
cross section on each gas component, and the loss to cy-
clotron radiation. The elements in RPSF are described
further in the remainder of this section.
B. Instrumental resolution I
In Phase II, the instrumental resolutionI accounts for
broadening from the differences in mean magnetic fields
sampled by detected electrons with different pitch angles
and radial positions. These mean field distributions vary
with trapping geometry. To obtain I for each data set,
mono-energetic events in all constituent single traps are
simulated as described in Sec. IV. In future Project 8
phases,I will also account for uncertainties on the mean
cyclotron frequencies (e.g., due to frequency binning and
noise). In Phase II, this effect was small ( ∼0.2 eV) com-
pared to magnetic field variation.
The shape ofI depends on the range of track SNR val-
ues accepted in analysis. This is because SNR thresholds
limit the range of axial excursions in the trap, which in
𝒜!
FWHM(I∗ℒ"#") 
   = FWHM(I∗∑$𝛾$ℒ$∗ℒ%)
FWHM(I∗ℒ"#"∗’)𝒜( 𝒜’
Sampled 
from ∑$𝛾$ℒ$
etc.    etc.
Sampled 
from ℒ%
(a)
(b)
FWHM(I)
FIG. 9. (a) A CRES event with frequency jumps correspond-
ing to inelastic scattering P
i(γiLi) and energy loss due to
cyclotron radiationLr labelled. These energy losses only af-
fect the spectrum when early tracks in the event are missed.
(b) A modeled spectrum broken down into its constituent
scatter peaks and labelled to show the roles of model param-
eters: scatter peak amplitudes Aj, instrumental resolutionI,
and energy loss spectra L∗j
tot. A Gaussian I is used here for
illustration purposes only; a finer-grained instrumental reso-
lution is used in the analysis, as described later.
turn limits the range of mean fields experienced by de-
tected electrons. Locust computes relative signal powers
to reflect all physical effects in the waveguide. Hence,
only the absolute power scale must be set by configur-
ing the power corresponding to the measured SNR max.
The value of SNR max is specific to each data set and its
optimization is described in Sec. VI C 1.
The simulated events are filtered by an efficiency ma-
trix, which is a binned look-up table of the probability for
an event to be accepted as a function of SNR, first-track
duration, and number of tracks in an event. The effi-
ciency matrix is produced by simulating 100,000 events
covering the full parameter space and analyzing the event
detection probability with respect to those three event
properties. We use this matrix to avoid processing all
simulated data with the trigger and reconstruction meth-
ods, thereby greatly reducing the processing time. This
allows us to iteratively optimize, for example, the event

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
SNR in a data set, with a quick turn-around time.
The density histogram of simulated events that survive
the efficiency filter is a frequency resolution distribution,
which is converted to an energy resolution via Eq. 2.
We center the energy resolution distribution from each
trap on 0 eV to align the distributions before combin-
ing them (in the experiment the trapping field strengths
are aligned to minimize the resolution width of recorded
data). The total I is a weighted average of the reso-
lutions of individual traps. The relative SNR scales of
individual traps are determined using the mapping from
SNR to counts, requiring that the fraction of events in
each trap’s resolution matches the fraction collected in
the trap in real data. An example of a simulated I is
shown in Fig. 10. Because the resolution is centered on
0 eV, a fit of the full spectrum model to data will find
the overall energy scale, set by the mean magnetic field
experienced by the detected electrons.
100
 75
 50
 25
 0 25 50 75 100
Energy (eV)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05Count rate (arb. units)
FIG. 10. Instrumental resolution I of the pre-tritium 83mKr
calibration data set. The error bars include uncertainties from
Poisson counting, the efficiency matrix, and the trap weights.
C. Energy loss spectra L∗j
tot
Electrons lose energy primarily by inelastic scatter-
ing with gas molecules, causing the jumps in Fig. 4.
Cyclotron radiation is a smaller, continuous source of
electron energy loss, causing the upward track slopes in
Fig. 4. L∗j
tot comprises the distribution of possible en-
ergy losses an electron has experienced before the first
detected track due to both of these effects, with the self-
convolutionj times accounting for j scatters. The elec-
tron energy loss spectrum for a single scatter is
Ltot = (γ1L1 +γ2L2 +··· +γnLn)∗Lr, (12)
whereLi is the electron inelastic energy loss spectrum
for the ith gas species, each γi is the fraction of inelastic
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Energy loss (eV)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8Probability density
FIG. 11. SimulatedLr, the energy loss distribution due to cy-
clotron radiation during a missed track, for conditions ( e.g.,
track duration) corresponding to 83mKr pre-tritium data. The
width of this distribution scales with the average track dura-
tions and slopes (slopes correspond to radiated power).
scatters that are due to the specific gas species i, and
Lr is the energy loss spectrum due to cyclotron radiation
during the missed track.
We determine bounds onγi from quadrupole mass an-
alyzer data as described in Sec. III C. For the shallow
trap data, the high resolution allows for a more precise
estimate of gas scattering fractions for H 2 and He to be
determined from the fit to 83mKr data. We neglect the
energy dependence of the scatter fractions γi over the
small range of energy change.
EachLi is calculated in the Bethe theory of electron
inelastic scattering (as in [38]), given by
dσ
dE = 4πa2
0R
Ekin
R
E
df
dE ln
4cEEkin
R

+O
 R
Ekin

,(13)
where R is the Rydberg energy, a0 is the Bohr radius,
Ekin is the incident energy of the electron, E is the en-
ergy loss of the electron, cE≈ (R/E)2, and df/dE is the
optical oscillator strength of the gas molecules. The op-
tical oscillator strength [39–41] data for the relevant gas
species are from the LXCat database [42–45].
We determine the loss due to cyclotron radiation Lr
using the simulated data described in Sec. IV. In
these simulated data, missed tracks associated with de-
tected events are identified. The distribution of dif-
ferences between track end frequency and track start
frequency among these tracks is converted to energy
and taken as the radiative energy loss spectrum Lr
(Fig. 11). With most of its weight in a peak between
0 and 3 eV—reflecting the low likelihood of missing long
tracks—and a modest tail out to∼10 eV,Lr has a much
smaller impact than inelastic scatters.

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
0 4 8 12 16 20
Order j of scatter peak
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
Scatter peak amplitudes Aj
From fitting simulated result
From fitting Kr pre-tritium data
From simulation
FIG. 12. From simulation, amplitudes Aj of scatter peaks in
the CRES response function (blue points), caused by missing
j tracks in an event. Aj are simulated accounting for elec-
tron pitch angle changes from scattering (modeled by Eq. 14).
Aj are modeled by a modified exponential function parame-
terized by p and q (Eq. 15). Fitting p and q for pre-tritium
83mKr data results in a curve (green) in good agreement with
simulation (orange).
D. Scatter peak amplitudes Aj
Each amplitude Aj is the relative likelihood of miss-
ing the first j tracks in an event and detecting track
j + 1. The function Aj(j) is nearly exponential. It de-
viates from an exponential due to pitch-angle changes
from scattering (which alter the probability of an electron
being trapped and detectable) and event reconstruction
thresholds (which here depend on first track duration,
first track SNR, and number of tracks in an event).
To determine the functional form of Aj(j), includ-
ing the deviation from exponentiality, we perform a
toy model simulation and reconstruction of events, then
count events in each scatter peak. It is assumed that
inelastic scattering leads to energy loss and small pitch
angle changes, while elastic scattering removes electrons
from the trap before the next inelastic scatter [25]. The
simulated inelastic scattering angle θs follows the distri-
bution [46]
P (θs)∝

1 + cos2θs
α2
−1
, (14)
where α is a constant that depends on gas composition.
A fraction κ of electrons leave the trap between inelas-
tic scatters due to elastic scatters. As an example, we
find α = 0.0018 (corresponding to an average sampled
scattering angle of 0.48 ◦) and κ = 0.19 for pre-tritium
83mKr data (similar to tritium data). This simulation
and reconstruction procedure is described in more detail
in Appendix C.
Fig. 12 shows the dependence of Aj on j from the
simulations. The curve may be parameterized by
Aj = exp
h
−pj(−dp+q)
i
, (15)
with free parameters p and q. The constant d = 0.4955
is chosen to minimize the correlation between p and q
and held fixed. For a specific 83mKr data set, Aj(j) is
determined by fitting the CRES spectrum while using a
response function model that includes Eq. 15. This pro-
duces estimates of p and q. These parameters must be
fitted because α and κ are not known externally; they
are instead tuned to match CRES data. In future exper-
iments, α and κ could be predicted using more precise
calibration of gas composition and scattering effects.
The p and q values for tritium analysis are extrapo-
lated from 83mKr p and q values as a function of the av-
erage number of tracks per event (Ntrue
tracks), as described in
Sec. VIII C. The result for tritium data isp = 0.89±0.11,
q = 1.12±0.05. The variation in Ntrue
tracks among data sets
stems mainly from differences in gas composition, which
changeα and κ, thus changingAj(j).
VI. CALIBRATION WITH 83mKr
Fits to 83mKr electron lines are used to both charac-
terize the apparatus and estimate parameters for tritium
data analysis. Sec. VI A details how we performed Voigt
fits to 83mKr lines to verify the relation between energy
and cyclotron frequency. The remaining subsections de-
scribe fits to the 17.8-keV 83mKr line using the full CRES
model in Eq. 10, producing estimates of the mean fieldB,
scattering parameters p and q, and detection efficiency ϵ
as a function of frequency.
A. Test of the frequency-energy relation
To verify the predicted CRES energy-frequency rela-
tionship (Eq. 2) across a 14.3-keV range, the 83mKr shal-
low trap data included measurements of the K, L2, L3,
M2, M3, N2 and N3 internal-conversion lines of the 32-
keV transition. For each line, the main peak is well
separated from the scattering tail and from a 83mKr
shakeup/shakeoff structure [48] in this high-resolution
trap. This makes it possible to extract the central fre-
quency of the main peak in each 83mKr spectrum by fit-
ting it with a Voigt profile, which has a fixed Lorentzian
width as tabulated in [47]. A constant background is
added as a fit parameter when events from the tail of a
different 83mKr line are present within the fit range. The
frequencies extracted are given in Tab. IV and the fit to
the K line is shown in Fig. 13.
The energy of each conversion line is calculated in
[47] using the 32-keV gamma energy, as well as a bind-
ing energy and recoil energy specific to that line (shown
in Tab. IV). Fig. 14 shows the fitted frequency-energy

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
TABLE IV. The frequencies of the conversion electron lines recorded in the shallow trap configuration. The N2 and N3 lines
are not resolved but their frequencies are fitted separately by fixing the intensity ratio and separation between the two lines.
The conversion electron line energies are calculated by fixing the gamma energy at the literature value of 32151.6 eV, and using
the binding energies and recoil energies from [47]. The 0.5-eV energy scale uncertainty from the gamma energy is not included.
Line Conversion Binding Recoil Shallow trap frequency
electron energy (eV) energy (eV) (kHz)
energy (eV)
K 17 824.23(4) 14 327.26(4) 0.120 25 940 625.2(8)
L2 30 419.49(6) 1 731.91(6) 0.207 25 337 157.0(6)
L3 30 472.19(5) 1 679.21(5) 0.207 25 334 690.7(8)
M2 31 929.26(17) 222.12(17) 0.218 25 266 701.5(21)
M3 31 936.85(11) 214.54(11) 0.218 25 266 348.0(11)
N2 32 136.72(1) 14.67(1) 0.219 25 257 051.7(27)
N3 32137.39(1) 14.00(1) 0.219 25 257 019.2(27)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600Counts / 20 kHz
fK = 25940625.2(8) kHz
K = 42.3(13) kHz
2/dnf = 1.5
940 942 944 946 948 950
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz)
50
0
50
Counts / 20 kHz
FIG. 13. Top: Fit of a Voigt profile (red) to 83mKr K con-
version electron events (blue) recorded with the shallow trap.
The center frequency fK and the standard deviation σK of
the instrumental resolution are extracted from the fit. Bot-
tom: Residuals in the fitted frequency range.
relation with the mean magnetic field B as free pa-
rameter. The magnetic field found in the fit is B =
0.959023787(42) T. Note that this does not include the
uncertainty from the gamma energy scale of 0.5 eV. The
points in the residual plot below the figure illustrate the
good internal agreement of the data with the equation.
The conversion line energies are calculated by fixing the
gamma energy at the literature value of 32151.6 eV pro-
vided in [47]. An improvement in the gamma energy mea-
surement is planned by the KATRIN collaboration [49]
and could also be made via CRES with a precise inde-
pendent determination of the magnetic field by NMR.
25.3 25.4 25.5 25.6 25.7 25.8 25.9 26.0
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32Energy (keV)
Eq. (2) with B = 0.959023787(42) T
83mKr conversion electron lines
25.3 25.4 25.5 25.6 25.7 25.8 25.9 26.0
Frequency (GHz)
0.2
0.0
0.2
Residuals (eV)
 10
-10
Residuals (kHz)
FIG. 14. Fit via Eq. 2 of the measured frequencies of conver-
sion lines to their kinetic energies as given in Tab. IV. From
right to left the lines are K, L2, L3, M2, M3, N2 and N3. The
magnetic field is the fit parameter. The error bars do not
include a 0.5-eV energy scale uncertainty from the gamma
energy. In the residuals, the uncertainties in the frequencies
are projected and added in quadrature to those in the bind-
ing energies. The frequency scale shown for the residual is
not exact but shows the overall correspondence between the
magnitudes of the energy difference and the frequency differ-
ence for convenience.
B. 83mKr fit procedure with CRES spectrum model
For the remainder of this paper, all 83mKr fits use
the CRES spectrum model in Eq. 10 to fit the 17.8-
keV conversion-electron line. Since the structure of this
CRES spectrum model is common between 83mKr and
tritium data, we can use 83mKr fits to calibrate the tri-
tium energy point-spread function RPSF and detection
efficiency curve ϵ. The 17.8-keV 83mKr line is a powerful

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
tool, given its narrow (2.774-eV) natural line width [50],
well understood shape, and closeness to the tritium end-
point at 18.6 keV. The underlying spectrumYKr includes
the 17.8-keV 83mKr main peak with its natural line width,
as well as a lower-energy satellite structure from shakeup
and shakeoff [48].
In these fits, the magnetic field B and scattering pa-
rametersp andq are left free. For the fit to the deep quad
trap data, the scatter fractions γi are inputted, while for
the shallow trap data, the scatter fractions for H2 and He
are extracted from the fit, as motivated in Sec. V C. In
the final fits, the detection efficiency variation with fre-
quencyϵ (as determined in Sec. VI D 1) is included in the
model. No background component is included in the fits
due to the short run durations and negligible expected
background rate. Section III A explains the reasons for
expecting negligible background, and Sec. X B confirms
this assumption.
Numerical scatter peaks serve as fixed inputs to the
fitting function. These scatter peaks are produced by
convolving data-set-specific simulated instrumental reso-
lutionsI (see Sec. VI C) with electron energy loss spectra
Ltot. To determine Ltot, loss spectra are combined ac-
cording to Eq. 12, accounting forLr and scattering from
gases present in 83mKr data: Kr, 3He, Ar, and H 2 and
its isotopologues.
Fits to 83mKr data are performed by minimizing a Pois-
son likelihood chi-squared [51],
χ2
λ,p = 2
X
yi−ni +ni ln (ni/yi)

, (16)
whereyi is the expected number of events in bini accord-
ing to Eqs. 10 and 11, and ni is the measured number
of events in that bin. Because the spectra contain many
bins with zero or few counts, χ2/DOF is not an optimal
figure of merit. Instead, goodness-of-fit testing is per-
formed as suggested in [51]. Treating the fitted spectrum
as the truth, the Poissonχ2
λ,p is sampled by Monte-Carlo,
and the distribution of Poisson χ2
λ,p is compared to the
χ2
λ,p for the data.
C. Instrumental resolution I
The instrumental resolutionI is an input to 83mKr fits.
I is determined for each trap configuration by simulation
as described in Sec. V B.
1. SNR scaling optimization
EachI distribution has an associated value of SNRmax,
the SNR of a 90◦ electron in trap 3 atr = 0 mm. SNRmax
mostly affects the width of I while maintaining the dis-
tribution’s overall shape. In particular, a higher SNR max
corresponds to a wider I distribution because the over-
all SNR in track bins is higher, making electrons with
12 13 14
14.342
15 16 17 18
Maximum SNR
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.25Width scale factor
Second order polynomial fit
Interpolated point corresponding to s = 1
Fitted width scale factors
FIG. 15. SNR max optimization for 83mKr pre-tritium data.
The vertical axis is the scale factor s that adjusts the simu-
lated width ofI to match the experimental one for each choice
of SNRmax in the simulation.
smaller pitch angles more detectable. These small-pitch-
angle electrons explore a larger range of magnetic fields,
broadening the detected frequency spectrum.
The total system gain and noise temperature are not
known well enough for each 83mKr data set to determine
SNRmax. Instead, to estimate SNR max, 60 83mKr fits are
performed using inputted I distributions corresponding
to SNR max values ranging from 12 to 18. We add a fit
parameter to the 83mKr model: a scale factor s, which
widens or compressesI during the fit. When s = 1, this
indicates thatI has the best width to describe the data,
and thus the best SNR scale. We fit the 60 (SNR max, s)
points to a quadratic function and predict the SNR max
for s = 1. This procedure anchors SNR max to exper-
imental data. It also produces a best-estimate for the
standard deviation ofI for each 83mKr data set.
For pre-tritium 83mKr data, the outcome of the SNR
scaling procedure (SNR max = 14.3) is shown in Fig. 15,
and the resultingI is displayed in Fig. 10. To simulateI
for the tritium analysis, we use the same SNRmax value as
in the pre-tritium 83mKr data, since its properties most
closely resemble those of tritium data (see Tab. II). The
two data sets are only distinguishable in track duration,
which has a sub-dominant effect on the width of I.
2. Uncertainties on I propagated to 83mKr fit results
A simulated, fixed I distribution is inputted to each
83mKr K-line fit listed in Tab. II. As a result, uncertain-
ties onI propagate to the fit parameter results (p,q and
B), which in turn feed into the tritium analysis. Thus,
we estimate the uncertainties in p, q and B due to both
I simulation uncertainties and SNR max uncertainties.

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
For each data set, I simulation uncertainties are ob-
tained from 100 bootstrapped resolution shapes, which
are produced by repeatedly sampling counts in all bins
from Gaussian distributions. Each Gaussian’s standard
deviation equals the bin simulation uncertainty, which in-
cludes uncertainties from Poisson counting, the efficiency
matrix, and the trap weights. 83mKr K-line fits are then
repeated 100 times, once with each bootstrapped I as
input, to obtain uncertainty distributions for fit param-
eters. Separately, we estimate the SNR max contribution
to 83mKr fit parameter uncertainties. To do so, we fit the
data 100 times, each time using an inputted resolution
simulated with a different SNRmax value sampled from a
normal distribution (with a mean from the procedure in
Sec. VI C 1 and an uncertainty calculated as described in
Sec. VIII B). Simulation and SNR max uncertainties are
added in quadrature.
D. Field-shifted 83mKr data analysis
1. Measurement of detection efficiency vs. frequency
Detection efficiency as a function of frequency is an
input to the CRES spectrum model. To study the fre-
quency response, we recorded 83mKr data at a range
of background magnetic field values, as described in
Sec. II A and in the “ 83mKr field-shifted” row in Tab. II.
Data were taken in the full quad trap configuration as
well as in each individual trapping coil in isolation. A
subset of the 83mKr K-line data recorded in the quad
trap configuration is shown in Fig. 16. To measure the
detection efficiency vs. frequency, we extracted ϵ(fc) at
the frequency center of each recorded peak by fitting the
data with a reduced version of the full CRES spectrum
model that does not include ϵ(fc). The number of re-
constructed events within ±1 MHz of the fitted peak’s
840 860 880 900 920 940 960 980 1000
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2Count rate (arb. units)
3.0
 1.5
 0.0 1.5 3.0
Background field shift (mT)
FIG. 16. The 17.8-keV 83mKr conversion electron line
recorded in the deep quad trap at different magnetic back-
ground fields (red / blue).
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0Relative count rate
Averaged single traps
Quad trap
Trap 1
Trap 2
Trap 3
Trap 4
825 850 875 900 925 950 975 1000
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz)
4
2
0
2
4
Residuals ( )
FIG. 17. Event detection rates from 83mKr K-line data
recorded with different single-coil traps (red and blue) and
the quad trap (black) in field-shifted data relative to the re-
spective count rate at fc≈ 25.91 GHz (whereB =B0). The
uncertainties from interpolation are shown in grey. The rela-
tive count rates can be summed with weights (green) to match
the quad-trap count rate curve (black). The residuals show
the differences of the summed single-trap rates and the quad-
trap rates divided by the quad-trap count rate uncertainties.
The standard deviation of the residuals is larger than 1 and
the uncertainties on the tritium efficiencyϵ (Sec. VIII D 1) are
inflated to account for this.
frequency location is compared to the number of events
for the data at the unshifted background field (B =B0).
The motivation for the start-frequency cut of ±1 MHz
around the peak center is to not average the detection ef-
ficiency over a larger frequency range while maintaining
a sufficiently high statistical precision for the efficiency
analysis. The obtained relative count rate vs. frequency
in a given trap (shown in Fig. 17) is equivalent to the rel-
ative ϵ(fc) in this trap for (quasi) mono-energetic data
like the 83mKr K-line (the energy spread of K-line elec-
trons is small compared to the resolution width I). For
tritium data analysis in the quad trap, ϵ is summed from
the single-trap count rates after a correction for the de-
pendence of SNR on kinetic energy. We motivate and
describe this correction in Sec. VIII D.
2. Extraction of statistical trap weights
The statistical trap weights wi correspond to the rel-
ative number of detected events in each trap. These
weights are used for two purposes: to sum the simulated
instrumental resolutions of the 4 traps that compose the

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
quad trap, and to correct the measured efficiency vari-
ation with frequency for the tritium analysis as will be
discussed in Sec. VIII D 1. We extract the wi at B =B0
from the field-shifted data by minimizing the summed
squared differences between the quad trap count rates
vs. frequency and the weighted sum of the single-trap
count rates vs. frequency, withwi being free parameters.
The resulting weights arew1 = 0.076(3),w2 = 0.341(13),
w3 = 0.381(14), and w4 = 0.203(20), which are in good
agreement with the observed count rate differences at
B =B0.
Note that the field step sizes are 0 .07 mT in traps 2,
3, and the quad trap. We chose the step sizes in trap
1 and trap 4 to be 0 .7 mT to reduce the total duration
of these field-shifting scans for the traps with the lowest
count rate at the nominal frequency position of the K-line
(≈ 25.91 GHz). For the summation, the count rates from
trap 1 and 4 are interpolated linearly. The uncertainties
in the interpolated frequency ranges are taken to be equal
to the largest deviation from a linear interpolation over
the same range in trap 2 or 3 (shown in grey in Fig. 17).
E. 83mKr shallow trap data and fits
To explore the best resolution achievable in Phase II,
and to test the CRES spectrum model (Eq. 10), we took
83mKr data with the trap coil currents set to the shal-
low trap configuration in Fig. 2. Figure 18 shows the fit
to these data. Also shown is the underlying 83mKr line-
shape modelYKr, which includes both the main peak and
the shakeup/shakeoff satellites. The figure displays inter-
mediate lineshapes in which contributions to the model
are included one by one, to exhibit the effects of mag-
netic field inhomogeneity (treated as equivalent to in-
strumental resolutionI) and scattering. In the shallow
trap, there are only small differences between the aver-
age magnetic fields experienced by trapped electrons with
different pitch angles. Accordingly, the broadening from
I (included in the purple curve) is 1 .66(19) eV FWHM.
This combines with the natural linewidth of 2.774 eV
FWHM [50] to produce a main peak with a FWHM of
4.0 eV. Out of all events, 69% are detected before scat-
tering. Additional curves in Fig. 18 show events detected
after a single scatter and after up to 20 scatters. In the
low-energy tail (below 17.814 eV), scattering events com-
prise 61% of counts.
The summedχ2
λ,p of the binned data (631) falls within
1σ of the mean of the distribution of summedχ2
λ,p values
from MC simulations (607 ± 40), verifying goodness of
fit. This demonstrates the high-resolution capabilities of
CRES and validates the 83mKr model.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000Counts / 2 eV
Shallow trap data
Underlying 83mKr lineshape
model
Including shallow trap
instrumental resolution,
no scattering
Up to 1st order scattering
Full model fit result
Pearson residuals
17760 17780 17800 17820 17840 17860
Reconstructed kinetic energy (eV)
-3
0
3Residuals ( )
FIG. 18. The 17.8-keV 83mKr K-conversion electron line, as
measured with CRES in the shallow (high-resolution) electron
trapping configuration, with FWHM of 4.0 eV. The data are
the 83mKr shallow data set (Table II).
0
500
1000
1500
2000Counts / 2 eV
Deep trap data
Underlying 83mKr lineshape
model
Including deep trap
instrumental resolution,
no scattering
Up to 1st order scattering
Full model fit result
Pearson residuals
17500 17600 17700 17800 17900 18000
Reconstructed kinetic energy (eV)
-3
0
3Residuals ( )
FIG. 19. The 17.8-keV 83mKr K-conversion electron line,
as measured with CRES in the deep (high-statistics) electron
trapping configuration, with FWHM of 54.3 eV. The data are
the 83mKr pre-tritium data set (Table II).
F. 83mKr pre-tritium and post-tritium quad trap
data and fits
The 83mKr “pre-tritium” and “post-tritium” data sets
(see Tab. II) were taken in the same deep quad trap as
tritium data, to calibrate the mean fieldB and scattering
parametersp andq for the tritium analysis. Fig. 19 shows
the 83mKr pre-tritium data and fit. The 83mKr line shape
is significantly broadened by the 35.6 eV FWHM instru-
mental resolutionI (Fig. 10), due to the large range of
average magnetic fields experienced by electrons.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
Compared with the shallow trap, the larger pitch an-
gle acceptance in the deep trap causes more electrons
to remain trapped after scattering, leading to a higher
average number of tracks per event. This also leads to
a smaller proportion (53%) of events being detected be-
fore scattering, since events that begin in non-detectable
pitch angles have a larger phase space of detectable pitch
angles to scatter into. This gives rise to the enhanced
low-energy tail and brings the FWHM to 54.3 eV. Note
that here the scatter peaks merge with the instrumental
resolution into a single broad peak. In the deep trap, the
FWHM therefore contains both events detected before
scattering and events first detected after scattering.
For the 83mKr pre-tritium and post-tritium data sets,
the comparison of the summedχ2
λ,p for binned data (1211
and 1112, respectively) with the distributions of MC-
simulated summed χ2
λ,p values (884±38, 830±59) indi-
cated underfitting. This tension likely stems from small
imperfections in the simulated instrumental resolution,
relative to data. To account for the uncertainty asso-
ciated with this tension, the uncertainties for B, p and
q from the maximum likelihood fit are inflated by 17%
and 5% for the pre-tritium and post-tritium data sets, re-
spectively. These fit uncertainties are combined with the
larger uncertainty contributions from I and gas compo-
sition to produce the total uncertainties on B, p and q.3
Uncertainties on I are propagated using the sampling-
and-refitting method described in Sec. VI C 2. The un-
certainty onI due to SNR max is not propagated to B,
since those variables are independent. SNR max primarily
affects the width ofI, whileB controls the location of the
distribution’s center; these are two separate moments of
I. To propagate the uncertainty from gas composition,
the 83mKr fits are repeated 300 times while sampling the
inputted gas scattering contributions from the distribu-
tions defined in Tab. III. The gas composition uncertain-
ties on B, p and q are the standard deviations of results
from these 300 fits.
With fit, I, and gas composition uncertainties in-
cluded, the best estimates of B from 83mKr pre- and
post-tritium data differ by 1.6 σ. Estimates for p and q
are not expected to be consistent between the two quad
trap data sets, due to a difference in the mean number
of tracks per event (see Sec. VIII C).
VII. TRITIUM MODELS
In this paper, we employ two models of tritium CRES
data: a highly detailed model for data generation in
Monte Carlo (MC) studies, and a simplified, analytic
model for analysis. In the detailed generation model, the
3 When fit uncertainties are inflated to account for underfitting,
this increases the total uncertainties onB,p andq by only 1.6%,
0.3% and 0.1%, respectively.
beta spectrum function is numerically convolved with the
energy point-spread function RPSF, and no approxima-
tions are made to either function. In the analysis model,
several approximations are made for computational effi-
ciency. MC studies demonstrate that each of these ap-
proximations do not affect endpoint ( E0) and neutrino
mass (mβ) results, as discussed in Sec. IX B. The remain-
der of this section describes the tritium data generation
and analysis models.
A. Detailed tritium model for MC data generation
For tritium data, the underlying spectrum in Eq. 10 is
the beta spectrumYtritium, given by the product of neu-
trino and electron phase space density factors Dν and
De. When experimental sensitivity is insufficient to re-
solve individual mass eigenstates, the beta spectrum for
molecular tritium is given by [7]
Ytritium =Dν·De, where
Dν∝ϵν

ϵ2
ν−m2
β
1/2
Θ(ϵν−mβ)
De∝F (Z,p e)peEe.
(17)
In this equation, ϵν = E0−Vk−Ekin, where Vk is the
energy supplied to rotational, vibrational, and electronic
excitations of 3HeT+ during the decay [52]. Θ is the
Heaviside step function,F (Z,p e) is the relativistic Fermi
function for charge Z = 2 of the daughter nucleus, and
pe and Ee are the electron momentum and total en-
ergy, respectively. The MC data generation model uses
Eq. 17, including all atomic physics corrections to the
Fermi function from [53]. We numerically convolve Eq. 17
with the final state distribution for 3HeT+, which is the
probability distribution of Vk values. We use the final
state distribution calculated by Saenz et al. [12] down to
a binding energy of −2288 eV.
TheRPSF model includes a simulated, tritium-specific
instrumental resolutionI, which is numerically convolved
(according to Eq. 11-12) with inelastic scatter spectra
calculated from [42–45]. We account for rare scatters
with CO during generation but not analysis. Twenty
scatter peaks are generated ( jmax = 20). An MC study
shows that including higher-order peaks in the generation
and/or analysis models does not alter results. RPSF is
numerically convolved withYtritium.
B. Approximate tritium model for analysis
The tritium analysis model is used to fit both the tri-
tium spectrum obtained from the apparatus and Monte
Carlo spectra. The analysis model includes approximate,
analytic expressions for both Ytritium and RPSF, en-
abling computationally efficient inference. This is crucial
for the Bayesian analysis, since algorithms that perform
Bayesian inference in many dimensions—corresponding

===== PAGE 21 =====
21
to many nuisance parameters—tend to be slow at nu-
merical integration. The analytic model of RPSF also
substantially speeds up the calculation of the response in
the frequentist analysis.
For each model approximation described below, a
Monte Carlo test is performed by generating an ensem-
ble of spectra with the detailed tritium model, then an-
alyzing those spectra using a model which includes the
approximation. These studies show that E0 and mβ fit
results are unaffected by each approximation, for Phase
II data. Even for the resolution and statistics expected
in Project 8’s final planned phase, the simplified model of
Ytritium was shown to yield accurate results [15]. Some
simplifications of RPSF may not hold in future experi-
ments. We will refine the RPSF model and incorporate
numerical components, as needed (which may be practi-
cal for Bayesian inference with state-of-the-art tools).
1. Tritium beta decay analysis model
The frequentist analysis model uses Eq. 17 for the un-
derlying beta spectrumYtritium. In the Bayesian analysis,
Dν is approximated according to the formalism in [15].
This involves Taylor expanding inm2
β to produce the ex-
pression
Dν≈

ϵ2
ν−m2
β/2

Θ(ϵν−mβ). (18)
In addition, De is Taylor expanded to first order around
the energy at the center of the analysis region of inter-
est (ROI), neglecting atomic physics factors that correct
the Fermi function. The resulting model for Ytritium
may be analytically convolved with a normal distribu-
tion. Thus, for any model of RPSF that is expressed as
a weighted sum of Gaussians, the full tritium model is
analytic. Here, unlike in Ref. [15], the low-energy edge of
the spectrum is not smeared out by magnetic field broad-
ening, since a hard maximum-frequency cut is performed
before analysis.4
If the final state distribution of 3HeT+ were neglected
in the analysis model, this would bias the E0 result by
−8.1(8) eV, as computed from a Bayesian MC study.
To speed up computation, the frequentist and Bayesian
models use a sparse approximation of the final state dis-
tribution down to 240 eV below the endpoint. The sparse
distribution uses only every 4th excitation energy and as-
sociated probability from [12]. While some electrons are
produced by HT, which decays to 3HeH+, this molecule’s
final state distribution is similar to that of 3HeT+, com-
pared with our resolution. These simplifications intro-
duce no biases in the results.
4 A low-energy smearing of 0.001 eV is included in the model for
computational stability, negligibly affecting results. In Bayesian
MCMC inference, infinitely steep drops in probability density
can cause Markov chains to behave pathologically [54, 55].
2. Tritium energy response function analysis model
For tritium analysis, the energy response point-spread
functionRPSF is modeled as a sum of Gaussians. This
allowsRPSF to be analytically convolved with the beta
spectrum, simplifying computation.
WithinRPSF, the energy loss function Ltot accounts
for scattering with H 2 and 3He, as these have the
largest inelastic scatter fractions γi in tritium data:
0.911(45) and 0.075(40), respectively. The scatter frac-
tion 0.014(9) of CO is omitted from the tritium fit model.
We further simplify by modeling each scatter peak as a
weighted sum of H 2 and 3He peaks. This is akin to as-
suming that a given electron scatters with the same gas
type after all missed tracks. The radiative lossLr is omit-
ted from the model, since it is small relative to scattering
losses. MC studies validate these simplifications.
Each scatter peak I∗L ∗j
tot is expressed as a function
of σ, the calculated standard deviation of the simulated
resolutionI. This enables us to propagate uncertainty on
the resolution width to the endpoint and neutrino mass,
via σ. The j = 0 peak is modeled separately from j≥ 1
peaks (up to jmax = 20), as described below.
Thej = 0 term reduces toI. Because this term is the
dominant contribution toRPSF, it is important to model
the peak with a closely-fitting distribution. A simple
Gaussian would underestimate the tails of I and fail to
account for its small asymmetry. Instead, the simulated
I is fitted with a sum of two normal distributions N
with means µ[i]
0 and standard deviations σ[i]
0 (i = 1, 2),
weighted by a parameter 0≤η≤ 1:
I∗L ∗0
tot≈ηN

µ[1]
0 ,σ [1]
0 (σ)

+ (1−η)N

µ[2]
0 ,σ [2]
0 (σ)

.
(19)
To find how σ[1]
0 and σ[2]
0 depend on σ, we perform
fits to simulated resolutions with a range of σ values (see
Appendix D). The result of this procedure is σ[1]
0 (σ) =
1.1σ +1.9 eV andσ[2]
0 (σ) = 0.8σ−3.7 eV. This procedure
also demonstrates that η = 0.66 is constant as σ varies.
By fixing η and plugging the expressions for σ[1]
0 (σ) and
σ[2]
0 (σ) into Eq. 19, we obtain a model for I with only
three free parameters: σ, µ[1]
0 and µ[2]
0 . This “reduced
model” can scale in width based on σ and captures the
slight asymmetry inI viaµ[1]
0 andµ[2]
0 . We confirm that
the fitted value of σ matches the standard deviation σ
calculated directly fromI.
We find the best estimates of σ,µ[1]
0 andµ[2]
0 by fitting
the reduced model to the simulated I distribution that
was generated with the best-estimate SNR max value, as
shown in Fig. 20. The χ2/ndf is 44/58, and the fit result
forσ is consistent with the standard deviation calculated
directly fromI. The fit energy range is limited to pro-
duce a good fit to the central region of I, which has the
largest impact on tritium data fits. During tritium anal-
ysis, uncertainties are propagated for σ (see Sec. VIII B)

===== PAGE 22 =====
22
100
 75
 50
 25
 0 25 50 75 100
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05Count rate (arb. units)
2/ndf = 44/58
Simulated instrumental
resolution
Model in Eq. 19
(Fitted: , [1]
0 , [2]
0 )
100
 75
 50
 25
 0 25 50 75 100
Energy (eV)
2
0
2
Residuals ( )
FIG. 20. Fit of Eq. 19 to the simulated resolution I for
tritium data. Bin errors are approximately Gaussian, from
sources described in Sec. VI C. Fit parameters are meansµ[1]
0 ,
µ[2]
0 of the two normal distributions and standard deviation σ
ofI. The fraction of counts η in the first normal distribution
is inputted, determined by computing the average η from fits
to 100 resolutions with different σ values.
but not for µ[1,2]
0 , since an MC study shows that neglect-
ing uncertainties on µ[1,2]
0 negligibly affects results.
Whenj≥ 1, each scattering termI∗L ∗j
(H2) orI∗L ∗j
(He)
can be modeled by a normal distribution, with a mean
and standard deviation that depend only on σ. This
approximation holds despite the asymmetry in L∗j
(H2,He)
for two reasons: the j ≥ 1 peaks each contribute sub-
dominantly toRPSF, and they are broadened byI, mak-
ing them more Gaussian. Scatter peaks are modeled as
I∗L ∗j
tot(j≥ 1)≈γH2
h
I∗L ∗j
(H2)
i
+ (1−γH2)
h
I∗L ∗j
(He)
i
→γH2N

µH2
j (σ),σ H2
j (σ)

+ (1−γH2)N

µHe
j (σ),σ He
j (σ)

,
(20)
where γH2 is the hydrogen inelastic scatter fraction and
1−γH2 is the helium inelastic scatter fraction. The Gaus-
sian meansµj depend onσ becauseL∗j
(H2,He) is asymmet-
ric, so the convolution withI can shift the center of each
scatter peak when σ is large enough (as is the case for
deep quad trap data).
The slopes and y-intercepts of µj(σ) and σj(σ) are
fixed during tritium data analysis, so the scatter tail
shape depends only on σ, γH2 and scatter peak ampli-
tudes. For each gas, the slopes and intercepts for µj and
σj are determined through the following procedure. For a
givenj, we fit Gaussians to 20 sets of scatter peaks broad-
ened by 20 different resolution widths, ranging from 0.5σ
to 1.5σ. This procedure produces µj andσj for a range of
σ values. We then observe and fit the linear dependence
of µj and σj on σ.
Each scatter peak is multiplied by the corresponding
amplitudeAj(p,q ). Tritium-specific p and q values are
estimated in Sec. VIII C by slightly shiftingp andq from
the fit to 83mKr pre-tritium data, to account for a dif-
ference in the mean number of tracks per event (Ntrue
tracks)
between 83mKr and tritium data. Combining the j = 0
andj≥ 1 peaks, the fullRPSF model for tritium analysis
includes a limited set of free parameters with propagated
uncertainties: γH2, σ, p, and q.
C. Event rate model
For both tritium data generation and analysis models,
the signal probability density function S(Ekin) is given
by Eq. 10. A false event probability density function
F(Ekin) is also introduced.F(Ekin) is assumed to be flat
in energy because the probability to measure RF noise
(the only expected significant background source) is uni-
form as a function of cyclotron frequency, and energy is
approximately linearly related to frequency over a limited
range. Combining signal and background, the expected
tritium event rate is
dN
dEkin
(Ekin) =rsS(Ekin) +rfF(Ekin), (21)
where rs is the signal rate and rf is the false event rate.
Binning of data is handled differently in Bayesian and
frequentist analyses, as discussed in Sec. IX.
VIII. TRITIUM PARAMETER ESTIMATES
AND UNCERTAINTIES
We study and quantify the following systematic effects
for the tritium data analysis:
1. The mean magnetic field B that converts cyclotron
frequencies to energies;
2. The tritium-specific simulated instrumental resolu-
tionI, which determines σ;
3. Scatter peak amplitudes Aj (parameterized by p
and q);
4. The energy-dependent event detection efficiency ϵ;
5. The frequency dependence of the energy point-
spread functionRPSF (specifically, of σ, p, and q);
and
6. Gas composition, which determines the hydrogen
inelastic scattering fraction fH2 in tritium data.

===== PAGE 23 =====
23
This section covers items 1-5. Item 6—gas composition
and associated uncertainties—was discussed in Sec. III C
and Sec. VII B 2.
Systematic factors affect the tritium data analysis via
three pathways. First, 83mKr-specific estimates of some
uncertainties (on simulated resolutions and gas composi-
tion) are incorporated into the 83mKr quad trap analysis
and propagated to B, p and q—the three tritium model
parameters from 83mKr fits. Second, tritium-specific es-
timates of some uncertainties (on σ and fH2) are di-
rectly employed in tritium data analysis and propagated
to the endpoint E0 and neutrino mass mβ as described
in Sec. IX. Third, 83mKr fits are used to estimate the
variation of parameters (ϵ,σ,p andq) across the tritium
ROI, as well as the uncertainty on this variation.
Below, we describe procedures for estimating parame-
ters in the tritium model, their systematic uncertainties,
and where relevant, their correlations. At the end of this
section, Sec. VIII F summarizes the probability distribu-
tions for all tritium model parameters, which account for
uncertainties on these parameters.
A. Mean magnetic field B
A systematic uncertainty in B shifts the overall recon-
structed energy scale, so uncertainties in B are expected
to propagate to E0. By contrast, the mβ determination
is unaffected by the B systematic, since mβ is altered by
the second moment of the energy PSF (spectral broad-
ening), not the first moment (overall energy scale) [56].
The best estimate forB is determined by fitting 83mKr
pre-tritium quad trap data. We choose this data set be-
cause its event features most closely resemble those of
tritium data. In particular, as shown in Tab. II, the
pre-tritium mean track duration differs from that of tri-
tium data by 10% (compared with 29% for post-tritium
data), and the pre-tritium mean number of tracks differs
by 2% (compared with 43% for post-tritium data). This
choice minimizes differences between parameters fitted
from 83mKr data and tritium parameters. Pre- and post-
tritium estimates of B differ by 1.6σ, indicating that the
impact of discrepancies in data-taking conditions on B is
relatively small. The best estimate for B is shifted down-
ward by 5× 10−7 T to correct for a 14 kHz (0.3 eV) mean
error in start frequencies. This error is caused by the
reconstruction algorithm identifying electron tracks with
a small time delay, on average, during which the electron
loses energy to radiation. The uncertainty on this shift
contributes negligibly to the B uncertainty.
The uncertainty on B includes three contributions
from the 83mKr quad trap fitting process: the statistical
uncertainty outputted by the 83mKr maximum likelihood
fit (±3× 10−7 T), the uncertainty in the gas composition
of pre-tritium 83mKr data (±7× 10−7 T), and simulation
uncertainties on the instrumental resolution input to the
83mKr fit (±5× 10−7 T). Combining the three uncertain-
ties in quadrature, we measure a mean magnetic field
of B = 0.9578099(9) T. Separately, there is a magnetic
field uncertainty from a 0.5 eV uncertainty on the 83mKr
K-line energy [47]. Accounting for the external K-line
uncertainty, we findB = 0.9578104(13) T for the tritium
analysis.
B. Energy resolution σ
The simulated resolutionI for the tritium data analy-
sis differs from the resolutions used for quad trap 83mKr
analyses due to slight differences in mean track duration
and mean number of tracks per event. The standard de-
viationσ of the tritium resolution is estimated by fitting
the tritium-specific simulated resolution with the model
in Eq. 19. The best fit result is σ = 15.10 eV. In the tri-
tium data fits, we include two types of uncertainties on
the resolution parameter σ: (a) uncertainties from the
I simulation process, and (b) an uncertainty on the op-
timized SNRmax value. The procedures for determining
(a) and (b) are described below.
There are three contributions to the simulation uncer-
tainty (a): first, Poisson errors on the number of sim-
ulated events; second, uncertainties in the efficiency fil-
ter matrix; and third, the uncertainty in the number of
events contributed from each magnetic trap in the quad
trap. The resulting bin errors are propagated to each bin
of the histogrammed start frequencies that comprise the
simulated resolution. Combined, these uncertainties are
approximately Gaussian and are included in a χ2 fit ofI
using Eq. 19. Accordingly, the 0 .22-eV uncertainty on σ
that the fit outputs accounts for simulation uncertainties.
The SNRmax in the tritium simulation (b) also affects
σ. To estimate the SNRmax uncertainty, we compared the
optimal SNRmax from Sec. VI C 1 (14.3) with the result
from an alternate method, the first-track SNR match-
ing described in Sec. IV. This produced an estimate of
SNRmax=18.0. The result of the method in Sec. VI C 1
provides the SNRmax best estimate, because that method
ensures that the distribution’s width is consistent with
data—our primary concern when estimating σ. Still, the
discrepancy between the two estimates sets the uncer-
tainty scale, as it quantifies the impact of small imper-
fections in the resolution simulation (for example, mis-
modeling of pitch angle changes from scattering, which
could not be directly compared to data). Thus, we take
the SNRmax uncertainty to be half the difference between
the two estimates: 1.85. This is larger than the uncer-
tainty from the procedure in Sec. VI C 1 (0.15) and twice
the difference between the optimal SNR max values for
pre- and post-tritium 83mKr data, suggesting that the
uncertainty of 1.85 may be conservative.
To find the corresponding uncertainty on σ, we fit
Eq. 19 to 100 tritium-specific resolutions, each simulated
with an input SNR max sampled from a normal distri-
bution with a mean of 14.3 and standard deviation of
1.85. The σ uncertainty contribution from SNR max is
then 1.73 eV, the standard deviation of the 100 fit re-

===== PAGE 24 =====
24
sults. Combining simulation and SNR max uncertainties
in quadrature, we find σ = 15.1± 1.7 eV for the tritium
instrumental resolution.
C. Scatter peak amplitudes Aj(p,q )
We estimatep,q for tritium data usingp,q results from
the two 83mKr quad trap fits, adjusting for the difference
in mean number of tracks per event ( Ntrue
tracks) between
data sets. More true tracks provide more opportunities
to detect an event, even after early tracks are missed—
increasing the number of events in higher-j scatter peaks.
Accordingly, a higherNtrue
tracks produces a slower decline in
Aj as a function of j. Among data sets obtained with
the same magnetic trap configuration, such as the tri-
tium and 83mKr quad trap data, we therefore expect that
Ntrue
tracks is the dominant factor causing differences inp and
q. Besides Ntrue
tracks, other properties affecting missed track
probabilities, such as electron pitch angle distributions,
are similar among data sets with the same trap configu-
ration. In addition, the mean track duration τ is deter-
mined to be a sub-dominant factor, since fitted p and q
values appear to vary randomly with τ across data sets,
suggesting that they are not strongly correlated with τ.
The estimated Ntrue
tracks for all data sets are listed in
Tab. II. Results from pre- and post-tritium quad trap
83mKr fits define functions p(Ntrue
tracks) and q(Ntrue
tracks),
which predict p and q for tritium data. We perform lin-
ear extrapolations from these to p and q for the Ntrue
tracks
in tritium data. Fig. 21 displays the p, q estimates and
uncertainties used in this extrapolation. The uncertainty
on Ntrue
tracks is larger for tritium than for 83mKr data be-
cause the tritium data set has fewer events. Uncertainties
are propagated via Monte Carlo sampling. For each of
the three quad trap data sets, we sample Ntrue
tracks from
a normal distribution defined by its mean and uncer-
tainty, given in Tab. II. For each83mKr data set, we sam-
ple p and q from a bivariate normal distribution which
accounts for their correlated uncertainty contributions.
That set of sampled values predicts one p-q pair for tri-
tium. By repeating the sampling process, we construct
a bivariate uncertainty distribution of tritium p-q val-
ues. Means, uncertainties and a correlation are com-
puted from this distribution and reported in the first row
of Tab. V. Note that the mean p, q values for tritium
are close to the pre-tritium 83mKr values; this is because
Ntrue
tracks is similar for the two data sets. Best estimates
for scatter peak amplitudes as a function of scatter order
are shown in Fig. 22.
We include three systematic effects in thep-q bivariate
uncertainty distributions for 83mKr quad trap data: sta-
tistical fit uncertainties, gas composition uncertainties,
and resolution (I) simulation uncertainties. These effects
produce shifts in different directions for distinct data sets,
so they may be propagated in the extrapolation using in-
dependent distributions for pre- and post-tritium 83mKr
data. For each 83mKr data set, the covariance matrix for
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Mean number of tracks / event
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2p
(a)
Shallow trap 83mKr fit
Deep quad trap 83mKr fit, pre-T2
Deep quad trap 83mKr fit, post-T2
Prediction for T2
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Mean number of tracks / event
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6q
(b)
Shallow trap 83mKr fit
Deep quad trap 83mKr fit, pre-T2
Deep quad trap 83mKr fit, post-T2
Prediction for T2
FIG. 21. Fitted scatter peak amplitude parameters (a) p and
(b) q vs. mean number of tracks per event in each data set.
For tritium (black dot), parameters are predicted by extrap-
olating deep quad trap results to the tritium data’s number
of tracks per event.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Order j of scatter peak
10 5
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
Scatter peak amplitude
Shallow trap 83mKr fit
Deep quad trap 83mKr fit, pre-T2
Deep quad trap 83mKr fit, post-T2
Prediction for T2
FIG. 22. Best-estimate scatter peak amplitudes Aj for j
missed tracks. 83mKr estimates are fitted from data; tritium
estimates are extrapolated from 83mKr results.

===== PAGE 25 =====
25
TABLE V. Estimates and uncertainties of scatter peak am-
plitude parameters p and q for tritium data.
p q Correlation
Best estimate 0.89 1.12 N/A
Extrapolation uncertainty 0.06 0.05 0.60
SNRmax uncertainty 0.09 0.01 0.56
Total uncertainty 0.11 0.05 0.38
samplingp,q is the sum of three covariance matrices as-
sociated with the three systematic effects. For statistical
fit uncertainties, the matrix is output by the 83mKr max-
imum likelihood fit. Gas composition uncertainties are
determined as described in Sec. III C. Specifically, 83mKr
data are re-fitted for 300 gas compositions, producing a
p-q distribution from which a covariance matrix is cal-
culated. Simulation uncertainties in I are determined
using the method in Sec. VI C 2, which again yields ap-q
distribution and corresponding covariance matrix.
One additional effect, SNR max uncertainty, is ac-
counted for after the p-q extrapolation. This uncertainty
is not propagated through the extrapolation because do-
ing so would treat the effect as uncorrelated among data
sets. In fact, mis-modeling the SNR max systematically
shifts p and q across data sets by altering the width of
I, causing p and q to compensate similarly during both
quad trap 83mKr fits. We estimate the SNR max uncer-
tainties and correlation for tritiump,q using the method
in Sec. VI C 2, with pre-tritium 83mKr data. Covariance
matrices for the extrapolation and the SNRmax effect are
then summed. Table V summarizes the results. We find
p = 0.89± 0.11 and q = 1.12± 0.05, with a correlation of
0.38.
The SNRmax effect also causesp andq to be correlated
with σ, the standard deviation of the tritium I. We as-
sume that, in the tritium analysis, the correlations of p
and q with σ match correlations observed in 83mKr fits
due to the SNR max effect. Pearson correlations of p and
q with σ are determined using 100 sets of ( σ, p, q) val-
ues for different SNR max values. We find that the p-σ
correlation from the SNR max effect is 1.00, but the over-
all p-σ correlation is 0.82—accounting for the fact that
the parameters’ uncertainties include other, uncorrelated
contributions. The q-σ correlation from SNR max is 0.60
and the overall correlation is 0.06.
D. Energy-dependent efficiency ϵ
The measured efficiency variation with frequency in
Sec. VI D 1 requires a correction for energy dependence
before it can be used for tritium analysis.
1. Efficiency correction for energy dependence
Determining the detection efficiency vs. frequency
curve for tritium requires an additional step beyond the
procedure for 83mKr data. This is because the field-
shifted 83mKr data at different frequencies vary in B but
are fixed at an energy of 17.8 keV, while electrons in the
tritium spectrum experience the same B but have varied
kinetic energies. This leads to a difference in radiated
power and therefore in detection efficiency. The power
coupled to the transporting TE 11 mode is a function of
both frequency and energy, as derived in [20]:
P (fc,E kin)∝Z11(fc)e2v2
0(Ekin), (22)
where Z11 is the TE 11 mode impedance and v0 is the
magnitude of the electron’s velocity.
The process of correcting ϵ(fc) for the energy-
dependence of the transmitted power is depicted in
Fig. 23. Since B was constant during tritium data col-
lection and fc and Ekin are linked by Eq. 2, the goal of
the correction is to obtain the efficiency’s simultaneous
dependence on fc andEkin which we denote ϵ(fc(Ekin)).
The energy dependence of ϵ is added by combining in-
formation from field-shifted 83mKr data, simulation, and
Eq. 22. The energy correction relies on the fact that
a relative change of SNR leads to a predictable relative
change of count rate. Because of the SNR differences
between the individual trap locations in the cell, predict-
ing the relation between SNR and count rates is diffi-
cult in the quad-trap but can be found by summing the
single-trap count rates. Hence the energy correction is
done for single-trap data and the statistical weights from
Sec. VI D 2 are used to sum the results.
We measure the SNR of events in each trap at each
frequency in the field-shifting scans relative to the SNR
in trap 3 at the un-shifted background field strength.
We name this relative SNR β(fc). In single-trap data,
β(fc) (Fig. 24) is extracted by matching simulations to
the SNR distribution in field-shifted 83mKr data at each
step in the field scans (see Sec. VIII D 2 for more). Com-
bining β(fc) with the relative changes of count rate vs.
frequency yields the count rate vs. β (Fig. 25). With
the exception of two narrow frequency ranges at around
25.828 GHz and 25.926 GHz, the relation between count
rate and β is bijective and identical in each trap up to
a relative scaling factor resulting from trap-depth differ-
ences. At ∼ 25.828 GHz and∼ 25.926 GHz, the recon-
structed event count rate is decreased by the presence of
very high track slopes, especially in traps 2 and 3 (see
Fig. 26(a)). We exclude these frequency ranges (they are
treated separately in Sec. VIII D 3) and fit the remain-
ing count rate vs. SNR from all traps with a 4 th-order
polynomial. This fit provides a function that enables em-
pirical prediction of a relative change in detectable tracks
from a relative SNR change.
With the relation of count rate vs. SNR in hand, we
perform the energy correction for each individual trap
by:

===== PAGE 26 =====
26
Single trap
Count rate 
vs. frequencyReconstructed SNR 
distribution vs. 
frequency
Correct for energy by 
scaling with 𝑃(𝑓!,𝐸"#$): 
Obtain 𝛽(𝑓!(𝐸"#$))
Quad trap
Count rates vs. frequency 
and energy
Count rate vs. frequency
Corresponds to 𝜖(𝑓!(𝐸"#$))
used in T%analysis
Corresponds to 𝜖(𝑓!)used 
in &’(Kranalysis
Field-shifted single-trap 
&’(Krdata
Field-shifted quad trap 
&’(Krdata
Simulated single-trap 
&’(Krdata
Reconstructed SNR 
distribution vs. SNR()*
Find match and obtain 
𝛽(𝑓!), the relative 
change of SNR()*vs. 
frequency
Combined to determine 
count rate vs. 𝛽, which is 
then fit with a polynomial
Use polynomial to predict 
count rate vs. frequency 
and energy from  
𝛽(𝑓!(𝐸"#$))
Sum single-trap 
count rates 
with optimum 
weights 𝑤+to 
match quad trap 
count rates
Sum single-trap 
count rates 
with weights 𝑤+to 
predict quad trap 
count rates
Data FitsModelsSimulations Analysis outputsIntermediate steps Key Key variables
FIG. 23. Energy correction of the detection efficiency curve: Count rate dependencies on frequency are obtained from field-
shifted 83mKr data in each single-coil trap at fixed electron energy. Matching the data to dedicated simulation sets yields β(fc),
the relative change of SNR with frequency. From these, the count rate dependence on SNR is obtained. β(fc) is corrected
for energy using the analytic power dependence on energy (Eq. 22) to obtain β(fc(Ekin)). Combining this with the count rate
vs. β yields the energy-corrected count rate vs. frequency. The energy-corrected count rates vs. frequency for single traps are
summed to obtain the quad-trap rates which correspond to the quad-trap efficiency for tritium: ϵ(fc(Ekin)).
• Translating relative count rates vs. frequency in
each trap to relative SNR vs. frequency β(fc).
• Multiplying the relative SNR vs. frequency with
the relative dependence of the coupled power on
energy: P (fc,E kin)/P (fc,E kin = 17.83 keV).
• Translating the energy-corrected SNR vs. fre-
quency β(fc(Ekin)) back to relative count rates
vs. frequency using the 4 th-order polynomial rep-
resenting count rate vs.SNR.
After performing the energy correction in the single
traps, we sum the corrected count rates using the trap
weights wi to obtain energy-corrected quad-trap count
rates. The resulting relative changes of the quad-trap
rates with frequency directly correspond to the energy-
corrected detection efficiency curve ϵ(fc(Ekin)), which is
shown in Fig. 26(b).
Each step of the energy correction process contributes
an uncertainty to ϵ. All uncertainties are propagated
and amount to the width of the grey curve in Fig. 26(b).
The main contributions are the statistical uncertainties
from the count rates in each constituting trap and the
uncertainty from interpolating the coarse field scans in
traps 1 and 4 to the dense steps recorded in traps 2, 3,
and the quad trap. Other uncertainties originate from
800 825 850 875 900 925 950 975 1000
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
Relative SNR 
Trap 1
Trap 2
Trap 3
Trap 4
FIG. 24. Extracted relative SNR change β(fc) during the
background field scan in each single-coil trap.
the extraction of β(fc) and the polynomial fit parameter
uncertainties of count rates vs. β.

===== PAGE 27 =====
27
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50Relative count rate
Polynomial ODR fit
Trap 1
Trap 2
Trap 3
Trap 4
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1
Relative SNR 
2.5
0.0
2.5
Residuals ( )
FIG. 25. Measured relative count rate vs. extracted rel-
ative SNR change during background field scans. The
data points originating from ∼25.828 GHz and∼25.926 GHz
(where slopes in trap 2 and 3 are highest) are excluded from
this plot. The count rates in each trap are scaled relative
to trap 3 to minimize the orthogonal distance to a common
4th-order polynomial fit. The orthogonal distance regression
(ODR) takes the x and y uncertainties into account.
2. Extraction of SNR dependence on frequency
The relative SNR β(fc) is extracted from the field-
shifted 83mKr data by comparing the data to simulation.
We simulate 83mKr K-line data for a single deep trap and
collect the coupled power from each simulated event. In-
stead of processing the simulated data with the trigger
and offline event reconstruction, we apply a response ma-
trix. This matrix maps the true SNR of an event to a
distribution of likely reconstructed SNR that integrates
to the detection probability for this event. The coupled
power of each event is scaled to SNR before being forward
folded with the response matrix. The resulting SNR dis-
tribution is then compared to the distributions recorded
in the field-shifted data for all scan steps. Prior to the
comparison, the simulated and recorded data are both
reduced to a frequency slice around the peak center of
±1 MHz (the same cut was applied to the field-shifted
83mKr data). The process of scaling the power to SNR,
mapping it to a detected SNR distribution, and compar-
ing it to the recorded data is repeated in a χ2 minimiza-
tion with the power-to-SNR scaling factor as the only free
parameter. β(fc) is calculated by dividing the power-to-
SNR scaling factors by the factor for ∆ BFSS = 0 in trap
3. The results are shown in Fig. 24. The similarity to
Fig. 17 (count rate vs. frequency from data) gives rise to
the direct relation between count rates and β in Fig. 25.
Note that the lowest frequency point at whichβ(fc) could
be extracted from fits in trap 4 is ≈ 25.85 GHz. At the
two scan points below this frequency, the limited statisti-
cal power of this trap prevented a successful SNR analy-
sis. As a result, the energy-corrected detection efficiency
in the quad trapϵ(fc(Ekin)) is limited tofc >∼ 25.85 GHz.
800 825 850 875 900 925 950 975 1000
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz)
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700Mean slope (MHz/s)
(a)
Trap 1
Trap 2
Trap 3
Trap 4
Q300
840 860 880 900 920 940 960 980 1000
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6Relative efficiency
(b)
Interpolated in high-slope range
With slope correction
FIG. 26. (a) Mean recorded first track slope in events that
start within ±1 MHz of the fitted 83mKr peak position. (b)
Relative detection efficiency predicted for tritiumϵ(fc(Ekin)).
The tritium efficiency is given relative to the efficiency for
83mKr K-line events. As an intermediate step in the con-
struction of ϵ(fc(Ekin)), the high-slope region at 25.926 GHz
was excluded from the correction for energy dependence and
the efficiency was linearly interpolated in this range (black).
The correction for slope variation assumes that the relative
decrease of detection efficiency is independent of the kinetic
energy, which results in the red curve. The slope peak at
25.828 GHz lies outside the calibrated efficiency range and
the range covered by the tritium spectrum.
3. Efficiency correction for slope variation
In Fig. 26(a), it can be seen that the average track
slope in the field-shifted data varies strongly across the
scanned frequency range. The high-slope regions oc-
cur at frequencies where there is enhanced coupling of
the electrons to trapped resonant modes as described in
Sec. II C. The largest effects are caused by the TM 01

===== PAGE 28 =====
28
mode, which is trapped at the upper end by the quarter-
wave plate and at the lower end by the terminator (which
were designed to match the mode impedance of TE11, not
TM01). Other, weaker resonances arise from reflections
at the windows, coupling flanges, gas connection, etc.
The detection efficiency mostly depends on frequency
and trap location in the waveguide. However, the event
reconstruction has a small track-slope dependence, too.
Over a large range of slopes (∆ s <∼ 300 MHz/s), this is
simply due to the fact that the electron tracks with larger
slopes cross more frequency bins per time and hence the
power in a single time-frequency bin is reduced. The
SNR-scaling analysis of the field-shifted data incorpo-
rates this effect by returning a decreased optimum β in
frequency regions of high slopes.
The largest slopes within the tritium analysis fre-
quency range are found at ∼25.926 GHz in trap 2.
Here the reconstruction algorithm sometimes misses or
breaks tracks and the reconstruction efficiency is reduced.
Therefore, we exclude this frequency region from the
count rate vs. β correlation (Fig. 25), and thus also from
the efficiency correction for energy dependence. Instead,
we linearly interpolate ϵ for this frequency range which
results in the black efficiency curve in Fig. 26(b). The
slope peak at ∼25.828 MHz is below the efficiency anal-
ysis range. The smaller peak at around ∼25.86 GHz is
close to the expected tritium endpoint location but the
event reconstruction quality is not further diminished by
the increased slopes in this region.
To re-introduce the variation in efficiency that is ob-
served in the field-shifted data at∼25.926 GHz, we multi-
ply the interpolated ϵ(fc(Ekin)) by the relative efficiency
decrease in this region. The uncertainty on ϵ(fc(Ekin))
increases in the process, since the multiplied ratio comes
with an uncertainty that is added in quadrature to the
uncertainty from interpolation. The result is shown in
red in Fig. 26(b).
4. Efficiency binning
Since the tritium analysis is performed with binned
data, we obtain an efficiency ϵk for each bin k by inte-
grating the quasi-continuous efficiency ϵ(fc(Ekin)) over
the bin.
The interpolation of the measured count rates in each
trap makes it possible to calculate a relative efficiency
value at any frequency over the calibrated range cov-
ered by the field-shifted 83mKr data. The correction of ϵ
for energy dependence produces an efficiency curve that
applies for any energy corresponding to a frequency at
which the field-shifted 83mKr data had sufficient statisti-
cal power to perform the energy correction. This limits
the energy range over which the tritium data can be mod-
eled to 16.2–19.0 keV. However, for the background-only
energy range above the tritium endpoint, ϵ(fc(Ekin)) is
not used because the background is due only to false
tracks from noise and is thus energy-independent and
880 900 920 940 960 980
Frequency - 25 GHz (MHz)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4Scatter peak amplitude parameter p,q
p q High-slope region
FIG. 27. The field-shifted quad trap data is analyzed at each
magnetic field step with the 83mKr lineshape model. A sepa-
rate simulated resolution shape was produced in simulations
for each step and the response function parameters p and q
were extracted from fits. The p and q fit results over the
tritium analysis ROI are shown. The vertical yellow band in-
dicates the high-slope frequency range at ∼ 26.926 GHz.
unrelated to signal efficiency.
E. Frequency dependence of energy response
functionRPSF
In 83mKr data analysis, the response function RPSF is
optimized to fit the K-line at its singular frequency po-
sition. However, we know that the SNR varies with fre-
quency and depends on energy, so we can expect that the
instrumental resolutionI changes over the frequency and
energy ROI. We also expect the shape of the scattering
tail to vary with frequency, since the event reconstruction
is impacted, for example, by power-coupling changes in
the waveguide that manifest in the track slope changes
observed in the field-shifted data.
To obtain the variation in the shape of RPSF, we fit
the K-line in the field-shifted 83mKr data at each mag-
netic field step. For each frequency position, a simulated
instrumental resolutionI(fc) is created by scaling the op-
timum SNRmax for the reference field-shifted data from
∆B = 0 mT by the relative SNR β(fc). The resulting
instrumental resolution serves as input to the lineshape
fits in whichp andq are left free to obtain their variation
with frequency. The result is shown in Fig. 27. We verify
that the relative variation with frequency is not signifi-
cantly affected by the gas composition by repeating all
fits for the maximum and minimum allowed helium con-
tribution to inelastic scattering.
The variation of p with frequency is much larger than
that ofq. Monte Carlo studies of tritium data with vary-
ing p and q have shown that the shape of RPSF and its
impact on the tritium analysis results are more sensitive

===== PAGE 29 =====
29
to changes ofq than they are to changes of p. It is there-
fore unsurprising that the 83mKr fits constrain q more
tightly than p.
Note that the mean p and q seen in Fig. 27 are dif-
ferent from their values under tritium conditions due to
the differences in gas composition and system noise tem-
perature (heat transfer from the field-shifting solenoid
increased the noise temperature by 10%). However, we
expect the tail shape to vary similarly with frequency in
the tritium data. By dividing the p(fc) and q(fc) values
in Fig. 27 by their means, we obtain scale factors sp(fc)
and sq(fc). For the tritium analysis, these scale factors
multiply the tritium p and q from Sec. VIII C.
The expected variation ofI with frequency in the tri-
tium data is obtained similarly to the calculation ofI(fc)
described above. However, the dependence on energy of
the efficiency variation ϵ(fc(Ekin)) has to be accounted
for. We therefore scale the optimum SNR max for tri-
tium (identical to the SNR max of the pre-tritium 83mKr
data) by β(fc(Ekin)). This allows us to generate the ex-
pectedI(fc(Ekin)) at each frequency in the tritium ROI.
From these distributions, we calculate width scale factors
sσ(fc(Ekin)), which multiply σ, the resolution standard
deviation from Sec. VIII B.
The estimate ranges of sp, sq, and sσ are given in
Tab. VII. The impact of the frequency and energy vari-
ation of RPSF on the tritium analysis is discussed in
Sec. IX B.
F. Summary of parameter probability distributions
Parameter estimates and uncertainties are summarized
in Tab. VI and Tab. VII. Statistical uncertainties con-
tribute more to the endpoint interval than the systematic
uncertainties combined. When propagating systematic
uncertainties to the endpoint and neutrino mass, we use
normal distributions to describe the uncertainties on all
parameters in Tab. VI. For the energy response ( RPSF)
parametersp,q andσ, a multivariate normal distribution
is used to account for correlations. Physical parameter
bounds (e.g., σ >0) are enforced during fits to tritium
data. While normal distributions do not permit such
bounds, the distributions are all localized sufficiently far
from bounds, as verified by MC studies (see Sec. IX B).
IX. TRITIUM DATA ANALYSIS
A. Tritium analysis procedures
We perform Bayesian and frequentist analyses of the
tritium data to measure the spectral endpoint E0 and
place a limit on the neutrino mass mβ. The analyses are
not blind, but they are validated using MC studies.
TABLE VI. Estimates with uncertainties for parameters in
the model of tritium data, derived from 83mKr calibration
data and simulations.
Parameter Estimate
H2 inelastic scatter fraction γH2 0.91(5)
Mean magnetic field B 0.9578099(13) T
Instrumental resolution σ 15(2) eV
Scatter peak amplitudes: p 0.89(11)
Scatter peak amplitudes: q 1.12(5)
Number of events 3770 events after cuts
TABLE VII. Size and uncertainty of variation ofϵ,σ,p, andq
with fc in the tritium model, derived from 83mKr calibration
data and simulations. The uncertainty on sσ does not affect
tritium analysis results and was therefore omitted.
fc-dependent
parameter scaling
Estimate
(min–max)
Uncertainty
(min–max)
ϵ 0.31–1.42 0.02–0.05
sσ 0.87–1.07 not included
sp 0.59–1.53 0.07–0.21
sq 0.95–1.10 0.01–0.06
1. Bayesian analysis procedure
The likelihood function used for Bayesian inference is
the Poisson likelihood for the number of counts per bin
according to the tritium model (Eq. 21), multiplied by
prior distributions for all parameters. For bink, the Pois-
son rate is (dN/dEkin)ctr
k · ∆Ekin,k: the tritium model at
bin center multiplied by the bin width.5 The bins have a
fixed width in frequency, so in energy their widths change
by 0.7 eV between the high and low ends of the ROI.
We evaluate the likelihood function using the Stan sta-
tistical software platform, which performs Bayesian in-
ference via the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) algo-
rithm [36, 57]. This produces numerical posterior distri-
butions for E0 and mβ, marginalized over nuisance pa-
rameters. There are two reasons why it is valuable to di-
rectly fitmβ, instead of the unbounded variablem2
β used
in frequentist analyses. First, imposing a lower bound
at mβ = 0 during the fit is consistent with Bayesian
methodology, which relies on the principle that known in-
formation about parameters (including physical bounds)
should be incorporated during inference, via priors. Sec-
ond, the Heaviside theta factor in the beta spectrum de-
pends directly on mβ (not m2
β), so fitting mβ is natural
and avoids the need to choose an approximate form of the
spectrum for m2
β < 0 [7, 15]. Several Stan convergence
5 Test fits with piecewise integration of the probability density in
each bin (10 steps per bin) produced consistent results.

===== PAGE 30 =====
30
diagnostics validate the algorithm’s performance for our
model [55, 58]. For E0, we report the posterior mean
and the 1σ quantile credible interval [5]. The 1 σ high-
est posterior density (HPD) interval is consistent within
< 0.5 eV. For the neutrino mass, we report a 90% credible
limit [5].
Uncertainties are propagated by incorporating them
into prior distributions. The uncertainty distributions
described in Sec. VIII F become normal priors in the
model (or multi-normal forσ,p, andq, the resolution and
scatter peak parameters). The HMC algorithm explores
the probability space defined by the priors and the tri-
tium model, propagating prior standard deviations (i.e.,
uncertainties) to the E0 and mβ posteriors [5].
Bayesian inference requires a choice of prior for ev-
ery parameter, not only those with measured uncer-
tainties. Thus, the Bayesian model includes priors on
the background rate rf, as well as E0 and mβ. For
rf, before analysis, prior knowledge constrained likely
background rates within several orders of magnitude.
This can be modeled with a lognormal prior (which
also has the correct bound rf > 0). The prior’s me-
dian is chosen to be 0 .0006 events/keV/day, the target
90% C.L. used to tune event power cuts. To conserva-
tively scale the prior width, we use the soft upper bound
rmax
f ≈ 0.2006 events/keV/day, the 50% C.L. from ob-
serving no events in ≈ 0.5 keV above the endpoint dur-
ing an early 7-day data set taken to test the appara-
tus setup. The prior’s standard deviation is set equal to
[0.2006−0.0006] events/keV/day, determining the lognor-
mal prior shape.
Separate fits are performed to measure E0 and place
a limit on mβ. When measuring E0, mβ should be con-
strained to its known range, near zero. Otherwise, the
E0 posterior is biased upward due to the large mβ prob-
ability density above the true value—with little density
below, since we require mβ > 0. By contrast, when plac-
ing a limit on mβ, a broad E0 prior may be employed,
since there is no bound in the E0 prior which introduces
an asymmetry.
For the E0 fit, the mβ prior is a gamma distribution
constructed so that 5% of its probability mass falls below
0.0085 eV (from mass splitting uncertainties [5]) and 10%
falls above 0.8 eV (KATRIN’s 90% C.L. [8]). A gamma
prior is appropriate because of its lower bound at zero,
and because it can take on a wide range of shapes de-
pending on the external conditions provided, making it a
generic prior choice for positive parameters. Other posi-
tive priors tend to effectively rule out either high values
ofmβ or a region nearmβ = 0 [59, 60]. We use a weakly-
informative normal prior on E0 with a standard devia-
tion of 300 eV. 6 MC-spectrum tests confirm that the E0
result is robust to the specific choice of prior: when we
analyze MC data, theE0 posterior interval width remains
6 We follow established conventions regarding weakly-informative
and ‘non-informative’ priors, see [59–62].
constant as the prior standard deviation is scanned from
100 to 400 eV, within < 1 eV computational uncertainty.
That uncertainty is calculated by re-analyzing the same
MC spectrum 25 times and computing the standard de-
viation of resulting interval widths.
For the mβ fit, we use the same normal E0 prior, and
for themβ prior we use a uniform distribution multiplied
by an error function withµerf = 1 keV andσerf = 0.2 keV.
Themβ prior for this fit reflects assumptions made before
data-taking: if mβ >∼ 1 keV, the apparatus’s frequency
bandwidth would be too small, as this would shift >∼ 2/3
of the events out of the ROI. On the lower edge, another
error function tapers the prior at 0.0085 eV ( σerf = [1/3
of that value]). MC tests demonstrate that this prior is
weakly informative: when we increase/decrease the high-
energy error function’s parameters by ≈ 50%, the mβ
limit is unaffected.
Frequency data are histogrammed in 71 bins, each
about 50 eV in width. We test several bin widths and
observe that the mβ limit results are slightly higher for
both narrower and wider bins. For example, with 65 bins
(≈ 55 eV in width), the Bayesian 90% credible limit on
mβ increases by 5 eV, relative to the 71-bin analysis.
2. Frequentist analysis procedure
The frequentist analysis uses the tritium model of
Eq. 17. There are small differences from the Bayesian
analysis model. Most notably, the analysis uses m2
β in-
stead ofmβ as the mass fit parameter and does not limit
m2
β to be positive. This allows the fit parameter to range
on either side of zero to allow for statistical fluctuations
near the endpoint. A functional form should be chosen
that yields parabolic likelihood profiles. We tried two
forms for m2
β < 0, the Mainz implementation [63]:
h
ϵ + 0.66k exp

−1− ϵ
0.66k
ip
ϵ2 +k2· Θ (ϵ + 0.66k),
(23)
and the Livermore implementation [7]:
|ϵ2 + k2ϵ
2|ϵ|| Θ(ϵ +k), (24)
withk2 =−m2
β. These functions replace the phase-space
factor ϵ

ϵ2−m2
β
1/2
Θ(ϵ−mβ) of Eq. 17 for m2
β < 0.
They bracket the desired parabolic behavior, the Mainz
version likelihood decreasing too slowly below 0, and the
Livermore version likelihood decreasing too quickly. In
the Feldman-Cousins construction used to find an upper
limit on the mass with our data, these functions give the
same result and refinements were not pursued.
The frequentist analysis uses uniform 50-eV-wide en-
ergy bins and employs extended binned maximum likeli-
hood fits, assuming that the number of events in each
bin are Poisson-distributed with an expectation value
given by the numerical integral of the tritium spectrum

===== PAGE 31 =====
31
(Eq. 21) over each bin. For minimizing the log likelihood
we use the MIGRAD algorithm from the Minuit2 library
[64, 65].
All systematic parameter uncertainties listed in
Tab. VI are modeled as Gaussian. The uncertainty of
the H 2 inelastic scatter fraction γH2 is propagated by
adding a normal constraint to the log-likelihood function.
A multivariate normal constraint is added forσ,p andq.
Only the magnetic field and detection efficiency are not
included as floating model parameters. Instead, they are
propagated by MC sampling. Hard lower limits of 0 are
imposed for the number of background and signal events,
the resolution, and for the bin efficiencies.
The endpoint E0 and m2
β are measured in separate
analyses. For the endpoint measurement, m2
β is fixed at
zero. For determining a limit on m2
β, both parameters
are free. The analysis proceeds in 3 steps. In the first
step, the data is fit with a model in which γH2, p, q,
and σ are constrained nuisance parameters and the sig-
nal rate rs, the false event rate rf, and E0 (andm2
β) are
free. The magnetic field and the detection efficiency in
each bin are fixed to their calibrated best values. Un-
certainty intervals on E0 (and m2
β) are extracted by the
MINOS profile method [66]. This way, the uncertainties
ofγH2,p,q, and σ are propagated to the interval widths
of E0 (and m2
β). In the next step, γH2, p, q, and σ are
fixed to the best-fit values while the magnetic field and
efficiency uncertainties are propagated by MC sampling.
An Asimov data set [67] from the first-pass best-fit model
is generated and then repeatedly analyzed with a model
that uses a sampled magnetic field valueBj and efficiency
valuesϵj,i, for energy bin i. This produces a distribution
of fit results for E0 (and m2
β). The difference between
the borders of the highest-density intervals and the best-
fit values are added in quadrature to the profile interval
widths from the first-pass analysis. In the third analysis
step, the frequency variation of p and q is propagated
(see Sec. IX A 3).
The Feldman-Cousins construction [68, 69] is used
to translate the best-fit point of actual data to a 90%
C.L. upper limit on m2
β, and consequently on mβ. For a
range of true masses, pseudo experiments are conducted
and the measured m2
β values are included in an inter-
val following the likelihood-ratio ordering rule. Since
systematic parameters are sampled in the generation of
pseudo data, their uncertainties are included in these in-
tervals. We find that the ordering process is impacted by
a small number of pseudo experiments with higher than
usual likelihood-ratio for a given fitted mass which results
in over-coverage of the obtained limits. We determined
these outliers to be primarily caused by the proximity of
the false event rate rf to the hard limit of 0, which is
implemented in Minuit by a non-linear variable transfor-
mation. To address these outliers, we take the median of
the likelihood-ratio over small ranges of fitted m2
β from
pseudo experiments for each simulated true mass and find
the likelihood-ratio level above which 90% of experiments
are contained.
3. Frequency variation of scatter peak amplitudes
The tritium analysis model does not include the fre-
quency variation of RPSF, controlled by parameters σ,
p and q. In both frequentist and Bayesian analyses, the
σ variation was found not to affect the reported results,
but the p and q variation does have an effect. This vari-
ation is captured by the scale factors sp(fc) and sq(fc),
as described in Sec. VIII E.
In the frequentist case, pseudo experiments revealed
that a neglected frequency dependence of p and q shifts
the endpoint result by−1.03(90) eV on average. No bias
was found form2
β. We therefore include an uncertainty of
E0 andm2
β and a correction ofE0 resulting from ignoring
this dependence in the frequentist analysis. For any given
analysis (of pseudo data or real data), this is done by gen-
erating many Asimov data sets from the initial best-fit
model modified with a randomized frequency-dependent
scaling of p and q by sp(fc) and sq(fc) and analyzing
them with the model that does not have a frequency de-
pendence included. The average shift of the E0 fit result
is subtracted from the original fit result and the standard
deviations of E0 and m2
β are added in quadrature to the
uncertainties of the experiment’s final results. For the
mβ limit construction with the Feldman-Cousins method,
sp(fc) andsq(fc) are sampled within uncertainties during
the pseudo-data generation and hence propagated to the
distribution of m2
β fit results and the confidence limit.
In the Bayesian analysis, MC studies show that ne-
glecting the frequency dependence of the scatter peak
amplitudes shifts the endpoint posteriors by−3.1(12) eV
on average. We correct for this shift by adding 3 .1 eV
to the calculated E0 posterior mean. As in the fre-
quentist case, the sp and sq values inputted to the MC
data generator for each frequency region are sampled
from distributions to account for uncertainty in the fre-
quency variation. That sampling produces a fluctuation
in the endpoint results, corresponding to an uncertainty
of [+4.1,−4.3] eV. This contribution is added in quadra-
ture to the 1σ E0 bounds from the fit to data, increasing
the bounds by 0.5 eV. Formβ, MC studies show that ne-
glecting the frequency variation of p and q reduces the
coverage of 90% credible upper limits on mβ by 3%. To
correct for this effect, MC 90% limits on mβ must in-
crease by 8 eV. This correction is added to the mβ limit
result.
B. Monte Carlo studies
The Bayesian and frequentist analyses are both vali-
dated with Monte Carlo (MC) studies. Random samples
of tritium decay pseudo-data are generated and fitted by
the analysis model (used to fit experimental data). For
ensembles of MC spectra, we confirm that E0 and mβ
(or m2
β) intervals have no under-coverage, and that E0
best-fit values do not exhibit large biases. We follow the
procedure in [15] for MC studies.

===== PAGE 32 =====
32
1. Generating ensembles of MC spectra
To generate data, electron energies are sampled from
the detailed tritium model described in Sec. VII A and
Sec. VII C. Events are converted to cyclotron frequen-
cies and then binned. Before generating each spectrum,
input parameters are sampled from their uncertainty dis-
tributions. This ensures that the ensemble of spectra
reflects the relative likelihoods of outcomes, validating
inferences [15, 70]. The background rate is sampled from
the prior distribution in Sec. IX A 1. The efficiency vs.
frequency curve is translated to energy using the sam-
pled B before being randomized within its uncertainty.
Other parameters are sampled from distributions simi-
lar to those in Tab. VI, with minor differences to avoid
making simplifications.
Instead of sampling σ (not present in the generation
model), we separately sample each contribution to the
uncertainty onI. First, counts in each bin are sampled
to account for Poisson and efficiency matrix uncertain-
ties. Second, statistical trap weights are sampled from
normal distributions before combining resolutions for the
four individual traps. Third, the SNR max uncertainty is
accounted for by scaling the width of the simulatedI by
a factor s, with s sampled from a normal distribution.
Inelastic scatter fractions for H2, 3He and CO are sam-
pled from normal distributions defined by the means and
uncertainties in Tab. III. This sampling is repeated until
the sum of fractions is within [0.99, 1.01], then fractions
are normalized to make the sum exactly 1. We account
for a covariance between the3He fraction (or equivalently,
the H2 fraction) and the gas-composition contribution to
p and q uncertainties. To do this, we sample p and q
from a bivariate normal distribution excluding gas com-
position uncertainty, then shiftp andq based on the sam-
pled 3He fraction, using pre-tritium 83mKr fit results to
estimate the expected shift.
MC studies are performed both with and without fre-
quency variation of p, q, and σ in the data generation
model. This is done by convolving a different RPSF with
the beta spectrum for each frequency step in the field-
shifted data, then concatenating the resulting partial-
spectra. At each step, the scale factors sp(fc) and sq(fc)
are sampled from normal distributions that account for
frequency-variation uncertainties, then multiplied by p
and q. Uncertainties on sσ(fc(Ekin)) are negligible in
comparison and are neglected.
2. Coverage and bias tests
ForE0 fit MC studies, “true” mβ values inputted to
the generator are sampled from the narrow prior de-
scribed in Sec. IX A 1 (defined by the KATRIN limit).
For mβ limit MC studies, mβ values are sampled from
a uniform distribution over [0, 300] eV, to observe how
the model performs across a large range of “true” values.
For both studies, E0 values are sampled from a normal
TABLE VIII. Interval coverage (covg.) and best-fit bias from
analyzing ensembles of Monte Carlo tritium data sets. The
Bayesian mβ coverage is computed for trials with MC true
mβ > 200 eV, as the limit coverage approaches 100% for small
masses.
E0 1σ covg. E0 best-fit bias mβ 90% C.L. covg.
Bayesian 68 ± 2% −2.9± 0.8 eV 90± 2%
Frequentist 69 ± 2% −2.5± 0.7 eV 90± 1%
distribution with σ = 0.07 eV (see Sec. IX A 1).
MC study results are summarized in Tab. VIII. In the
Bayesian case, the values are taken from an MC study
with no frequency variation of RPSF in the data gener-
ator or analysis models. The values for the case with
frequency variation were corrected to achieve the same
coverage and bias, as explained in Sec. IX A 3. In the fre-
quentist case, the numbers in the table are taken from an
MC study with frequency variation in the data generator;
for each spectrum, intervals and best-fits are corrected
for this frequency variation using the Asimov sampling
method described in Sec. IX A 3. Accordingly, for both
Bayesian and frequentist analyses, Tab. VIII reflects the
expected coverage and bias numbers for E0 and mβ re-
sults that include corrections for the effect ofRPSF vary-
ing with frequency.
We observe no under-coverage of E0 1σ intervals. E0
best-fit values have a small negative bias. This is likely
caused by modeling the correlations between p, q and
σ as linear as a function of frequency, while deviations
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
MC data true  (eV)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Posterior  (eV)
90% credible limit
Posterior mean
Posterior = MC true
FIG. 28. Neutrino mass credible limits and posterior means
from Bayesian Monte Carlo studies. As expected, mβ is over-
estimated for low MC true mβ. Credible limits in this region
are still robust. For high true mβ, posterior means approach
the expectation (solid black line) and limit coverages approach
the credibility (90%). In this plot, results are averaged over
∼20 eV regions with 33 points per region.

===== PAGE 33 =====
33
from linearity were observed for extreme values of these
parameters in field-shifted data. The E0 best-fit bias dis-
appears when we omit either the correlations between p,
q and σ or their frequency variation, during both MC
data generation and analysis. For comparison, when dif-
ferent “best-fit” statistics (e.g. median and mode) are
chosen to summarize the Bayesian E0 posterior distri-
butions, the average best-fit values change by a similar
amount to the biases in Tab. VIII.
For the neutrino mass, the Bayesian coverage of 90%
credible limits is 93 .8(7)% for “true” values of mβ ∈
[0, 300] eV. As expected, this coverage is inflated by trials
with truemβ∼ 0 eV, for which credible limits necessarily
include≈100% of true values. This effect may be seen
in Fig. 28, showing the credible upper limits on mβ as a
function of the true mβ. When we consider only trials
with true mβ > 200 eV, which are negligibly affected by
the physical bound at 0, the 90% limit coverage drops to
89.4(17)%.7 For 1σ intervals onmβ (like the one reported
for tritium data in Tab. IX), the coverage is 68 .4(14)%,
including all trials in the MC study. Moreover, as ex-
pected, the bias in the mβ posterior mean approaches
zero for high values of the MC true mβ.
The frequentist analysis is not limited to m2
β > 0 and
gives no over-coverage for 90% confidence limits even for
small m2
β. Neither Eq. 23 nor Eq. 24 yields a parabolic
m2
β likelihood profile, but since our best-fit value form2
β is
greater than zero, the upper limit in the Feldman-Cousins
construction is independent of these descriptions. The
coverage of the 90% confidence limits is found to be
89.6(10)%. These results validate the model of tritium
data used here, as well as the Bayesian and frequentist
analysis procedures.
TABLE IX. Best-fit values with 1 σ uncertainties for the tri-
tium endpoint and neutrino mass or mass squared, and 90%
credible/confidence limits on the neutrino mass. The lit-
erature endpoint value is 18574 eV [52, 71]. The reported
Bayesianmβ result is a posterior median with 1 σ quantiles.
Bayesian Frequentist Unit
Endpoint 18553 +18
−19 18548+19
−19 eV
mβ 57+61
−39 eV
m2
β 2440+10175
−13354 eV2
90% C.L. mβ < 155 mβ < 152 eV
7 In analogy with frequentist coverage, we may also consider the
coverage for trials with posterior medians near the best-estimate
obtained for real data (57 eV—see Sec. X A). For MC trials with
mβ medians within 5 eV of the result from data, the 90% limit
coverage is 91.3(34)%.
TABLE X. Endpoint uncertainty σ(E0) in the frequentist
analysis resulting from systematic effects and statistical pre-
cision. Here, individual uncertainties are propagated by sam-
pling each parameter from a PDF and fitting the data with
a maximum likelihood fit. The total systematic uncertainty
including correlations is 2 eV smaller than adding individual
systematic contributions in quadrature.
Effect Parameters σ(E0) (eV)
Systematic w/ correlations +9 ,−9
Systematic quad. sum +11 ,−11
Mean magnetic field B +4,−4
Instr. resolution std. σ +4,−4
Scattering energy loss γH2,A(p,q ) +6 ,−6
Bin signal efficiencies ϵk +4,−4
Frequency dependence sσ,sp,sq vs. fc +6,−6
Statistical +17 ,−17
X. RESULTS
A. Tritium endpoint and neutrino mass limit
Table IX displays the tritium analysis results for E0,
mβ or m2
β, and 90% confidence/credible limits on mβ.
Bayesian and frequentist results are similar to one an-
other. In particular, we report a neutrino mass limit of
155 eV (152 eV) from the Bayesian (frequentist) analysis.
In addition, the Bayesian (frequentist) E0 results differ
by 1.2σ (1.3σ) from the literature value. The Bayesian
1σ quantile bounds on mβ do not contain zero because
all of the posterior probability mass is above zero, since
mβ is a physical mass parameter. For m2
β in the frequen-
tist analysis, negative values are permitted, and the 1 σ
bounds on m2
β are consistent with zero.
Table X reports frequentist systematic and statistical
contributions to the total uncertainty onE0. The system-
atic contributions result from the uncertainties on tritium
model parameters, summarized previously in Tab. VI and
Tab. VII. The statistical uncertainty on E0 (±17 eV)
dominates over systematics ( ±9 eV), though the latter
does have a small effect on the total E0 uncertainty
(±19 eV in the frequentist case). All systematic contri-
butions are of a similar size.
In Fig. 29, the measured tritium spectrum is shown
with both Bayesian and frequentist best-fit curves, which
agree well. The small remaining model differences that
can be seen result from the different treatment of de-
tection efficiency in parts of the spectrum where the ef-
ficiency is changing rapidly with respect to energy. In
the frequentist analysis, the best-fit bin-efficienciesϵk are
equal to the values extracted from the field-shifted 83mKr
data. In the Bayesian analysis, ϵk are fitted from the tri-
tium data while constrained by priors that account for
uncertainties (like all other nuisance parameters). Ac-
cordingly, the Bayesian best-fit efficiency for each bin is

===== PAGE 34 =====
34
the mean of the ϵk posterior. For most bins, the effi-
ciency posteriors are similar to the priors, due to the
limited statistical power of tritium data. The exception
is the low-energy bins in Fig. 29, where the tritium data
pulls the ϵk distributions away from the best estimates
from field-shifted 83mKr data.
The frequentist confidence intervals for the endpoint
E0 and neutrino mass squaredm2
β are shown in the inset,
with the literature values for the endpoint energy [52, 71]
and neutrino mass [8] close to the 1σ contour. The shape
of the contours for m2
β < 0 and the lower limit given in
the third row of Tab. IX depend on the choice of function
for the non-physical regime, here chosen to be Eq. 23.
16500 17000 17500 18000 18500 19000 19500
Reconstructed kinetic energy (eV)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175Counts
Tritium data
Bayesian best fit
 Bayesian quantiles
Frequentist best fit
Literature 
 Bayesian credible interval
 frequentist confidence interval
18500 18600
Endpoint (eV)
200²
150²
0
150²
200²
² (eV²)
1 
2 
3 
Frequentist intervals
Literature
Best fit result
FIG. 29. Results: Measured tritium beta-decay spectrum
with Bayesian and frequentist fits, as well as endpoint inter-
vals from each analysis. (Inset) Frequentist neutrino mass
and endpoint contours. The literature sources for the end-
point energy are [52, 71] and for the mass the source is [8].
B. Background
During the 82-day tritium data taking period, zero
counts were observed in the spectrum in the 1.2 keV (23.5
bins) region of the detection window that was above
the tritium endpoint energy. From this a background
limit of 3× 10−10 eV−1 s−1 at 90% C.L. is obtained. If
the background is energy-independent and Poisson dis-
tributed with a mean number µ of events in the 50-eV
wide analysis window ∆E defined below in Eq. 26, then
the probability of there being a single background event
in the window and zero events in the window above the
endpoint is
P = µ1e−µ
1!
µ0e−21µ
0! . (25)
The probability maximizes at 1.7% forµ = 1/22 = 0.045.
The bulk of the probability is for zero events in the anal-
ysis window; numbers > 1 are highly improbable.
C. Neutrino mass sensitivity
Project 8 has developed and made extensive use of a
simple analytic model for predicting the sensitivity of dif-
ferential spectrometers to neutrino mass. In the model,
the size of the neutrino mass mβ is deduced from the
count rate in a part of the spectrum of width ∆ E con-
tiguous with the endpoint, and it is assumed that the
relative endpoint energy and the background are very
well determined from high-statistics data in other parts
of the spectrum. The width of this “analysis window”
is optimized with respect to the background rate b, en-
ergy resolution ∆Eres, and any other contributions to line
broadening such as the final-state distribution in molec-
ular T 2 beta decay, gas scattering, field inhomogeneity,
etc. Systematic contributions from imperfect knowledge
of the resolution contributions are added in quadrature
with the statistical contribution. Reduced to the bare
essentials, the optimum analysis window and the uncer-
tainty in m2
β are [7]
∆E ≃
r
b
r + (∆Eres)2, (26)
σm2
β
≃ 2
3
s
1
rt

∆E + b
r∆E

, (27)
wheret is the run time, ∆Eres is the FWHM of the com-
bined resolution contributions and
r = d2N
dt d(ϵ3) (28)
is the count rate in an energy interval ϵ contiguous with
the endpoint. The analytic model assumes Gaussian
statistics. A complete description may be found in [7].
The analytic sensitivity prediction model can now be
confronted with data (for the first time) in Phase II. Ta-
ble XI lists relevant parameters. We first calculate the
effective volumes Veff from the magnetic field B and the
range of pitch angles that can be accommodated with-
out exceeding a modulation index of 1, or equivalently
an axial amplitude of 2.8 mm (see Tab. I).
Only a subset of electrons trapped within this axial
range is detectable above the noise threshold, mainly be-
cause electrons at larger radii couple less strongly to the
propagating TE11 waveguide mode. We compute detec-
tion efficiencies by generating simulated tracks in all 4
traps, selecting the subset with average minimum pitch
angles of 89.37 degrees (see Tab. I), and passing those
events through triggering and T&ER (track and event
reconstruction) processors. These efficiencies are corre-
lated and the net detection efficiency is not simply the
product of the two. The results are in Fig. 30.
The density (hydrogen equivalent) found from track
length data is 2.09× 1017 m−3, with an effective T 2 den-
sity of 7.45×1016 m−3 from mass spectrometer data. The
balance is inactive hydrogen, with a small amount of he-
lium that is treated as hydrogen for these purposes. The

===== PAGE 35 =====
35
TABLE XI. Calculation of Phase II sensitivity, and comparison to analytic sensitivity.
Parameter Value Fractional Absolute Unit
Uncertainty Uncertainty
Total effective volume 14.6 1.2 mm 3
Trigger efficiency 0.229 0.003
T&ER efficiency 0.101 0.002
Combined trigger, T&ER 0.082 0.024 0.002
Mean track duration 156 0.07 µs
Total cross section 3 .9× 10−22 0.05 m 2
Electron speed 0.2625c
Density as if all H, D, and T 2 .09× 1017 0.09 m −3
Fraction of atoms that are H, D, or T 0.918 0.046
Activity fraction T/(H+D+T) 0.389 0.1
T2 density 7 .45× 1016 0.14 m −3
Background (Poissonian) < 3× 10−10 eV−1 s−1
Detectable source activity 0.32 Bq
Detectable rate r 9.5× 10−14 eV−3 s−1
Volume× Efficiency 1.20 0.09 mm 3
Run time 7185228 0.008 s
m2
β (E0 free, no sys.) 2473 +9822
−13233 eV2
σ(m2
β) 9822 1520 eV 2
89.4 89.5 89.6 89.7 89.8 89.9 90.0
Pitch angle (°)
100
101
102
103
Counts
Simulated events
Triggered events
Reconstructed events
Triggered and reconstructed events
FIG. 30. Number of simulated trapped electrons vs. pitch
angle (blue) in the quad trap. The grey histogram shows the
subset of events that were detected by the DAQ trigger (red)
and the reconstruction methods (green). From the fraction of
detected events the efficiency vs. pitch angle is determined.
standard deviation in the neutrino mass is taken from
the frequentist analysis of the Phase II data. It is derived
with the endpoint energy E0 and background b floating,
which is the assumption made in deriving the sensitivity
curves. We use only the positive side of the 1-standard-
deviation uncertainty range of the data point, because
the best-fit value is in the positive, physical regime. Neg-
ative fit values require a functional form to be chosen for
the negative regime [7].
In Fig. 31(a), the statistical uncertainty in neutrino
mass from Phase II data is compared to the predicted
sensitivity for a T 2 density of 7.5× 1016 molecules m−3,
resolution of 50 eV FWHM, and a background limit of
3× 10−10 eV−1 s−1 (90% C.L.). A mean Gaussian rate
of b = 4.7× 10−11 eV−1 s−1 for the background repro-
duces the probability in the analysis window for the sen-
sitivity calculation. The theoretical curves show the evo-
lution with volume and efficiency for experiments run
for 3× 107 s: with the Phase II gas mixture, resolution
and background (red solid line); with improved resolu-
tion (1.5 eV FWHM), and pure T2 (red dashed line); and
with atomic T for 0 .5 eV FWHM resolution and a den-
sity that optimizes the experimental reach in neutrino
mass (blue dotted line). Systematic uncertainties have
not been fully quantified, however. Figure 31(b) shows
an expanded view of the region with the Phase II data
point and the actual run time of 7.2× 106 s. Uncertainty
in the gas density is included with the data point rather
than by broadening the theoretical curve.
In regimes where ∆ E is dominated by ∆ Eres, the
curves fall with a logarithmic slope of −1/2. Where ∆E
is dominated by b/r, the slope steepens to −3/4. The
curves flatten out when systematic uncertainties become
important, in this case taken to be a 1 % uncertainty
in the resolution. The curves shown in Figs. 31(a) and
31(c) are calculated for a run time of 3×107 s and the ef-
fective volume for the Phase II data point is scaled to the
actual run time. Rescaling in that way is only accurate
for an experiment for which the sensitivity is dominated
by ∆Eres rather than background and signal rate, be-
cause the signal scales with volume and time while the
background scales only with time. The expanded view in
panel (b) is therefore calculated with the actual running

===== PAGE 36 =====
36
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
105
 Standard deviation in mβ2 (eV2
)
10-10 10-8 10-6 10-4 10-2 100 102 
 Volume x Efﬁciency (m3
)
0.1
1
10
100
 90% CL mass limit (eV)
 Phase II
     1 GHz cavity (T2)
     1 GHz cavity (T) 
      Atomic T, 3x1017
 m-3
     T2, 2x1017
 m-3
     T2, 7.5x1016
 + H2, 13.4x1016
m-3
 (a)
5
6
7
8
9
104
 Standard deviation in mβ2 (eV2
)
10-10
10-9
10-8
 Volume x Efﬁciency (m3
)
8
9
102
 90% CL mass limit (eV)
 Phase II
 (b)
0.1
1
10
100
 90% CL mass limit (eV)
10-10 10-8 10-6 10-4 10-2 100 102 
 Volume x Efﬁciency (m3
)
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
105
 Standard deviation in mβ2 (eV2
)
 (c)
  1 GHz cavity (T)
  No background 
  Background 4.7x10-11
 eV-1
 s-1
(Gaussian)
  Background 3x10-9
 eV-1
 s-1
(Gaussian)
 
FIG. 31. (a) Statistical uncertainty in neutrino mass for 3 ×
107 s runs for the Phase II gas mixture, a pure molecular
tritium source, and an atomic tritium source. The Phase II
data point is scaled to this run time, as described in the text.
(b) Expanded view of the region with the Phase II data point
for the actual Phase II run time of 7.2× 106 s, with all curves
redone for this run time. (c) The atomic T calculation (run
time 3× 107 s) with different background levels.
time of 82 days. The sensitivity determined for Phase II
agrees well with the sensitivity curve.
The role of background is illustrated in Fig. 31(c).
Project 8 plans to scale up in future experiments by mov-
ing to a resonant-cavity-based detector geometry, with
one or several large cavities each producing the equiv-
alent of a single spectrogram. It is a design criterion
that the SNR remain high enough to hold false-event
background to the necessary level, a criterion to be met
through choice of frequency, unloaded cavity Q, temper-
ature, amplifier technology, and bandwidth [72]. As a
result, the background rate can be maintained at a near-
constant level as cavity volume increases, in contrast to
the intuitively expected increasing background rate with
volume. The background scales with the number of cav-
ity apparatuses. For the future experiments envisioned in
Fig. 31(a), the number of apparatuses is assumed to be
1 (as in the present Phase II experiment). On the other
hand, the three curves in Fig. 31(c) assume zero back-
ground, the Gaussian background estimated for Phase
II, and a higher background level corresponding to 10
apparatuses with similar SNR conditions to Phase II if
its background is at the 90 % C.L. limit. For large ex-
periments, the effect of background on the neutrino mass
limit remains negligible.
XI. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
A major motivation in Phase II of Project 8 was to ob-
tain information of value for the future scaling up of the
CRES technology for neutrino mass measurement. With
the waveguide-based CRES apparatus described in this
work, we have carried out the first measurement of the
tritium beta spectrum by this new method. We report
an upper limit on neutrino mass at 90% C.L. of 155 (152)
eV in a Bayesian (frequentist) analysis. In both analyses,
the extrapolated endpoint energy for molecular T2 decay
and the neutrino mass limit are found to be consistent
with literature values obtained by traditional methods.
No background events were observed in the 82-day run-
ning period. These results from a small-scale apparatus
are the first steps in a phased approach to a CRES-based
experiment with high sensitivity to neutrino mass.
The waveguide CRES cell is quite efficient in coupling
the electron to the propagating electromagnetic field.
However, because the electron’s guiding center in the trap
moves along the direction of propagation, the Doppler ef-
fect is maximal. This limits the pitch angle range that
can be used, and hence the efficiency with which use-
ful signals can be obtained from the gas in the trap re-
gion. Two approaches to circumventing this limitation
in a large volume are to use an antenna array that is di-
rected at signals emitted by the electron perpendicular to
its axial motion, and to use a resonant cavity wherein the
phase velocity is much larger and the Doppler shift corre-
spondingly smaller. For reduced complexity and better
signal-to-noise ratio, the Project 8 collaboration is fo-
cused on the cavity approach. The sensitivities of large-
volume cavity experiments are marked in Fig. 31.
The CRES method is inherently capable of high reso-
lution, as may be seen simply from the widths of tracks
in Fig. 4. These tracks are roughly a single bin wide
in frequency space, about 1 part per million, which cor-
responds to an energy width at the tritium endpoint of
0.5 eV. That measure of the intrinsic resolution depends
on the signal-to-noise ratio, and the system noise tem-
perature in Phase II was about 132 K when the CRES

===== PAGE 37 =====
37
cell was at 85 K. Substantially lower physical temper-
atures can be realized, especially for atomic tritium in
a magnetic trap. The total experimental resolution has
other contributions, primarily the varying magnetic field
experienced by electrons moving in a trap that may itself
not be ideal, with spatial inhomogeneities and temporal
instabilities. Scattering of electrons from gas molecules
can lead to energy loss prior to the detection of an event.
The analysis is complex, a consequence of the experi-
ment’s exploratory nature—and in particular, of certain
unanticipated aspects of design and analysis. For exam-
ple, the gas composition stability and measurement was
more important than expected, given the large role of
scattering in the data. In future experiments, scatter-
ing effects will be less significant and better controlled,
due to higher energy resolution, purer source gas, and im-
proved composition monitoring. In addition, in Phase IV
(Project 8’s final planned phase), the energy loss from
scattering (>∼ 12 eV) will fall outside the likely energy re-
gion of interest. Another unexpected complication was
the extent to which the efficiency as a function of fre-
quency and energy was modulated by parasitic reflections
in the waveguide, demanding a detailed analysis method-
ology. In the future, the energy region will be smaller and
the mode structure will be a key part of the experimen-
tal design, avoiding large efficiency variations and further
simplifying the analysis.
The zero background observed is both encouraging and
expected. In the CRES method there are no physical de-
tectors for electrons (for example, silicon detectors) that
can be background sources. Electrons or gammas from
external radioactivity and cosmic rays do not produce
trapped electrons unless an interaction with a gas atom
occurs, because electrons produced at the wall can make
at most one cyclotron orbit before striking the wall again,
while those produced at the ends can make at most a
single axial cycle before leaving. Cosmic ray interactions
with the dilute source gas itself are negligible even for
very large-scale experiments. In addition, in a differen-
tial spectrometer, an electron must be in the right en-
ergy range to create a background event. Electrons in a
CRES system are not slowed nearly to rest and reaccel-
erated as in a retarding-field analyzer, and the counting
of ubiquitous slow electrons is thereby avoided. The pri-
mary background that remains is false tracks from ran-
dom aggregations of noisy pixels. This background was
the target of a detailed study before data-taking began
in Phase II, so that a power threshold could be set to
limit false events to less than 1 in 100 days at 90 % C.L.
The success of that strategy is one of the most impor-
tant conclusions of this study. For a fixed signal-to-noise
ratio, the background rate is independent of volume. A
good signal-to-noise ratio is key to eliminating the RF
background at minimal cost in efficiency, and in future
CRES designs it is a basic requirement.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank two anonymous referees
for their valuable suggestions reflected in the final ver-
sion of this paper. This material is based upon work
supported by the following sources: the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy Office of Science, Office of Nuclear
Physics, under Award No. DE-SC0020433 to Case West-
ern Reserve University (CWRU), under Award No. DE-
SC0011091 to the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy (MIT), under Field Work Proposal Number 73006
at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL),
a multiprogram national laboratory operated by Bat-
telle for the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC05-76RL01830, under Early Career Award
No. DE-SC0019088 to Pennsylvania State University, un-
der Award No. DE-FG02-97ER41020 to the University
of Washington, and under Award No. DE-SC0012654
to Yale University; the National Science Foundation
under Award No. PHY-2209530 to Indiana University,
and under Award No. PHY-2110569 to MIT; the Clus-
ter of Excellence “Precision Physics, Fundamental In-
teractions, and Structure of Matter” (PRISMA+ EXC
2118/1) funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG) within the German Excellence Strategy (Project
ID 39083149); the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT) Center Elementary Particle and Astroparticle
Physics (KCETA); Laboratory Directed Research and
Development (LDRD) 18-ERD-028 and 20-LW-056 at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), pre-
pared by LLNL under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344,
LLNL-JRNL-845409; the LDRD Program at PNNL; In-
diana University; and Yale University. Portions of the
research were performed using the Core Facility for Ad-
vanced Research Computing at CWRU, the Engaging
cluster at the MGHPCC facility, Research Computing at
PNNL, and the HPC cluster at the Yale Center for Re-
search Computing. The 83Rb/83mKr isotope used in this
research was supplied by the United States Department
of Energy Office of Science through the Isotope Program
in the Office of Nuclear Physics.
[1] Y. Fukuda et al. (Super-Kamiokande), Phys. Rev. Lett.
81, 1562 (1998), arXiv:hep-ex/9807003.
[2] Q. Ahmad et al. (SNO), Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 071301
(2001), arXiv:nucl-ex/0106015.
[3] B. Pontecorvo, Sov. Phys. JETP 6, 429 (1957).
[4] Z. Maki, M. Nakagawa, and S. Sakata, Prog. Theor. Phys.
28, 870 (1962).
[5] P. A. Zyla et al. (Particle Data Group), Prog. Theor. Exp.
Phys. 2020, 10.1093/ptep/ptaa104 (2020), 083C01.
[6] N. Aghanim et al. (Planck), Astron. Astrophys. 641, A6
(2020), [Erratum: Astron.Astrophys. 652, C4 (2021)],

===== PAGE 38 =====
38
arXiv:1807.06209 [astro-ph.CO].
[7] J. A. Formaggio, A. L. C. de Gouvˆ ea, and R. G. H.
Robertson, Phys. Rept. 914, 1 (2021), arXiv:2102.00594
[nucl-ex].
[8] M. Aker et al. (KATRIN), Nature Phys. 18, 160 (2022),
arXiv:2105.08533 [hep-ex].
[9] M. Aker et al. (KATRIN), J. Instrum. 16 (08), T08015,
arXiv:2103.04755 [physics.ins-det].
[10] M. Aker et al. (KATRIN), J. Phys. G 49, 100501 (2022).
[11] N. Doss, J. Tennyson, A. Saenz, and S. Jonsell, Phys.
Rev. C 73, 025502 (2006).
[12] A. Saenz, S. Jonsell, and P. Froelich, Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 242 (2000).
[13] Y. T. Lin et al. (TRIMS), Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 222502
(2020), arXiv:2001.11671 [nucl-ex].
[14] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al. (Project 8), J. Phys. G 44,
054004 (2017), arXiv:1703.02037 [physics.ins-det].
[15] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al. (Project 8), Phys. Rev. C 103,
065501 (2021), arXiv:2012.14341 [physics.data-an].
[16] B. Monreal and J. A. Formaggio, Phys. Rev. D 80,
051301(R) (2009), arXiv:0904.2860 [nucl-ex].
[17] D. M. Asner et al. (Project 8), Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
162501 (2015), arXiv:1408.5362 [physics.ins-det].
[18] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al. (Project 8), Phys. Rev. Lett.
131, 102502 (2023), arXiv:2212.05048 [nucl-ex].
[19] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 1st ed. (Wiley,
New York, 1967).
[20] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al. (Project 8), Phys. Rev. C 99,
055501 (2019), arXiv:1901.02844 [physics.ins-det].
[21] D. V´ enos, A. Spalek, O. Lebeda, and M. Fiser, Appl.
Radiat. Isot. 63, 323 (2005).
[22] C. Colmenares, E. G. Shapiro, P. E. Barry, and C. T.
Prevo, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 114, 277 (1974).
[23] J. Hickish et al. (CASPER), J. Astron. Instrum. 5,
1641001-12 (2016), arXiv:1611.01826 [astro-ph.IM].
[24] D. L. Furse, Techniques for direct neutrino mass measure-
ment utilizing tritium [beta]-decay , Ph.D. thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology (2015).
[25] D. D. Joy, in Monte Carlo Modeling for Electron Mi-
croscopy and Microanalysis (Oxford University Press,
1995) Chap. 3.
[26] V. Aseev et al., Eur. Phys. J. D 10, 39 (2000).
[27] J. W. Liu, Phys. Rev. A 35, 591 (1987).
[28] S. T. Perkins, D. E. Cullen, and S. M. Seltzer, Tables and
graphs of electron-interaction cross sections from 10 eV
to 100 GeV derived from the LLNL Evaluated Electron
Data Library (EEDL), Z = 1–100 , Tech. Rep. UCRL-
50400-Vol.31 (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
1991).
[29] P. Nagy, A. Skutlartz, and V. Schmidt, J. Phys. B 13,
1249 (1980).
[30] R. S. Brusa, G. P. Karwasz, and A. Zecca, Z. Phys. D
38, 279 (1996).
[31] A. Zecca, G. P. Karwasz, and R. S. Brusa, J. Phys. B 33,
843 (2000).
[32] D. C. Cartwright, G. Csanak, S. Trajmar, and D. F. Reg-
ister, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1602 (1992).
[33] W. Hwang, Y. K. Kim, and M. E. Rudd, J. Chem. Phys.
104, 2956 (1996).
[34] D. Rapp and P. Englander Golden, J. Chem. Phys. 43,
1464 (1965).
[35] I. Kanik, S. Trajmar, and J. C. Nickel, J. Geophys. Res.
E Planets 98, 7447 (1993).
[36] B. Carpenter, A. Gelman, M. Hoffman, D. Lee,
B. Goodrich, M. Betancourt, M. Brubaker, J. Guo, P. Li,
and A. Riddell, J. Stat. Softw., Articles 76, 1 (2017).
[37] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al. (Project 8), New J. Phys. 21,
113051 (2019), arXiv:1907.11124 [physics.comp-ph].
[38] M. Inokuti, Rev. Mod. Phys. 43, 297 (1971).
[39] W. F. Chan, G. Cooper, and C. E. Brion, Phys. Rev. A
44, 186 (1991).
[40] W. F. Chan, G. Cooper, X. Guo, G. R. Burton, and C. E.
Brion, Phys. Rev. A 46, 149 (1992).
[41] T. N. Olney, N. Cann, G. Cooper, and C. Brion, Chemical
physics 223, 59 (1997).
[42] E. Carbone, W. Graef, G. Hagelaar, D. Boer, M. M. Hop-
kins, J. C. Stephens, B. T. Yee, S. Pancheshnyi, J. van
Dijk, and L. Pitchford, Atoms 9, 16 (2021).
[43] L. C. Pitchford, L. L. Alves, K. Bartschat, S. F. Biagi,
M.-C. Bordage, I. Bray, C. E. Brion, M. J. Brunger,
L. Campbell, A. Chachereau, et al. , Plasma Processes
and Polymers 14, 1600098 (2017).
[44] S. Pancheshnyi, S. Biagi, M.-C. Bordage, G. Hagelaar,
W. Morgan, A. Phelps, and L. C. Pitchford, Chemical
Physics 398, 148 (2012).
[45] The Plasma Data Exchange Project, Lxcat data base
(2022), https://fr.lxcat.net.
[46] M. E. Rudd, Physical Review A 44, 1644 (1991).
[47] D. V´ enos, J. Sentkerestiov´ a, O. Dragoun, M. Slez´ ak,
M. Ryˇ sav´ y, and A.ˇSpalek, J. Instrum. 13 (02), T02012.
[48] R. G. H. Robertson and V. Venkatapathy, Phys. Rev. C
102, 035502 (2020), arXiv:2003.12952 [nucl-ex].
[49] C. Rodenbeck, Eur. Phys. J. C 82, 700 (2022),
arXiv:2205.01484 [physics.ins-det].
[50] K. Altenm¨ ulleret al. (KATRIN), J. Phys. G 47, 065002
(2020), arXiv:1903.06452 [physics.ins-det].
[51] S. Baker and R. D. Cousins, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res. 221, 437 (1984).
[52] L. I. Bodine, D. S. Parno, and R. G. H. Robertson, Phys.
Rev. C 91, 035505 (2015), arXiv:1502.03497 [nucl-ex].
[53] M. Kleesiek et al. , Eur. Phys. J. C 79, 204 (2019),
arXiv:1806.00369 [physics.data-an].
[54] Stan modeling language users guide and reference man-
ual, version 2.30 (2022), Stan Development Team.
[55] M. Betancourt, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1701.02434 (2017),
arXiv:1701.02434 [stat.ME].
[56] R. G. H. Robertson and D. A. Knapp, Annu. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci. 38, 185 (1988).
[57] M. Guigue, J. A. Formaggio, J. Johnston, J. Kofron,
B. LaRoque, N. S. Oblath, and T. E. Weiss, Morpho
(2021), doi:10.5281/zenodo.5117728.
[58] M. Betancourt, Toward a principled Bayesian
workflow (PyStan) (2018), retrieved from https:
//github.com/betanalpha/jupyter_case_studies/
tree/master/principled_bayesian_workflow, commit
2580fdeac38f77859b2d1c60f9c4a37237864e63.
[59] A. Gelman, J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, D. B. Dunson,
A. Vehtari, and D. B. Rubin, Bayesian Data Analysis ,
3rd ed. (Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2014) Chap. 2.
[60] A. Gelman, Prior choice recommendations (2020).
[61] M. Betancourt, Stan Documentation: How the Shape of
a Weakly Informative Prior Affects Inferences (2017).
[62] G. D’Agostini, Rep. Prog. Phys. 66, 1383 (2003),
arXiv:0304102 [physics.data-an].
[63] C. Kraus et al. , Eur. Phys. J. C 40, 447 (2005),
arXiv:hep-ex/0412056.

===== PAGE 39 =====
39
[64] H. Dembinski and P. Ongmongkolkul 10.5281/zen-
odo.3949207 (2020).
[65] F. James and M. Roos, Comput. Phys. Commun. 10, 343
(1975).
[66] B. A. Murtagh and M. A. Saunders, Mathematical Pro-
gramming 14, 41 (1978).
[67] G. Cowan, K. Cranmer, E. Gross, and O. Vitells, Eur.
Phys. J. C 71, 1554 (2011), [Erratum: Eur.Phys.J.C 73,
2501 (2013)], arXiv:1007.1727 [physics.data-an].
[68] G. J. Feldman and R. D. Cousins, Phys. Rev. D 57, 3873
(1998), arXiv:physics/9711021.
[69] R. L. Workman et al. (Particle Data Group), PTEP
2022, 083C01 (2022).
[70] S. R. Cook, A. Gelman, and D. B. Rubin, J. Comput.
Graph. Stat. 15, 675–92 (2006).
[71] E. G. Myers, A. Wagner, H. Kracke, and B. A. Wesson,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 013003 (2015).
[72] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al. (Project 8), in Snowmass 2021
(2022) arXiv:2203.07349 [nucl-ex].
[73] A. Ashtari Esfahani et al. (Project 8), in preparation
(2023).
Appendix A: The effect of track duration
distribution
The dependence of efficiency and response function
on the track duration distribution comes about as fol-
lows. In the track reconstruction process, track dura-
tion is a powerful tool for discriminating between noise
and signal. The offline event reconstruction [73] removes
events of which the first track’s signal-to-noise ratio is
below certain thresholds. These thresholds are specific
to the combination of first track duration and number
of tracks in the event. Hence, the gas pressure in the
CRES cell impacts the overall event detection efficiency
as well as the first track detection efficiency, thereby af-
fecting the electron energy point-spread function RPSF
(see Sec. V A). Track duration also impacts the recon-
structed mean number of tracks per event, which in turn
affects the shape of the tail from missed tracks in RPSF,
as discussed in Sec. VIII C.
Appendix B: Illustration of full analysis procedure
Fig. 32 shows the analysis flow in greater detail than
Fig. 8. It also displays interdependencies of 83mKr and
tritium analyses.
Appendix C: Validating 83mKr scatter peak
amplitudes with simulation
In the energy response function model, the amplitude
Aj(p,q ) of scatter peak j is proportional to the probabil-
ity of missing j tracks before detecting an event. Simu-
lations validate the model for Aj (Eq. 15) as well as the
fitted values of p and q for quad trap 83mKr data.
We perform a set of toy model simulations (not using
Locust) in which inelastic and elastic scattering are mod-
eled separately, with pitch angle changes included. The
event detection process is approximated by power and
track length cuts. In the Locust simulations in this pa-
per, pitch angle changes are ignored and assumed to be
zero. When one is concerned with the properties of first
tracks (e.g., the start frequency spread captured by I),
that approach is sufficient. However, this simplification
does not allow the prediction of accurate Aj values.
For the simulations, it is assumed that inelastic scat-
tering leads to energy loss and small pitch angle changes,
while elastic scattering removes electrons from the trap
before the next inelastic scattering event [25]. The in-
elastic scattering angle θs follows the distribution in
Eq. 14 [46]. The elastic scattering is modeled by as-
suming a fixed fraction κ of electrons leave the trap be-
tween inelastic scatters due to elastic scatters. The track
duration follows the exponential distribution in Eq. 8.
The coupled power from a radiating electron is calculated
given its instantaneous pitch angle and axial position.
The detection status of an electron is determined by
whether the electron power and track length are both
above the corresponding preset thresholds. The SNR
threshold chosen matches the threshold applied to tracks
in real data by the Phase II track detection algorithm,
prior to combining single tracks into full events (see [73]).
Similarly to in Sec. IV, it is assumed that the highest
simulated power corresponds to the estimated maximum
SNR observed in data. The power of all simulated events
is translated to SNR accordingly. The track length de-
tection threshold is set to the minimum recorded track
length in data. Tuning α and κ, the Aj curve and the
mean event length can be simultaneously matched to val-
ues extracted from 83mKr data (see Fig. 12).
TABLE XII. Values of the parametersα andκ found by tun-
ing the scatter amplitude ( Aj) curves from simulations to
match those from fits to 83mKr data.
Data set α κ Mean of sampled scattering angles
Pre-tritium 0.0018 0.185 0.48◦
Post-tritium 0.0025 0.150 0.64◦
Shallow trap 0.0025 0.400 0.64◦
Tab. XII compiles the values of α andκ found by tun-
ing theAj curves to match those from fits for the three
83mKr data sets. This simulation reveals that the fraction
of trapped electrons with larger pitch angles increases
from scatter to scatter as shown in Fig. 33. This explains
why the scatter peak amplitude curve deviates from an
exponential function in the direction of more electrons in
the higher order scatter peaks. However, this simulation
cannot be directly used to predict Aj in tritium data,
sinceα andκ are related to the gas composition and dif-
fer among data sets. Instead, the values of p and q for

===== PAGE 40 =====
40
IV: Introduce 
framework for 
generating 
simulated data; 
determine 
𝑁!"#$%&
!"’((𝑁!"#$%&
"($)*)
Key
Key variables
III.C: Measure H2 gas scatter 
fraction 𝛾+!	for tritium data
IX.B: 
Simulate un-
simplified 
tritium data
X.A: Measured tritium 𝛽, 
endpoint and limit on 𝑚-
Data ModelsFits
Simulations
Determinations of fit 
inputs and priors
VI.E: Validation of 
detailed model, 
measured resolution
VI.A: 
Verification 
of 𝑓.-𝐸%/* 
relationship
Results X.B: 
Background 
limit
VIII.D.2: Compare 
simulation to 83mKr 
field-shifted data to 
determine SNR(𝑓.)
V.B: Create 
simulated data 
corresponding 
to each data set
VI.E: Fit detailed model to 83mKr shallow-trap data
VI.A: Fit 83mKr K, L, N, 
M lines with Voigt 
model
VIII.E: Fit 83mKr 
field-shifted data to 
determine
𝑠0(𝑓.), 𝑠1(𝑓.)
VI.F: Fit 83mKr 
pre-tritium and 
post-tritium data to 
determine 𝐵, 𝑝, 𝑞
III.D: Fit mean track 
duration 𝜏
IX.A: Fit experimental 
data with tritium model
IX.B: Fit simulated 
un-simplified data with 
tritium model for 
systematics studies
VI.D: Determine trap 
weights, 𝑤, and efficiency 
for 83mKr, ϵ(𝑓.), from 83mKr 
field-shifted data
VI.C.1: 
Preliminarily fit 
83mKr pre-tritium 
data to get SNRmax
VI.C.2: Propagate 
uncertainties on 
instrumental resolution 
𝐼 for 83mKr fits
VIII.A: Determine 
uncertainties on 𝐵
VIII.C: Extrapolate 𝑝, 𝑞, 
and their uncertainties to 
tritium data conditions
VIII.D.1: Implement 
tritium energy 
dependence to obtain 
𝜖(𝑓.(𝐸%/*))
VIII.D.3: Correct 
𝜖(𝑓.(𝐸%/*)) for 
track slope 
dependence
VIII.F: Priors for tritium analysis:
B, 𝜎, 𝑠2(𝑓.(𝐸%/*)), 𝑝, 𝑠0(𝑓.), 𝑞,𝑠1(𝑓.), 𝜖%, 𝛾+!
VIII.D.4: 
Bin to 
get 𝜖% VII.A: Define fully-
detailed tritium 𝛽, 
spectrum model 
𝒴!"/!/’3
VII.C: Define 
simplified energy 
response ℛ456 and 
𝛽, spectrum model 
for tritium fit
VII.C: Define 
binned event 
rate model 
𝒩(𝐸%/*)
VI.B: Introduce underlying 83mKr 
K-line spectrum model 𝒴78 
and  83mKr fit procedure
V.A: Define full detailed signal model: 
𝒮(𝒴,𝜖,ℛ456(𝒜9(𝑝,𝑞),𝐼,ℒ!)!
∗9))
II.A: Magnetic field map
III.B: 83mKr CRES data
III.C: Measure gas scatter 
fractions 𝛾i for 83mKr data
III.B: Tritium 
CRES data
VIII.B: Determine 𝜎 and 
its uncertainty for 
instrumental resolution 𝐼 
for tritium
VIII.B: Determine 𝑠2(𝑓.(𝐸%/*))
FIG. 32. Flow chart of the analysis procedure. Thin arrows represent relationships between individual boxes, while thick arrows
describe shared inputs from and/or outputs to a group of boxes in the same bubble.

===== PAGE 41 =====
41
tritium data are found by extrapolating from the p and
q results of the pre-tritium and post-tritium 83mKr fits,
as described in Sec. VIII C.
88.4 88.6 88.8 89.0 89.2 89.4 89.6 89.8 90.0
Pitch angles at the center of the trap ( )
0
1
2
3
4Probability density (arb. units)
After 9 scatters
After 3 scatters
Before scatters
FIG. 33. Evolution of the distribution of pitch angles of
trapped electrons at the center of the trap from simulation.
After more scatters, a larger fraction of electrons assume
larger pitch angles, which corresponds to higher SNRs—thus
explaining the deviation in the Aj curve from a pure expo-
nential, with an excess in higher order scatter peaks.
Appendix D: Determining parameters for the
reduced resolution model
The tritium analysis model (Sec. VII B) approximates
the instrumental resolution I with a weighted sum of
two Gaussians (Eq. 19). We perform fits to simulated
resolutions with different σ values to determine how σ[1]
0
and σ[2]
0 depend on σ. To vary σ in the simulations, the
maximum detectable track SNR (SNR max) is varied. As
discussed in Sec. VI C 1, σ is determined primarily by
SNRmax.
To determine the expressions for σ[1]
0 and σ[2]
0 in
Sec. VII B 2, we use three pieces of information:
1. Simulations show that σ[2]
0 = 0.8σ[1]
0 − 5.2 eV for
our instrumental resolution. We observe this lin-
ear relation by generating 100 simulated resolutions
with different SNRmax values, then fitting each res-
olution with Eq. 19. In these fits, the Gaussian
means, Gaussian standard deviations and η are all
fitted.
2. We observe that σ ≈ ησ[1]
0 + (1−η)σ[2]
0 for the
same 100 simulated resolutions. The relation is ap-
proximate because an exact expression for σ must
depend on µ[1]
0 and µ[2]
0 . In that relation, the right
hand side is computed from fit results, and σ is
calculated directly from the simulated resolutions.
3. We observe that η = 0.66 is constant within fit
errors, for the SNRmax uncertainty range in tritium
data (quantified in Sec. VIII B).
Combining the first and second relations, and fixingη, we
findσ[1]
0 (σ) andσ[2]
0 (σ)—expressions that depend only on
σ and constants.
