===== PAGE 1 =====
To unify relativity and quantum mechanics we
must abandon materialism
There is something more fundamental than both mind and matter
20th June 2025
 cite
Dean Rickles | Professor of the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, University of Sydney, and Co-
Director of the Sydney Centre for Time.
2,163 words
Read time: approx. 11 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
Physicists have so far failed to unify general relativity and quantum mechanics. As
attempts to unite them into a quantum theory of gravity mount up, philosopher of
physics Dean Rickles argues that the assumption of materialism is the problem. We
need to look beyond the physical—beyond space, time and matter—to something
primordial out of which minds can construct physical reality, and which explains both
general relativity and quantum mechanics. Pioneers like John Wheeler and David
Bohm have already begun to chart what such a realm of “pre-physics” might look like
—it’s high time physics took their ideas more seriously.
 
A pair of recent physics Nobel prizes (2020 and 2022) were awarded for basic
research in general relativity (Einstein’s theory of gravitation that explains gravity as
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
The quantum
world reveals
reality is made of
relations, not
objects
New theory
argues quantum
physics must
abandon irrational
numbers and the
continuum
Schrödinger’s
blunder created
the quantum
measurement
problem
The universe is
fine-tuned for
technology, not
just life
Related Videos:
the curvature of spacetime by matter and energy) and quantum mechanics (our best
bet for a theory of matter and energy). The experimental successes of these theories
keep piling up. There is clearly much truth in them. They both aim to describe the
same world: this world. They should surely overlap, since the matter and energy
described by quantum mechanics should curve spacetime as well as good old-
fashioned non-quantum mechanical matter and energy. Why then can we not
construct a theory in which they both appear? Why is it so difficult to build what would
be a Quantum Theory of Gravity?
___
It is the biggest scandal in physics, but it is rarely presented
as anything other than an amusing paradox or an interesting
challenge.
___
It seems, in crucial ways, their pictures of the world are completely at odds. Quantum
theory speaks of particles and fields in a fixed spacetime that stands quite apart from
them. General relativity speaks of a spacetime that gregariously joins in the drama
with particles and fields. Demanding the particles and fields obey quantum mechanics
spoils their passionate tango with gravity and spacetime. Making the spacetime move
and curve by the matter and energy described by quantum theories, spoils the tight
rules of quantum theory that make it go. We are as a result in a more-than-century-old
stalemate. And consider what this means for our scientific worldview: if these two
theoretical frameworks cannot peacefully co-exist, then there is no solid ground for
physics to stand on at a fundamental level. It is the biggest scandal in physics, but it is
rarely presented as anything other than an amusing paradox or an interesting
challenge. It’s a mess!
___
The shackles of orthodox, materialist approaches to doing
physics must at the very least be loosened, if not broken off
completely to make progress.
___
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
Time's great
mystery
Our future
theories of the
universe
Physics has
misunderstood
time
The trouble with
string theory
 p p
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too

===== PAGE 4 =====
28 December 2025
Reply 
Brian Balke
All rational analysis departs from axioms. The crux of physical analysis is inferring the axioms from observation. When contradictions arise,
we are required to isolate our axioms and evaluate how they might be modified to expand our understanding.
The contradictions that divide quantum mechanics (and particularly field theory) from general relativity resolve to a small number of axioms.
Committed to the principle that there was no preferred rest frame, Einstein asserted that if we remove all matter, space would be empty. A
corollary is smooth fields that can be modeled with differential equations. However, the axiom itself has been disproven by dark energy.
Field theorists hold the axiom that particles are unitary (they have no constituent parts). This is challenged by the regularity of the particle
generations, suggesting that they are composed of a structure with excitation states. If we further allow that charge is detachable from that
structure, we come immediately to a dualist model of reality.
That the neutrinos have no mass demands that the fundamental (charge-free) structure of the particles must be the building block of the
dark energy field, which is recognized as the "aluminiferous ether" that Einstein consigned to intellectual oblivion.
These ideas have been elaborated with a conceptual model whose degrees of freedom can be mapped to all of known physics. The
answers are all available. The discipline is simply incurious. I would post a link but the engine disallows that. The motivations can be found
be searching for a blog post titled "Einstein Led Us into Mass Hallucinations."
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
