===== PAGE 1 =====
THE DARK SIDE OF TRANSLATION SURFACES:
IT IS NOT ALL ABOUT DYNAMICS
GIANLUCA FARACO
Abstract. This survey offers a geometric and topological perspective on translation surfaces, with a focus
on aspects that are often overshadowed by the dynamical viewpoint. After presenting several equivalent
definitions of translation surfaces, particularly those based on polygonal models and fundamental domains,
we explore the structure of their moduli spaces in the spirit of Thurston, including natural stratifications.
The final part is devoted to the study of the period map, the realisation of representations as period characters
and the fibres of the holonomy map. This approach highlights a foundational, yet sometimes underrated,
facet of the theory.
Contents
1. Introduction 1
2. Translation surfaces 2
3. Metric geometry of translation surfaces 15
4. Moduli spaces of translation surfaces in genus one 20
5. Moduli spaces of translation surfaces 26
6. Periods of translation surfaces 41
References 68
1. Introduction
Translation surfaces appear naturally at the intersection of geometry, topology, and dynamics, and they
have attracted increasing attention in recent decades. A large portion of the research on translation
surfaces has focused on their dynamical aspects. This includes the study of interval exchange transfor-
mations, billiards in rational polygons, and Teichmüller dynamics. These directions have led to deep and
beautiful results, and the field has flourished around them.
This survey, however, explores a different and perhaps less illuminated side of the theory, a side whose
existence is well known but often left in the background. Borrowing from the title of the famous Pink
Floyd album, we might call itthe dark side of the translation surface. The word "dark" is not meant
as a negative term, but rather as an invitation to shed light on aspects of translation surfaces that, while
fundamental, often remain in the shadow of the more visible dynamics-orientated research.
In the spirit of Thurston, this survey begins by presenting various equivalent ways of defining translation
surfaces, particularly through polygonal models and fundamental domains. It then turns to the struc-
ture of moduli spaces of translation surfaces and their natural stratifications. This chapter focuses on
the period map and the problem of realising abelian differentials with prescribed absolute and relative
periods. In fact, the main purpose of this survey, however, is to present Haupt’s theorem and its recent
developments. We finally conclude with the geometry and topology of isoperiodic foliations, a subject
that has been significantly developed through the pioneering work of McMullen. While this perspective
Date: July 17, 2026.
2020Mathematics Subject Classification.57M50; 32G15; 14H15.
Key words and phrases.Translation surfaces, Haupt’s Theorem, absolute period realisation.
1
arXiv:2607.14822v1  [math.GT]  16 Jul 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
may not be the most visible part of the theory, it offers a rich and geometrically intuitive approach that
complements the more widely known dynamical picture.
Scope of the present note:In [Mas22], Massart writes, referring to his own work:
"There are already many wonderful introductions to translation surfaces (for instance,
[FM14],[HS06],[Möl09],[Wri15]or[Zor06]), and this one is in no way meant as a
substitute to any of them [...]"
I fully agree with this statement. The cited works are difficult to match and encompass a remarkable
wealth of material. To these, I would add the recent book by Athreya–Masur [AH24], a recent survey by
Filip [Fil24], as well as Massart’s own paper [Mas22], which I found particularly helpful and thoughtfully
written, and which also serves as a gentle introduction to Teichmüller curves. For the reasons mentioned
above, these notes will not address the dynamical aspects in any way. To semi-quote Massart, this work
does not intend in any way to replace any of the previous ones, and I hope it may be helpful to those who
wish to explore the "dark side" of translation surfaces.
Acknowledgments.The author wishes to thank Athanase Papadopoulos and Ken’ichi Ohshika for invit-
ing him to write the present survey. The author also wishes to thank Gabriel Calsamiglia, Dawei Chen,
Stefano Francaviglia, Subhojoy Gupta, Ursula Hamenstädt, Thomas Le Fils, Martin Möller, Guillaume
Tahar and Yongquan Zhang for all discussions he had with them about translation surfaces and moduli
spaces of differentials. I would also like to thank Gye-Seon Lee for inviting me to Seoul National Uni-
versity to give a mini-course on translation structures. Part of these notes were written during that visit,
and the course itself was inspired by the material presented here. Finally, I thank an anonymous referee
for comments which led to improvements in the present note.
2. Translation surfaces
The present chapter is devoted to introducing the reader totranslation surfacesfrom a topological point
of view in the spirit of Thurston. These can be defined in several ways depending on whether we adopt
the language of geometric structures, or a complex-analytic language or a topological one.
Convention.In what follows we shall agree with the usual identificationCR 2 determined by the
well-known associationz=x+iy←→(x,y) and hencedz 2 =dx 2 +dy 2. In particularCis endowed
with its standard complex structure which determines a well defined orientation.
2.1.Translation surfaces as tiled surfaces.We begin with a topological definition because this is cer-
tainly the most direct and concrete one, useful when we need to visualise the objects. We first recall that
a polygon is said to befinite and simpleif its boundary is a simple curve,i.e.without self-intersections
and made of finitely many segments. LetP={P 1,...,P n}be a finite collection of simple polygons in
Cwith disjoint interiors. We shall agree that all polygons in the present chapter are understood in the
Euclidean sense.
2.1.1.Topological definition.We begin by introducing the concept ofpairing via translations, bearing
in mind that the following definition naturally extends to other geometries.
Definition 2.1.A finite collection of polygonsPinR 2 admits apairing via translationsif there exists a
finite subsetτ={g s|s∈S}of translations of the plane, indexed by the collectionSof all the sides of
the polygons inP, such that for each sides∈Sthere is a sidet∈Ssuch that
1.g s(t)=s,
2. the translationsg s,g t satisfyg s gt(z)=g t gs(z)=z, that isg s =g−1
t ,
3. ifsis a side of P i andtis a side of P j, for some 1≤i,j≤n, then P i∩g s( Pj )=s.

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
We observe that it is not necessary to explicitly require that each side in the collectionScorresponds to a
unique side, as this uniqueness is already ensured by condition (2) in Definition 2.1. It is worth noticing
that a translation inτis allowed to be trivial,i.e.the identity, see Figures in §6 for some examples.
Figure1. A collection of disjoint polygonsPthat admits a pairing via translations.
Remark2.2.It is worth noting that, according to the definition provided, the polygons in a given collec-
tion are not necessarily disjoint, as shown in the Figure 1. In the following, many translation surfaces
are constructed using a single polygon in the plane subdivided into triangles and/or squares that are not
necessarily disjoint. If they are not disjoint, two polygons intersect along a common edge that they share.
We therefore assume that our collection of polygons admits a pairing via translationsτand let us denote
byPthe disjoint union of all polygons of our collection,i.e.
(2.1)P=
[
P
Pi.
Two points, sayp,q, are said to be paired if there are two sides, says,t∈S, such thatp∈sandq∈tand
a translationg s of the plane such thatg s(q)=p. This pairing of edge points generates an equivalence
relation on the setS. LetΣbe the topological quotient space ofS. ThenΣis the space obtained by gluing
the polygons inPvia the pairingτ. Its topology depends only on the combinatorial properties of the
identification. We have the following:
Proposition 2.3.Σis a compact orientable manifold of dimension two, i.e.Σis a compact orientable
surface.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
We postpone the proof to §2.1.2. Notice that, in principle,Σmay not be a connected surface and thus be
the union of finitely many connected surfaces because the collectionPis finite. In what follows we shall
requireΣto be connected, just because if it is not, we study its connected components separately.
More important is the fact that two distinct collections of polygons that admit a pairing via translations
may define the same surface in the following sense: two collections of polygons, sayPandQ, are
considered to define the same surface if one can be cut into pieces along straight lines, and these pieces
can be translated and reassembled to form the other collection. Notice that when a polygon is cut into two
pieces, the resulting boundary components must be paired, and two polygons can be glued together along
a pair of edges only if those edges are paired. We may thus say thatPandQare equivalent collections
of polygons. More generally, this criterion yields an equivalence relation on the set of all possible finite
collections of polygons inCthat admit a pairing via translations.
Definition 2.4.Atranslation surfaceis an equivalence class of polygons ofCthat admits a pairing via
translations.
Before we explore some examples of translation surfaces, let us understand why they are called surfaces
in the first place,i.e.it is now the right time to show Proposition 2.3.
2.1.2.Manifold structure.In the present paragraph, we prove that the topological spaceΣdefined as in
§2.1.1 is a differentiable surface by providing a differentiable atlas. Letπ:P−→Σbe the quotient map,
and letp∈Σbe any point. There are three mutually disjoint possibilities as follows.
In the first place let us assume thatπ −1(p) is a singleton. In this case, the preimage ofpis an interior
point of some polygon in the collectionP, and as such, it admits an open neighbourhoodUsuch that the
restrictionπ U :U−→π(U)⊂Σis a homeomorphism. Its inverse provides the desired local chart.
In the case where the preimage ofpis not a singleton, thenπ −1(p) must be a finite set becausePis
made of finite and simple polygons. See Remark 2.6 for a notable counterexample when the polygon
has infinitely many sides. Assume thatπ −1(p) consists of two points lying in the interior of edges of
polygons Pi and P j.
Remark2.5.Notice thati=jis very well admissible. In fact, this is always the case if the collectionP
is made of a single polygon P.
In this case,phas a neighbourhood inΣwhose preimage inPis the union of two half-disks of equal
radius and parallel diameters, each centred at one of the two preimages ofp. If the corresponding edges
are identified by a translation, we define a chart by mapping one half-disk via the identity and the other
via the translation, thus obtaining the desired local homeomorphism onto an open subset ofC.
The third and the last case is the most subtle to deal with. Assume thatπ −1(p) consists of finitely many
points, all of which are vertices of polygons in the collectionP, sayv 1,...,v k. This happens because
the gluing edge identifies only edges of equal length, so vertices are glued only to other vertices. A
neighbourhood ofpinΣlifts to the union ofkcircular sectorsS 1,...,S k, each of radiusr, centred atv i,
and bounded by two edgese i andf i, such thatf i is parallel toe i+1 for everyi=1,...,kwhere the indices
are taken modulok.
Letθ i be the interior angle of the sectorS i at the vertexv i. It is a non-trivial fact that the total angle is
always an integer multiple of 2π, that isθ 1 +···+θ k =2(m+1)π. In fact, this follows directly from
the assumption that the polygons are glued together by translations. Without this assumption, such a
property is not generally guaranteed.
In what follows, we shall callconical singularityorcone pointevery point such thatm≥1. Notice that
these points must arise from the identification of vertices. Following Massart in his very nice survey
[Mas22], we define a chart aroundpby mapping each sectorS i onto a standard circular sector centred at
the origin. Settingα i as the partial sumα i =θ 1 +···+θ i−1, we define the chart by
(2.2)v i +ρexp

i θ+α i

7−→ρexp
 i
m+1
 θ+α i

,for 0≤ρ≤r,0≤θ≤θ i.

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
This defines a homeomorphism onto an open subset ofC. We thus have a collection of charts, and it
is not difficult to see that the transition functions are restrictions of global translations or the identity.
As a consequence, our topological space is indeed a manifold, and it is orientable because transition
maps, being smooth functions, have Jacobian matrices with positive determinant. Notice that, by design,
each local chart is an orientation-preserving map. It remains to show that the surfaceΣis compact.
This follows from the fact that our collectionPconsists of finitely many compact polygons. SincePis
compact and the quotient projection is continuous, the claim follows.
Remark2.6.In [Cha04], Chamanara introduced a translation surface of infinite type obtained from a
unit square on which each side is subdivided into infinitely many segments. Every side of the square is
recursively halved, and edges on opposite segments are identified by translations. This process yields a
polygon with infinitely many sides, and the resulting surface has infinitely many handles. Notably, the
identification map fails to be finite-to-one: the quotient space includes a single conical singularity arising
from the identification of all cutting points and corners in the metric completion.
2.1.3.Tilings.Strictly speaking, a tiling is a subdivision of a geometric surfaceΣinto non-overlapping
polygons,i.e.polygons with disjoint interiors, calledtiles, such that the total angle around each vertex
is 2π. Without going into the general theory of tilings, which is rich and fascinating enough to have
inspired numerous surveys on the topic, for instance see [GS87], we shall limit ourselves to a few remarks
concerning tilings by Euclidean polygons. It is a well-known topological fact that the only closed surface
that admits a true tiling (in the strict sense above) is the torus. However, as soon as we relax the rather
restrictive condition that vertices must have total angle 2π, we arrive at a broader notion of tiling. In this
more general setting, the class of surfaces that can be constructed by gluing together Euclidean polygons
along their edges by translations becomes much wider. Example 1 below shows, for instance, that any
surface of positive genus can be realised by identifying sides of a single 4g-gon. For our purposes, as we
will see, special importance will be given to the class of surfaces known in the literature assquare-tiled
surfaces, see Example 2.
2.2.Some examples.We provide here a few explicit examples of translation surfaces. The collection of
polygons in Figure 1 determines a translation surface, and the reader is invited to find an explicit pairing
via translation to determine it.
Example1 (Regular polygons).Naturally, the simplest example is that of a square or, more generally, a
parallelogram embedded in the complex plane. By identifying the opposite edges of the parallelogram
by using translations, the resulting surface is a torus. This example can be easily generalised as follows:
every regular 4g-gon embedded inChas 2gpairs of parallel sides. The edges of each pair can be
identified via a translation, and the resulting surface is a closed surface of genusg.
Example2 (Square-tiled surfaces).One of the most celebrated and remarkable families of examples of
translation surfaces is that of the square-tiled surfaces. These structures are obtained by gluing together
a finite collection of unit squares. In the minimal case, consisting of a single square, one obtains a flat
torusT. For square-tiled surfaces, Definition 2.4 is equivalent to the following construction. LetPbe a
collection ofN>0 squares labelled from from 1 toN. Then a square-tiled surface is determined by a
pair of permutations (σh,σ v) in the symmetric groupS N, considered up to equivalence by simultaneous
conjugation, where the upper horizontal edge of thei-th square is glued to the lower horizontal edge of
thej-th square ifjis the successor ofiinσ v. Similarly, the right vertical edge of thei-th square is glued
to the left vertical edge of thej-th square ifjis the successor ofiinσ h. By construction, on the resulting
surfaceΣthere is a well defined mapf:Σ−→Twhich is a covering of degreeNbranched at a single
point. As we shall see in §6, in what follows this realisation plays a crucial role.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
2.3.Gauss-Bonnet condition.In the following paragraph, we aim to address the following question:
how many conical singularities can a translation surface admit?
It is worth noting that our definition above allows for the presence of singular points, but does not
guarantee their existence, nor does it impose any bound on their magnitude. In this section, we therefore
set out to count them.
Proposition 2.7(Gauss–Bonnet’s formula).LetΣbe a translation surface of genus g with cone points
of total angle2(m 1 +1 )π,...,2(m k +1 )π. Then
(2.3) 2g−2−
kX
i=1
mi =0
Proof.There are several ways to prove the Gauss–Bonnet’s formula; we provide the most topological
one which relies on the well-known formula
(2.4)χ(Σ)=V−E+F,
whereV,E,Fare the numbers of vertices, edges and faces of any triangulation ofΣ. Since a translation
surface is realised by gluing Euclidean polygons by means of translations, it naturally admits a triangula-
tion, sayτ, into Euclidean triangles such that all cone points are vertices ofτ. Recall that, for a Euclidean
triangleTwith interior anglesα,β,γ, we have
(2.5)
Z
T
k dA=α+β+γ−π,
wherekis the Gaussian curvature. In the flat case,k=0, and the formula shows that the total angle sum
equalsπ, unless there is a singularity. Let∆ ={p 1,...,p k}⊆Vbe the set of singular points–notice that
not all vertices are cone points. For every vertexv∈V, setθ(v) as
(2.6)θ(v)=

2 (mi +1 )πifv=p i
2πifvis a regular point
.
Sinceτis a triangulation then 2E=3Fbecause each face is adjacent to three edges, equivalently, each
edge is adjacent to two faces. The triangle being Euclidean, then we have the equality
(2.7)
X
θ(v)=πF.
As a consequence, we get the following
(2.8) 2πχ(Σ)=2πV−2πE+2πF
(2.7)
=2πV−
X
θ(v)
(2.6)
=−2π
kX
i=1
mi,
that is
(2.9) 2g−2−
kX
i=1
mi =0
as desired. □
As a direct consequence, we derive a characterisation for low-genus surfaces,i.e. g≤1.
Corollary 2.8.There are no translation surfaces of genus zero. Every translation surface of genus one
has no conical singularities.
The result of this paragraph can be summarised as follows: for closed surfaces, there cannot be too many
singularities, but neither can there be too few. Moreover, the singularities that do occur cannot have
arbitrary order. The Gauss—Bonnet condition thus provides a balance between the number of conical
singularities and their angular magnitudes. What is truly remarkable is that this balance depends solely
on the topology of the surface—in particular, on its genus. This is truly extraordinary.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
2.4.Geometric structures and singular Euclidean metrics.In §2.1, we introduced translation sur-
faces as topological surfaces obtained by gluing together finitely many simple polygons in the Euclidean
plane via translations. To ensure that the resulting structure is indeed a surface, it was necessary to define
a suitable atlas of charts–see §2.1.2. This atlas satisfies a key property: the transition maps are either
trivial or translations of the plane. In particular, every translation surface admits a unique maximal at-
las with this property. In this section, we show that this condition completely characterises translation
surfaces in this sense. That is, if a topological surfaceΣis endowed with such an atlas, then it admits a
triangulation made of Euclidean triangles.
Recall that a generic translation surface may have special points, defined as conical singularities. Al-
though this was not made explicit at the time, around every cone point the definition of charts is essen-
tially given by taking the (m+1)-th root. To better formalise this concept, and thus define translation
surfaces in terms of atlases, it is useful to first introduce the following models.
2.4.1.A small cone.We introduce a cone that serves as a local model. Acone of angleπis defined as
the quotient space obtained as follows:
(2.10)C(π)=
n
(ρ, θ)
 ρ≥0 and 0≤θ≤π
o
/(ρ,0 )∼(ρ, π)
with the metricds 2 =dρ 2 +ρ 2 dθ2, where (ρ, θ) are the polar coordinates on the closure of the upper
half-plane. Thetip of the coneis the unique point with coordinateρ=0. Letq(z)=z −1 dz2 be the
quadratic differential onCwith a single simple pole at the origin. The following holds, see [Tro86]:
Lemma 2.9.C(π)is isometric toCendowed with the flat metric induced by q.
Proof.We first recall that the flat metric induced byqisds 2 =|z −1||dz| 2. Then consider the function:
(2.11)  ρ, θ7−→
 1
4ρ2 cos( 2θ), 1
4ρ2 sin( 2θ)
!
=   x,y .
It is a routine exercise to show that the given function realises the desired isometry.□
We conclude by noting that this construction is a special case of a more general framework, capable
of modelling arbitrary cone angles, that is, any angle not greater than 2π, which we have intentionally
omitted so as to avoid unnecessary technical digressions.
2.4.2.A wider cone.We now proceed to employ the model just defined to introduced bigger cones.
Takem+1 copies of the upper half-plane with boundary, each equipped with the standard flat metric,
and similarlym+1 copies of the lower half-plane with boundary. Label both the upper and lower half-
planes from 1 tom+1, and glue them as follows: the half-infinite ray [ 0,∞) of thei-th half-plane is
glued to (−∞,0 ] of the (i+1)-th one, where the indices are taken modulom+1. The gluing can be
carried out in such a way that the Euclidean metrics on the individual half-planes extend to a singular
Euclidean metric on the entire disc, with a unique singularity at the origin having total angle 2(m+1)π.
Notice that the resulting space is topologically a disc; we define this space as aEuclidean cone of order
m+1. In this case, the origin plays the role of thetip of the cone.
The terminology is motivated by the fact that there is a well defined branched covering map over the
coneC(π) defined as follows:
(2.12)C
g
−→C
f
−→C(π)
wheref(z)=z 2 =wandg(u)=u m+1 =z. Their compositionπ(u)=u 2m+2 is branched at the tip of
the coneC(π).
Lemma 2.10.The quadratic differentialπ ∗q(u)defines a singular Euclidean metric onCwith a singu-
larity of order m at the origin.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
Proof.This is a straightforward and rather simple calculation. In the local coordinateuwe have
(2.13)π ∗q(u)=
 dπ
du
!2 du2
π(u) =( 2m+2 ) 2 u2m du2.
Thusπ∗qdefines a singular Euclidean metric with a singularity of ordermat the origin.□
In reference to the concluding remark of §2.4.2, the construction just presented allows for the realisation
of cones with arbitrary angle greater than 2π. These are useful in describing flat structures with more
general singularities, which lie beyond the scope of this survey. However, the reader can easily retrace
the construction in order to define the singular Euclidean structure on a cone with an arbitrary angle.
2.4.3.Definition via atlases.We are now in a position to provide a second, more intrinsic definition of
translation surfaces.
Definition 2.11(Second definition).LetΣbe a closed, topological orientable surface. Atranslation
structureonΣconsists of a finite set∆⊂Σ, possibly empty, and an atlas ofC-valued charts onΣ\∆,
extended by requiring that for each pointp∈∆there exists an integerm>0 and a homeomorphism from
a neighbourhood ofpto a neighbourhood of the origin in the Euclidean cone of orderm+1, such that
transition maps are translations on their overlaps. Atranslation surfaceis a closed topological surface
endowed with a translation structure.
A pointp∈∆is called aconical singularitywhereas all other points are calledregular. It has a cone
angle of magnitude 2(m+1)π, since it can be obtained by gluing 2m+2 half-planes, each of which with
angleπat the origin. The termcone pointis a synonym forsingularity. In what follows, it will be useful
to adopt the following standard terminology: the integermis defined as theorder of a cone point, and it
essentially measures how many times the cone angle exceeds 2π. Some remarks are in order.
Remark2.12.A translation structure on a closed topological surfaceΣdetermines a natural orientation
that makes the local charts orientation-preserving.
Remark2.13.We observe that a Euclidean cone of order one is nothing but the complex plane itself.
Therefore, one could define a translation surface as a geometric structure in which every point is modelled
on a suitable cone, without explicitly stating in advance that the set of singular points is finite (recall that
we are assuming the surfaces to be compact).
Remark2.14.In principle, every chart taking values in a cone of orderm≥1 can be replaced by its post-
composition with the mapg, as defined in §2.4.2. Such a post-composition is usually called abranched
chart, since it fails to be a homeomorphism onto its image. Consequently, one could define translation
structures as maximal atlases of charts, possibly branched, whose transition maps are translations on
their overlaps. It is in fact not uncommon to find in the literature definitions that favour this second
approach over the former, as it allows one to define translation surfaces, and more generally, structures
with conical singularities, without first introducing a conical model.
In its simplicity, it is a non-trivial fact that the two definitions are equivalent. We will provide a proof of
this fact in §2.4.5. We first provide a description of the local geometry.
2.4.4.Local geometry.By using the definitions just given, we aim to describe the geometry around a
point. We first consider a regular point. A local chart, sayφ α :U α−→C, is a homeomorphism onto its
imageφα(Uα)⊂C. As a consequence, the standard Euclidean metric, restricted to the image of the chart,
pulls back to a Euclidean metric, sayds 2
α, defined on the open setUα⊂Σ. Each chart centred at a regular
point defines a local Euclidean metric, and these local metrics extend to a Riemannian metric onΣ\∆.
Notice that it is locally Euclidean onΣ\∆, because the transition maps are translations. The Euclidean
metric just defined onΣ\∆extends over∆to a singular Riemannian metric with conical singularities
and Lemma 2.10 provides an explicit closed form. In what follows we refer to these metrics as singular
Euclidean metrics.

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
One might be tempted to erroneously define a translation structure as the data of a singular Euclidean
metric with conical singularities of angle 2(m+1)πon a closed surface which is locally Euclidean away
from the singularities. However, for such a metric to define a genuine translation structure, it is essential
that the parallel transport it induces onΣ\∆be trivial. Example 4 in §2.6.3 may clarify better this point.
2.4.5.Showing the equivalence of definitions — part one.We now provide a proof of the equivalence
between Definitions 2.4 and 2.11. One implication is subsumed in §2.1.2. In fact, we have already shown
the existence of an atlas of charts such that transition functions are translations on their overlaps. We just
clarify that the chart defined by Equation (2.2) around a generic vertex is not a homeomorphism onto a
cone of angle 2(m+1)π, but rather the associated branched covering, as explained in Remark 2.14. By
lifting this map to the Euclidean cone of orderm+1 one gets the desired chart as in Definition 2.11.
We only need to show the opposite implication. Let us then consider a surface endowed with a maximal
atlas as defined in Definition 2.11. We take an arbitrary open cover and then a finite sub-cover. The key
fact now is that a surface can be triangulated. We therefore choose a suitable refinement such that the
following properties hold:
1. each triangle is entirely contained in a chart,
2. and each singular point is a vertex of the triangulation.
We then deform the given triangulation by a homotopy that fixes all the vertices pointwise, so as to obtain
triangles that are isometric to Euclidean triangles. The resulting triangulation yields the desired family
of polygons as in Definition 2.4.
2.5.Developing-holonomy pair.What follows is a specific instance of a much more general construc-
tion that applies to an arbitrary geometric structure. As above, we do not dwell on details that are
unnecessary for the purposes of this chapter. We begin by defining the developing map. Historically, this
concept dates back to Ehresmann [Ehr36] and was subsequently revisited by Thurston; see [Thu97].
LetΣbe a closed surface of genusgand let eΣbe its universal cover. Since there are no translation
structures on the sphere, there is no loss of generality in assumingg≥1. A translation structure on a
surfaceΣnaturally lifts to a translation structure on eΣby making the covering projection a local isometry.
Adeveloping mapdev: eΣ−→Cis a local embedding away from the singularities of eΣsuch that
1. its restriction to any sufficiently small open neighbourhood of a regular point is a local chart for
the translation structure on eΣ, and
2. its restriction to any sufficiently small open neighbourhood of a conical singularity is a branched
chart as in Remark 2.14. In other words there is a local coordinateusuch that dev(u)=u m+1
for some integerm≥1. The developing map clearly fails to be a local embedding around a
conical singularity because its Jacobian vanishes.
Notice that as a consequence of Remark 2.12, a developing map is an orientation-preserving local isom-
etry away from the singularities.
Remark2.15.Recall that genus one surfaces admit translation structures without conical singularities,
see Corollary 2.8. In this case, a developing map is not only a local embedding, but indeed a global
one. This is a matter of Riemannian geometry. A torus endowed with a translation structure is a compact
Riemannian manifold, as the local charts define a complete Riemannian metric without conical singular-
ities, and the pull-back metric on its universal cover is also complete. Since the developing map is an
orientation-preserving local isometry, a standard result from Riemannian geometry asserts that it must
be an orientation-preserving global isometry, in particular, a global embedding.
A developing map for a translation structure can be constructed geometrically by unfolding the surface
into the Euclidean plane. As already hinted above, a translation structure naturally determines a triangu-
lation of the surface, which lifts to a triangulation of eΣ. Moreover, up to passing to a finer triangulation,

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
we may assume that each triangle is entirely contained within a single coordinate chart. This seem-
ingly simple observation leads to an alternative definition of developing maps: they can be described as
continuous maps that restrict to isometries on each individual triangle as follows.
Suppose two adjacent trianglesT 1 andT 2 share an edgee, and letf 1 :T 1→R 2 be an isometric embed-
ding. Then there exists a unique isometric embeddingf 2 :T 2→R 2 such thatf 1(e)=f 2(e) and the
images ofT 1 andT 2 underf 1 andf 2, respectively, have disjoint interiors. Gluingf 1 andf 2 along the
shared edge defines a mapf e =f 1∪f 2 :T 1∪T 2→R 2. By iteratively unfolding adjacent triangles across
shared edges, one defines an isometric map from an increasing union of triangles in eΣto the Euclidean
plane. Since the universal cover is simply connected, this process yields a globally defined developing
map eΣ−→R 2≃C, uniquely determined up to a translation.
The developing mapf: eΣ−→Cof a translation structure onΣsatisfies an equivariance condition with
respect to the fundamental group action on the universal cover. Specifically, for each elementγ∈π 1(Σ),
the compositionf◦γis also a developing map for the same translation structure. Since a developing
map is defined up to translation, there exists a translationc∈Csuch that
(2.14)f◦γ=f+c.
The correspondence
(2.15)ρ:π 1(Σ)−→C, γ7→c
defines a group homomorphism. Notice that post-composition of the developing map with any translation
preservesρ. By adopting the language of geometric structures, such a representation is called theholo-
nomyrepresentation of the translation structure. We may already observe that, since the target is abelian,
the representation reduces to a representation on homology, namelyχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→C, well-known in
literature asperiod character. We will return to this in §6.3.
2.6.Complex-analytic perspective.The definitions of translation surfaces given above both have a
geometric flavour: the first is certainly the most intuitive and also the most convenient for certain ap-
plications. There is a third definition, which is arguably the simplest to state but at the same time the
most abstract. The next definition we will introduce is of a complex-analytic nature and establishes a
non-trivial and very interesting connection between low-dimensional topology, algebraic geometry, and
complex analysis.
2.6.1.Definition via abelian differentials.LetXbe a compact Riemann surface, that is, an irreducible
smooth projective algebraic curve overC. Anabelian differentialon a Riemann surface is a holomorphic
1-form (or differential), that is, a global section of the cotangent bundle ofX.
Definition 2.16(Third definition).A translation surface is the datum of a non-zero abelian differential,
sayω, on a Riemann surfaceX. In this setting a translation surface is denoted as a pair (X,ω).
For the time being, we skip details about the moduli space of such pairs and will return to them later on
in §5.2. We want to focus on how this definition is equivalent to the other. The leading question of the
present paragraph is
why should we call a pair(X,ω)translation surface when translations do not even ap-
pear in the definition?
Translations do appear, though not as explicitly as in the previous cases. Here is the point: a Riemann
surface is defined as a maximal atlas ofC-charts, with transition maps that are biholomorphisms on their
domains of definition. A holomorphic 1-form singles out a sub-atlas that is maximal with respect to
the condition that transition maps are translations. In particular, two different holomorphic 1-forms on
the same Riemann surface may define different sub-atlases! While a direct equivalence with the first
definition is less easy to establish, the equivalence between this third definition and the second one is
relatively straightforward.

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
2.6.2.Showing the equivalence of definitions — part two.We now provide a proof of the equivalence
between Definitions 2.11 and 2.16.
One implication is a consequence of our discussion in §2.4.4. Suppose we are given a translation structure
on a closed surfaceΣ. Thus we have an atlas of charts toCwhose transition functions are translations
on their overlaps. Since these are biholomorphisms, we get a well defined complex structure onΣ\∆.
We use these charts to define a holomorphic 1-form on the open surfaceΣ\∆and we setω=dzfor any
such local coordinatez.
The interesting and non-trivial part is to define the complex structure and the differential at the conical
points. The key observation now is the following
Lemma 2.17.For every integer m≥0, the Euclidean cone of order m+1carries a unique complex
structure that makes it biholomorphic to the complex plane. It is, in fact, the Riemann surface that makes
the(m+1)-root a single-valued function.
By Definition 2.11, for each singular point, sayp, there exists somem>0 and a homeomorphism, say
φ, from a neighbourhood ofpto a neighbourhood of the tip of the Euclidean cone of orderm+1. The
complex structure is pulled back by extending the complex structure already defined onΣ\∆. Even more
explicitly, a neighbourhood of the tip of the Euclidean cone is biholomorphic to a neighbourhood of the
origin inC; precomposing this biholomorphism withφyields a chart for the complex structure. We thus
obtain a complex structureXon the topological surfaceΣ.
By using again the mapgas defined in (2.12), the differentialdzonCcan be pulled-back to a differential
on the Euclidean cone which, in the local coordinateu, takes the formω=u mdu; pulling it back via the
homeomorphismφdefines the desired holomorphic 1-form in a neighbourhood of the singular point. We
have the desired pair (X,ω) as in Definition 2.16.
It remains to show that every pair (X,ω) defines a translation structure as in Definition 2.11, thus es-
tablishing the equivalence with the complex-analytic definition. The starting point in this case is the
following result of complex analysis.
Lemma 2.18.Let X be a Riemann surface and letωbe a holomorphic1-form. At any point whereωis
non-zero, there exists a local coordinate z for X in whichω=dz. At any point whereωhas a zero of
order m, there exists a local coordinate z in whichω=z mdz.
In a neighbourhood of a pointpwhich is not a zero ofω, a local coordinate is defined as
(2.16)z(q)=
Z q
p
ω
in whichω=dz, and the coordinates of two overlapping neighbourhoods differ by a translationz7→z+c
for somec∈C. Thus we have an atlas of charts onΣ\∆toCwhose transition maps are translations.
Around a zero, sayp, of orderm≥1, there exists an open neighbourhoodUand a local coordinatezon
Usuch thatω=(m+1)z m dz. We may observe that this is the pull-back of the formdzvia the branched
covering mapφ:U−→Cdefined asφ(z)=z m+1, since
(2.17)d(z m+1 )=(m+1)z m dz.
By lifting this map to the Euclidean cone of orderm+1, we have a homeomorphism from a neighbour-
hood ofpto a neighbourhood of the tip of the Euclidean cone and hence the desired chart. We have thus
defined a translation structure as in Definition 2.11.
Remark2.19.We observe that the proof also tells us that the set of conical singularities coincides with the
set of zeros ofω. For this reason, in what follows, both will be denoted by∆. This should not be too sur-
prising. Indeed, the complex-analytic version of the Gauss–Bonnet theorem asserts that a holomorphic
differential on a compact Riemann surface has exactly 2g−2 zeros, counted with multiplicity.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
2.6.3.Where is the north?We introduce one final concept that will be useful in what follows. In the
first place, we observe that in the complex plane there are two main directions given by the real and
imaginary axes, which we can visualise as the E-W and N-S directions on a map. In particular, there is
a well defined direction,the north, given by the positive imaginary axis. These directions determine two
transverse foliations of the complex plane, called respectively thehorizontal foliationand thevertical
foliation.
Let now (X,ω) be a translation surface and let∆denote the set of zeros ofω. By using the associated
translation structure, the horizontal foliation pulls back to a well defined horizontal foliation onX\∆,
since the coordinate changes are translations. In other words, at every regular point of the surface, a
north direction is well defined. This foliation extends to∆as a singular foliation: if a singular point has
orderm, then there are exactlym+1 possible north directions.
An interesting consequence is that the parallel transport associated with the locally Euclidean Riemann-
ian metric onX\∆turns out to be trivial. More precisely, the parallel transport induced by the flat
connection yields a homomorphism
(2.18)π 1(X\∆,x o )−→SO(2,R)S 1
which acts on the tangent space ofx o. SinceS 1 is abelian, such a homomorphism factors in homology,
and hence we have a well defined homomorphism
(2.19) PT: H 1(X\∆,Z)−→SO(2,R)S 1.
Since the coordinate changes are translations, the parallel transport of a vector pointing north along any
closed path inXavoiding the zeros ofωreturns the vector to itself. Conversely, if the parallel transport is
trivial, then a well defined north direction exists away from the singularities ofω. In general, a flat metric
on a surface does not have trivial parallel transport, which means that the surface is obtained by gluing
polygons via isometries of the plane, such as translations and also rotations. For this reason, in §2.4.4,
we claimed that a singular Euclidean metric does not necessarily determine a translation structure, see
Examples 3 and 4. The following criterion holds.
Proposition 2.20.A translation structure is the datum of a singular Euclidean metric on a surfaceΣ
with trivial parallel transport.
Example3.Every polyhedron can be realised by gluing together a finite collection of Euclidean polygons
to form a topological sphere. Famous examples include the Platonic solids. For instance, the cube is
topologically a sphere obtained by gluing squares in the familiar way. If a polyhedron has vertices with
rational angles,i.e.of the form 2π pi
qi
, we definedas the least common multiple of the{q i}. Let∆be
the subset of cone angles of some convex polyhedronP. Notice thatP\∆is a punctured sphere. The
homology group H 1(P\∆,Z) is generated by loops around the punctures and, since there are finitely
many punctures, the image of the parallel transport is a finite group ofS1 of orderd. LetΣbe the smallest
cover ofPbranched at∆for which the parallel transport homomorphism has trivial image. That is, there
is a branched covering mapf:Σ−→Pthat arises as the completion of the covering ofP\∆associated
with the kernel of the parallel transport. HenceΣsupports a translation structure as in Proposition 2.20.
LetPbe the collection of Euclidean polygons used to construct the original polyhedron, and letQbe the
collection obtained by takingdcopies of the polygons inP. The monodromy offprovides an explicit
recipe for how to glue together the polygons inQ. The resulting surface is homeomorphic toΣby design.
Example4.Given a rectangle in the plane with side lengths 3aandb, we subdivide the upper segment
into three edges of equal length by adding two vertices. The resulting polygon is thus a hexagon with
four right angles and two angles of magnitudeπ. We observe that the sum of the internal angles is 4π, as
expected. We now take four copies of this rectangle: two oriented as the original one, and two rotated
byπ. We glue the sides of the hexagon appropriately, as shown in Figure 2, in order to obtain a larger
rectangle with twice the original size and with two slits in the middle.

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
R1
R4
R2
R3
s+
o s+
1
s−
o s−
1
Figure2. Realising a singular Euclidean metric which is not a translation surface.
The opposite sides of the rectangle are identified by translations. The surface obtained by gluing the two
slits will be of genus one or two and will carry a singular Riemannian metric with two singularities of
cone angle 4π. The resulting surface thus depends on how the edgess ±
i are glued together. There are
three cases as follows.
1. If the edges +
i is identified withs−
i , fori=0,1, then the resulting surface is a torus, in particular
a translation surface in the sense of Definition 2.4. As a consequence, it is endowed with a
translation structure in the sense of Definition 2.11.
2. If the edges +
i is identified withs−
i+1, fori=0,1 with indices taken modulo 2, then the resulting
space is a surface of genus two in the sense of Definition 2.4. In both cases, the identification is
by design given by the translationz7→z+3a. As a consequence, it is endowed with a translation
structure in the sense of Definition 2.11.
3. Finally, if the edges +
i is identified withs +
i+1, again fori=0,1 modulo 2, then the resulting space
is still a surface of genus two. In this case, however, the rectangles R1 and R4 are glued to R2 and
R3, respectively, via a rotation of order two around the centre of the rectangle. As a consequence,
the resulting surface is no longer endowed with a translation structure in the sense of Definition
2.11. See also Figure 3.
2.7.First-order linearODEs.An even more analytic perspective is given by first-order linear ODEs
on Riemann surfaces. LetXbe a closed Riemann surface and letωbe a holomorphic 1−form onX.
In terms of analytic maps, a translation surface can be seen as a solution of the first-order linear ODE
defined as
(2.20)dF=ω
on a Riemann surfaceX. On a simply connected open subset, sayU⊂X, we can always find a local
solutionF:U−→Cwhich is a biholomorphism onto its image wheneverUdoes not contain any cone
point. This can be taken as a local chart, and we may easily observe that two solutions, sayF 1 andF 2,
must differ by some constantc∈C,i.e.,F 2 =F 1 +c. Notice that ifUis a neighbourhood of some cone
point of orderm, then there is a local coordinate, sayz, such thatω(z)=z m dz, that is,dF=(m+1)z m dz,
so that a local solution looks likeF(z)=z m+1. It should not come as a surprise to the reader to encounter
the same charts defined in §2.6.2. We thus have defined a translation structure.
A local solution generally extends to a multivalued functionF:X−→C, obtained via the analytic
continuation principle, with monodromy given by a representationπ 1(X)−→C. This function lifts to

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
R1
R4
R2
R3
s+
o s+
1
s−
o s−
1
Figure3. Surface endowed with a singular Euclidean metric without trivial parallel
transport. Referring to Figure 2 of Example 4, this figure illustrates that ifs+
i is identified
withs +
i+1, then the resulting surface carries a singular Euclidean metric with non-trivial
parallel transport. A unit vector field along a non-contractible curve is highlighted in
red. After completing a loop, the initial vector is rotated by an angle ofπ.
a genuine single-valued function on the universal cover. The restriction of this lifted function to any
sufficiently small open neighbourhood defines a local chart for the underlying translation structure, and
therefore must be a developing map. Vice versa, given any translation surface with developing map, say
dev: eX−→C, then eω=dev ∗dzis a well defined holomorphic 1-form that projects to a holomorphic
1-formωonX. The key point is that the monodromy of the differential equation (2.20) coincides with
the holonomy of the translation structure.
From a different perspective, equation (2.20) is equivalent to the first-order differential equation
(2.21)du−ωu=0,
that means
(2.22) du
u =ω.
The equation (2.21) being linear of the first order admits a unique solution up to some scalar factor. In
other words, the ratio of two local solutions is constant.
2.8.Isomorphic structures.In the previous sections, we have examined translation surfaces from var-
ious perspectives. We now wish to provide a notion ofisomorphismfor translation surface. In other
words, we wonder when two translation surfaces can be considered equivalent. Depending on the adopted
perspective, the term "isomorphism" acquires different meanings: from the viewpoint of translation struc-
tures, we shall mean that the structures are isometric and differ by a translation. In terms of Riemann
surfaces, we shall mean that the structures are biholomorphic. For our purposes, it is convenient to adopt
the complex-analytic perspective as in §2.6. The leading question here is the following:
when are two translation surfaces equivalent?
Two Riemann surfaces, sayXandY, are declared to be equivalent if and only if there exists a biholo-
morphismf:X−→Y. In the same spirit we introduce the following
Definition 2.21.We define two translation surfaces, say (X,ω) and (Y,ξ), to be equivalent if and only if
there exists a biholomorphismf:X−→Ysuch thatf ∗ξ=ω.
The following characterisation result holds.

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
Lemma 2.22.Let(X, ω)and(Y, ξ)be two equivalent translation surfaces. Then, for every point p∈X,
there exist local charts(U,φ)around p and(V,ψ)around f(p), where f:X−→Y is the biholomorphism
satisfying f∗ξ=ω, such that on U the equalityψ◦f=φ+c holds for some c∈C.
Proof.Letp∈Xbe any point. Then there exists a neighbourhoodU⊂Xofpand a chartφ:U→C
such thatφ∗(dz)=ω. Similarly, there exists a neighbourhoodV⊂Yoff(p) and a chartψ:V→C
such thatψ ∗(dz)=ξ. Assumepis a regular point. In this caseφis a local homeomorphism onto the
image and henceψ◦f=φ+cis equivalent to the condition thatψ◦f◦φ −1 :φ(U)→ψ(V) is a
translation. Defineg=ψ◦f◦φ −1 :φ(U)−→ψ(V)⊂C. Sincefis a biholomorphism andf ∗ξ=ω,
we have
(2.23)g ∗(dz)=dz.
This implies thatgis a holomorphic function whose derivative is constantly one. Hence, it is of the form
(2.24)g(z)=z+c
for some constantc∈C. Therefore, in local coordinates,fis a translation. We next assumepis a cone
point of orderm. In this case,φ, and henceψ, are branched charts and the local inverse ofφis not well
defined. Once again, sincef ∗ξ=ω, we have
(2.25) (ψ◦f) ∗(dz)=φ ∗dz,
that means
(2.26)f ∗
(m+1 )w mdw

=(m+1 )z mdz⇐⇒(m+1 )f(z) m f′(z)dz=(m+1 )z mdz.
This latter holds if and only iff(z) m d f=z m dz. We thus need to solve a non-linear ODE on the open
setU⊂X. Sincefis a biholomorphism, we can perform a change of variable and setw=f(z). The
equation then becomes
(2.27)w m dw=z m dz,
which is separable. By integrating both sides, substitutingf(z) forwon the left side, and performing
some manipulations, we obtain the following form:
(2.28)f(z)=
m+1p
zm+1 +C.
Notice that we do not need to specify any branch of them+1-root becauseUis a neighbourhood of the
tip of the Euclidean cone of orderm+1 which is by Lemma 2.17 the Riemann surface that makes the
(m+1)-root a single-valued function. Since the charts are centred,phas coordinatez=0 andf(p) has
coordinatew=0, it follows thatC=0. Hencef(z)=z.□
Appendix at §2: Summarising table.We can summarise the different perspectives discussed so far in
the following double-entry table. A translation surface can be understood either in terms of surfaces or
in terms of functions, viewed from a geometric or an analytic angle. See Table 1.
3. Metric geometry of translation surfaces
In the present section we wish to provide some features of translation surfaces seen as metric spaces. We
may define a metric on a translation surface (X,ω) in two equivalent ways. First, we may consider the
singular Euclidean metric induced byω, which is locally isometric to the Euclidean plane away from
the zeros ofω. If we can also describe a neighbourhood of the singular locus via a singular Euclidean
metric, then we may define a global metricd(x,y) as the infimum of the Euclidean lengths of all piecewise
differentiable paths joiningxandyin (X,ω). As we shall see the expression for the metric is somewhat
bizarre.
Alternatively, since translation surfaces can be decomposed into polygons glued along parallel edges
e.g., via a triangulation into Euclidean triangles as done in §2.3 and §2.5, each piece inherits the standard

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
translation structure
φα :U α→C 	
whose transition functions are
translations on their overlaps
Riemann surface
+holomorphic 1-form
(X, ω)
multivalued function
F:X−→C
with monodromyρ:π 1(X)→C
developing map
smooth map dev: eΣ−→C
equivariant wrtρ:π 1(Σ)→C
surfacesmaps on surfaces
geometric perspective complex-analytic perspective
Table1. Summarising table
Euclidean metric. These local metrics can be combined to produce a global metric onX. There are several
ways to carry out this construction; for example, by using strings and chains as described in [BH99]. As
one may expect, both approaches yield the same resulting metric.
3.1.A few notions of metric geometry.Before proceeding, let us recall some general definitions valid
in any metric space. Given a metric space, say (Σ,d), thelengthof a continuous curveγ: [a,b]→Σis
defined as
(3.1) sup
n−1X
i=0
d γ(t i ), γ(ti+1 ),
where the supremum is taken over all partitionsa=t 0≤t 1≤···≤t n =bof the interval [a,b]. A curve
with finite length is calledrectifiable.
A curveγ: [a,b]→Σis aunit-speed geodesicif, for everyt∈[a,b] andsclose tot, we have
(3.2)d  γ(t), γ(s)  =|t−s|.
Any curve that is a reparametrisation of a unit-speed geodesic is called simply ageodesic.
A metric space (Σ,d) is called ageodesic spaceif any two points inΣcan be joined by a geodesic.
A metricdis called alength metricif for every pair of pointsx,y∈Σ, the distanced(x,y) equals the
infimum of the lengths of rectifiable curves joiningxandy. A space endowed with a length metric is
called alength space. It is worth noting that not every metric is a length metric, but every metric space
admits aninduced length metric, which can be constructed by taking the infimum over curve lengths
between points. The reader is invited to consult the nice book [BH99] for more details.
3.2.Distance on Euclidean cones.In §2.4.2 we introduced the Euclidean cone of orderm, withm≥1
and used it as a model to define the local geometry around conical points. We now describe the metric
geometry induced by the singular Euclidean metric. Once again, it is convenient to use polar coordinates
to introduce a notion of distance on a Euclidean cone. As usual we have a radial coordinateρ∈R + and
an angular coordinateθ∈ 0,2(m+1)π . We denote this cone asC( 2(m+1)π).

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
The resulting metric has an explicit form. By consideringS 1⊂E 2 =C( 2π), the points of the unit circle
are exactly those ordered pairsx=(x 1,x 2) such that||x||=1. The functiond S1 :S 1×S 1−→Rthat
assigns to each pair (x,y)∈S 1×S 1 the unique real numberd S 1(x,y)∈[0,π] such that
cosd S 1(x,y)=⟨x,y⟩
is a metric and the distance between each pair of points is the length of the shortest arc joining them, see
[BH99, Proposition 2.1, Chapter I]. The unit circle, sayS 1, centred at the tip of the coneC( 2(m+1)π)
has length equal to 2(m+1)πand it can be endowed with a metricd S 1 that assigns to each pair of points
the unique real number in [ 0,(m+1)π] that represents the length of the shortest arc joining them. In
both cases we refer tod S 1 as the circle metric.
Letd S 1 be the circle metric onS 1. We define the so-calledtruncated metric, and denote it byd π, the
function defined as
(3.3)d π(θ 1, θ2 )=min π,d S 1(θ 1,θ 2 )	.
We may observe thatd π =d S 1 on the unit circle ofC( 2π). For everym≥1, for two pointsp=(t, θ 1 )
andq=(s, θ 2 ) inC( 2(m+1)π), we define the distanced(p,q) via the formula
(3.4)d(p,q) 2 =t 2 +s 2−2stcos   dπ(θ 1, θ2 ).
One can show that this functionddefines a metric onC( 2(m+1)π). While the formula for the distance
may seem unusual, it simplifies in the case of small angular separation: for pointsp,qwith small angular
distance inS 1, the expression reduces to the law of cosines in Euclidean geometry.
A geodesicγpassing through the tip of the coneC( 2(m+1)π), after reparametrisation, has the form
(3.5)γ: (−ε,ε)→C( 2(m+1)π), γ(t)=

(t, θ1 ),t<0,
(t, θ2 ),t>0,
and for smallδ>0, we have
(3.6)d(γ(−δ), γ(δ) ) 2 =2δ 2   1−cos   dπ(θ 1, θ2 ) .
Forγto be a geodesic, we must then haved(γ(−δ), γ(δ) )=2δ, and hence:
(3.7) cos

dπ(θ 1, θ2 )

=−1.
This meansd S1(θ 1, θ2 )≥π. Therefore,γis a geodesic if and only if it leaves an angle of magnitude at
leastπon each side of the tip of the cone. Notice that at a regular point, this requirement is classical!
However, when a cone point, sayp, has magnitude that exceeds 2π, say 2(m+1)π, many geodesics do
pass throughp: any pair of geodesic segments meeting atpwith an angle of at leastπcan be joined to
form a single geodesic. Thus, unlike in the smooth case, geodesic continuation at a cone point of angle
greater than 2πis no longer unique.
3.3.Non-Positive Curvature of Translation Surfaces.We now analyse the non-positive curvature
properties induced by a translation structure on a surface. Let nowπ: eΣ→Σbe the universal covering
map. The singular flat metric onΣlifts to a singular metric on eΣ, turning the universal cover into a metric
space as well. We show thateΣis a CAT( 0 )-space. It follows thatΣis a locally CAT( 0 )-space. Precisely,
we have the following:
Proposition 3.1.LetΣbe a closed surface equipped with a translation structure. Then eΣis aCAT( 0 )-
space. In particular, the geometric boundary ofeΣis an oriented circle.
Proof.As already alluded to above, a translation structure determines a singular Euclidean metric with
trivial parallel transport; see §2.6.3. Letds 2 be its lift to eΣ. Equivalently, this metric can be defined
by pulling back the standard Euclidean metric via the developing map. The metric is a flat metric, in
fact locally isometric to the Euclidean metric onCE 2, away from the cone points. Let eΣdenote the
universal cover of a translation surfaceΣ, and let e∆⊂ eΣbe the set of cone points. Consider the regular

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
part eΣ◦ := eΣ\ e∆. At each point of eΣ◦, the metric is locally isometric to the Euclidean planeE 2. Since
Euclidean space is CAT( 0 ) and the CAT( 0 ) property is local, it follows thateΣ◦ is locally CAT( 0 ). By
a standard result in the theory of CAT( 0 ) spaces, the metric completion of a CAT( 0 ) space is CAT( 0 ),
see [BH99, Prop. II.3.10]. Consequently, the completed spaceeΣis CAT( 0 ). Sinceds 2 is smooth outside
a sufficiently small closed neighbourhood of the cone points, there exists a smooth flat metricds 2
o on eΣ
agreeing withds 2 outside this neighbourhood. Letd o denote the distance induced byds 2
o. The identity
map
(3.8) id : ( eΣ,d)−→( eΣ,d o)
is a quasi-isometry, hence (eΣ,d) and ( eΣ,d o) have the same ideal boundary, which is homeomorphic to a
circleS 1. □
3.4.Developing maps.In the present paragraph we want to use the metric properties of translation
surfaces for a better understanding of developing maps. The main result is the following:
Proposition 3.2.LetΣa translation surface. Then the developing mapdev: eΣ−→Cis uniformly open,
i.e. for anyε >0there existsδ >0such that B ε( dev(eq) )⊆dev(B ε(eq) )for any q∈Σ. Moreover the
developing mapdevis surjective.
Proof.LetΣbe a translation surface and let∆ ={p 1,...,p n}be the cone points of the translation
surface. Letd(·,·) be the distance induced by the associated singular Euclidean metric and define
(3.9) 2ε=min{d(p i,p j )|i,j}.
Let eq∈ eΣbe a regular point on the universal cover, and suppose that the Euclidean ballB ε(eq)⊂ eΣdoes
not contain any cone point. Then the result follows immediately, since the developing map
(3.10) dev: eΣ−→C
is a local isometry away from singularities and hence mapsBε(eq) isometrically to a Euclidean ball inC.
Now suppose instead thatB ε(eq) contains exactly one cone point, say ep, of orderm≥1. Letrbe the
geodesic segment joining epand eq. Since the angle around epexceeds 2π, we can consider two additional
geodesic segments, sayτ 1 andτ 2, starting at ep, forming angles ofπon either side ofr. These lie entirely
within the ballB ε(eq), and their union divides the ball into two open regions. The developing map,
restricted to the region containingr, is again a local isometry and its image contains the Euclidean ball
Bε( dev(eq) ). Therefore,
(3.11)B ε( dev(eq) )⊆dev(B ε(eq) )
for anyeq∈ eΣ. Suppose now that the developing map is not surjective,i.e.dev( eΣ)⊊ C. Then there exists
a point at positive Euclidean distance from the boundary∂dev( eΣ). Fixδ>0 such that 0<δ<ε/2, and
choose eq∈ eΣsuch that dev( ˜q) has distanceδfrom∂dev( eΣ). Then
(3.12)B ε( dev(eq) )⊆dev( eΣ),
which contradicts the assumption that dev( eΣ) is not the entire plane. Hence, the developing map is
surjective. □
Remark3.3.In [Tro07], the author provides an alternative proof which, however, relies on the same un-
derlying ideas. Unlike our approach, he considers a triangulation of the surface into Euclidean triangles,
and uses the key property that a developing is an isometry on each triangle, see §2.5. It is then shown that
a quadrilateral formed by two adjacent triangles is mapped to a quadrilateral. If the developing map were
not surjective, one can show that a boundary point of the image must lie on the side of some triangle;
however, such a triangle is always contained in some quadrilateral, yielding a contradiction. Our proof
does not rely on a triangulation of the surface but instead on properties of the induced distance. It should
not be surprising that the two proofs are equivalent.

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
3.5.Completeness.We begin with a general remark: a geometric structure induced by a possibly sin-
gular Riemannian metric can be complete in two senses: metric and geometric. We now examine these
aspects in the case of translation surfaces.
3.5.1.Metric sense.In our setting completeness is ensured by the fact that the translation structures
are defined on compact surfaces and every Cauchy sequence converges with respect to the distance
induced by the singular Euclidean metric. Therefore a translation structure defines a complete metric
space. Moreover, a translation structure is also a length space because the length metric coincides with
the one induced by the translation structure. By the Hopf–Rinow Theorem, every translation surface is
also a geodesic space. As a consequence, any two distinct points can be joined by a geodesic. In the
theory of translation surfaces, geodesics joining two conical points (possibly the same) play a particularly
important role. These are known assaddle connections. It can be shown that every translation surface
admits a triangulation made entirely of saddle connections.
3.5.2.Thurston sense.We have seen in the previous paragraph that translation structures are metrically
complete. In the present one we show they are not complete in Thurston’s sense. Indeed, this phenome-
non occurs precisely because the developing map of a translation surface is not a global diffeomorphism.
This failure arises due to the presence of critical points corresponding to the cone singularities onΣ.
Let dev: eΣ−→Cbe the developing map of a translation structure onΣ, and letρ:π 1(Σ)−→Cbe its
holonomy representation. For the readers’ convenience we recall the following notion: A subsetΩofC
is called afundamental domainfor the action ofΓ =Im(ρ) if:
1. The union of the translates covers the surface:
C=
[
γ∈Γ
γ(Ω),
2. The interiors of distinct translates are disjoint:
γ(Ω)◦∩γ′(Ω)◦ =∅for allγ,γ ′∈Γ.
Clearly, this definition is not specific to translation structures, but rather an adaptation of a much more
general definition valid for groups acting on topological spaces. In terms of tilings, a fundamental domain
is a prototile, and the complex plane can be tessellated using only copies of this tile labelled with the
elements ofΓ. The following equivalence is well known in the literature and some implications dates
back to Fricke–Klein.
completeness⇐⇒dev: eΣ−→Cis a diffeomorphism
⇐⇒ρ(π 1(Σ) )<Cacts freely and properly discontinuously
⇐⇒Σρ(π 1(Σ) )\C.
(3.13)
In general, the developing map fails to be a global diffeomorphism otherwise it would be a global isom-
etry. As a consequence, a fundamental domain for the action does not exist, and the developing map
produces an overlapping tiling ofCin the sense that the interiors of two tiles overlap. In particular, these
structures are not uniformisable in the following sense: there is no open domainΩ⊂Csuch that the
structure is isometric to the quotientρ(π 1(Σ) )\Ωby a proper discontinuous action without fixed points.
The following holds:
Lemma 3.4.A translation structure on a closed surfaceΣof genus g>0is complete in Thurston’s sense
if and only if g=1.
Proof.We have already observed in Remark 2.15 that the developing map is a global diffeomorphism,
in fact an isometry, if and only ifg=1.□

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
Alternative argument for Lemma 3.4.By adopting a more algebraic perspective, letρbe the holonomy
representation of the given translation structure. Sinceρtakes values in an abelian group, then the
subgroup generated by the commutators is properly contained in the kernel of the representation. If
g≥2, thenρcannot be faithful. Recall that a developing map satisfies an equivariance property with
respect to the representationρ. As a consequence, ifg≥2, a developing map cannot be injective and
thus cannot be a global diffeomorphism. Therefore, the assumptiong=1 is strictly necessary.
On the other hand, ifg=1, then the image ofρis a latticeΛ<Cand the action onCis free and properly
discontinuous. SinceC/ΛΣ, the resulting translation structure is complete in the sense of Thurston,
as desired. □
4. Moduli spaces of translation surfaces in genus one
In the present section we shall discuss the moduli space of translation surfaces in genus one. We keep
this section separate from the case of surfaces of genusg≥2, which will be addressed in §5.
Let us assumeg=1. The moduli spaceM 1 of compact Riemann surfaces of genus one is identified with
the quotient spaceH/SL(2,Z), whereHdenotes the upper half-plane. This identification is well known
and represents a cornerstone result in the theory of Riemann surfaces and elliptic curves. Let us briefly
review it from our perspective, with an emphasis on the geometric aspects of translation structures.
The main purpose here is to define a moduli space of translation surfaces of genus one. Essentially, there
are two approaches: a geometric one, in which we determine fundamental domains, and an analytic one,
in which we describe the holomorphic 1-forms supported on a Riemann surface.
4.1.Finding fundamental domains.Letµ 1, µ2 be non-real collinear elements ofCsuch that{µ 1, µ2}
is a positive oriented basis forCas a real vector space. The additive subgroup
(4.1)Λ = Λ(µ 1,µ 2 )=
n
mµ 1 +nµ 2|m,n∈Z
o
which they generate is calledlatticeand we shall callµ 1 andµ 2 a basis forΛ. We may notice thatΛacts
on the complex plane by translations. Since it is discrete, this action is free and properly discontinuous.
Afundamental domainfor such an action is the parallelogram P= { xµ 1 +yµ 2| x,y∈[0,1] } inC. Every
pointz∈Cis equivalent under the action ofΛto some point in P, and two points in P are equivalent if they
both lie on its boundary∂P and their difference isµ 1 orµ 2. Let∼be this equivalence relation. Since each
coset inC/Λadmits a unique representative in P/∼, the quotientC/Λis constructed by identifying the
opposite edges of P according to the action ofΛ. The holomorphic structure onCyields a holomorphic
structure onC/Λ, making it a Riemann surface. This surface is compact, since it is a continuous image
of P, which, by the Heine–Borel theorem, is compact. Vice versa, by the uniformization theorem, all
compact Riemann surfaces of genus one arise in this way. It is an easy matter to find a triangulation of
C/Λ(this can be directly drawn in P) which shows that this surface has genus one and naturally carries
a translation structure.
Remark4.1.Under a topological perspective, we are gluing the opposite sides of P by using translations
and the resulting surface is a torus. Based on the definition of a translation surface we provided in §2.1.1,
we can deduce that such a torus inherits a well defined translation structure.
Remark4.2.In the present section we aim to define the moduli space of translation surfaces in genus
one in terms of fundamental domains, namely parallelograms on the complex plane. In the case where
two parallelogramsCdiffer by a translation, then the resulting translation surfaces are the same. This is
a consequence of Lemma 2.22. Therefore, in what follows, we shall assume our parallelograms to have
one vertex at the origin. This leads us to avoid formulations like "up to translations" in the following.

===== PAGE 21 =====
21
A translation structure on a torus clearly depends on the parallelogram P which in turn depends on
the latticeΛ(µ 1, µ2 ). We wish to provide a criterion that tells us when two lattices define the same
translation surface. The desired criterion is in fact part of a more general result that classifies genus one
Riemann surfaces defined via lattices in the complex plane. Based on Lemma 2.22 in §2.8, given two
lattices, sayΛ 1 andΛ 2, the resulting translation surfacesC/Λ 1 andC/Λ 2 are equivalent if the underlying
Riemann surfaces are biholomorphic.
Proposition 4.3.Suppose thatΛ 1 andΛ 2 are lattices inC. Then the Riemann surfacesC/Λ 1 andC/Λ 2
are biholomorphic if and only ifΛ 1 andΛ 2 are similar lattices, that isΛ 2 =λΛ 1 for someλ∈C\{0}.
Proof.If there exists a biholomorphismF:C→C, defined asz7→λz+c, such thatλΛ 1 +c= Λ 2,
then it clearly induces a biholomorphism between the corresponding quotient surfaces. Conversely, any
biholomorphism
(4.2)f:C/Λ 1→C/Λ 2
lifts to a biholomorphismF:C→Cof the formF(z)=λz+cfor someλ∈C ∗ andc∈C. We may
assumec=0 because translations induce biholomorphisms of all tori. Forfto be well defined,Fmust
satisfyF(Λ 1 )= Λ 2, and thusλΛ 1 = Λ2.□
The proof is classical and can be found, for instance, in [JW16] and we have included it here because it
contains the key idea for proving the following corollary that provides the aforementioned criterion.
Corollary 4.4.Suppose thatΛ 1 andΛ 2 are lattices inC. Then they determine the same translation
surface if and only ifΛ 1 = Λ 2.
Proof.From the proof of Proposition 4.3 we can easily deduce that the mappingf:C/Λ 1→C/Λ 2 is a
translation in local charts if and only ifλ=1. Thence the desired conclusion.□
The above results show that two lattices define the same translation structure if and only if they coincide
as additive subgroups ofC. However, the fundamental domains they determine,i.e.the corresponding
parallelograms as defined above, need not be isometric. In fact, they generally are not, as their shape
depends heavily on the choice of generators. At this point, one may naturally ask whether, given two
such parallelograms, it is possible to subdivide one of them into triangles in such a way that, by applying
suitable translations, one recovers the other. And if so, how can such a subdivision be determined?
To address this question, let us begin with some general observations. A latticeΛ, as defined in (4.1),
not only determines a parallelogram P, as already mentioned, but in fact induces a tiling of the plane,
where each tile has vertices in the lattice and is isometric to P. Moreover, there is a fairly explicit group
isomorphism betweenΛandZ 2. We denote by SL(2,Λ) the group of automorphisms ofΛ; it can be
shown, without too much effort, that this group is isomorphic to SL(2,Z), hence the notation.
The action of SL(2,Λ) preserves the lattice, but not the tiling. In fact, the tiling is preserved only by
the action of the lattice itself via translations. To determine the effect on the tiling, it is enough to
understand the action on the tile P. Suppose P is a fundamental domain of some lattice, sayΛ(µ 1,µ 2 ).
Given any elementA∈SL(2,Λ), the imageA·P is a tile whose vertices are lattice points determined
by the vectorsA(µ 1 ) andA(µ 2 ). If we imagine this tile overlaid on the original tiling, in which P
served as a fundamental domain, thenA·P admits a decomposition into polygons determined by the
intersection ofA·P itself with translated tiles of P. These polygons, once appropriately translated and
reassembled, yield the original parallelogram P. Therefore, two parallelograms in the plane define the
same translation surface if and only if, after suitable decomposition and rearrangement, they reconstruct
the same parallelogram, see Figure 4.
A fundamental domain is the object carrying the richest amount of information: it defines a translation
structure and provides an explicit set of generators for the lattice. Recall from §2.5 that the holonomy
of a translation structure onΣis a representation ofπ 1(Σ) intoC. A translation structure carries less
information because the image of its holonomy only defines the lattice uniformising it, without specifying

===== PAGE 22 =====
22
Figure4. Different fundamental domains,i.e.parallelograms, may define the same
translation surface. Here is depicted the caseΛ =Z+iZwith respect to the base{1,i}
and the base{2+i,1+i}. Triangles with the same shade are isometric and differ by a
translation.
any generating set nor a fundamental domain. In fact, a generating set for this lattice depends on the
choice of generators for the fundamental group or, equivalently, for the first homology group. Thus, a
fundamental domain is not uniquely determined by a translation structure. Table 2 shows the relationship
among fundamental domains, lattices and translation structures on a torus.
( fundamental domains
i.e.parallelograms inC
) ( translation structures
on a torus
) ( subgroups ofC
i.e.latticesΛ<C
)
Table2. The solid arrow denotes a complete determination of one object by another; a
broken arrow denotes that some choice is involved.
The holonomy generally does not carry enough information to uniquely determine a translation structure.
While this is always the case for surfaces of genusg≥2, in the case of genus one surfaces, if a repre-
sentation determines a translation structure, then such a structure is unique up to isomorphism,i.e., up
to biholomorphisms that act as translations in local charts. A proof of this fact is deferred to Proposition
6.2 in §6.5.
4.2.Moduli spaces.We are now ready to define a moduli space of translation surfaces in genus one.
Let us consider first the set
(4.3)F=

fundamental domains
i.e.parallelograms inCbased at 0

of parallelograms based at zero topologised as follow. Let{µ 1,µ 2}be a positive oriented basis ofC.
For a parallelogram P= { xµ 1 +yµ 2| x,y∈[0,1] } andε >0, we defineU( P,ε) to be the subset of
fundamental domains Q= { xν 1 +yν 2| x,y∈[0,1] } such thatν 1 =µ 1 andν 2∈B ε(µ 2 ), whereB ε(p)
denotes the Euclidean ball centred atpof radiusε. We then consider the topology generated byU( P,ε).
Each parallelogram inFdefines a translation surface of genus one and a lattice inCalong with a specified
set of generators. Two parallelograms define the same translation surface if and only if they are related
by SL(2,Z). One direction is a consequence of Corollary 4.4 since two translation surfaces are the same

===== PAGE 23 =====
23
if they are determined by the same lattice and hence the respective set of generators must be related by an
element in SL(2,Z). On the other hand, if two parallelograms are related by an element in SL(2,Z), then
there is a way to decompose and reassemble one into another. Thence, in terms of fundamental domains,
the set of translation structures on the torus is defined as the quotient space
(4.4)Ω ∗M1 =

fundamental domains
i.e.parallelograms inCbased at 0

SL(2,Z) ,
equipped with the quotient topology. In the same fashion, in terms of fundamental domains, the moduli
space of compact Riemann surfaces of genus one can be defined as the quotient space
(4.5)M 1 =

fundamental domains
i.e.parallelograms inCbased at 0

SL(2,Z)×C ∗ .
In this quotient, the factorC ∗ accounts for the rescaling and rotation of the parallelogram by a complex
number. Specifically, this action identifies parallelograms that differ only by a similarity transformation
of the complex plane. We next describeM 1 by identifying it with a known structure. First, observe that
the actions of SL(2,Z) andC ∗ onFcommute. Let us first consider the rescaling action ofC ∗.
Let P= { xµ 1 +yµ 2| x,y∈[0,1] } be a parallelogram inF. By rescaling P byµ −1
1 , we obtain a new
parallelogram, say P(τ)=µ −1
1 ·P= { x+yτ | x,y∈[0,1] }, whereτ=µ 2/µ1. Notice that P(τ) is the
fundamental domain of the latticeΛ( 1, τ). The assumption of positive orientation guarantees thatτ∈H.
We may also notice that for everyτ 1,τ 2∈H, the parallelograms P(τ 1 ) and P(τ 2 ) are the same up to
scaling if and only ifτ 1 =τ 2. Hence, for every element [ P ]λ∈C∗∈F/C ∗, there is a uniqueτ∈Hsuch
that P(τ)∈[ P ] λ∈C∗. As a consequence, the mapΦ:F/C ∗ −→H, that associates to every [ P ]λ∈C∗ the
uniqueτ∈Hsuch that P(τ)∈[ P ] λ∈C∗, is well defined. Moreover,Φis also surjective because the
parallelogram P(τ) exists for everyτ∈H. HenceΦis a bijection that is more than a mere identification
of sets. In fact, the following proposition holds.
Proposition 4.5.The mapΦ:F/C ∗ −→His a homeomorphism with respect to the given topologies.
Proof.In order to show this proposition, it is convenient to consider the mappingψ:F−→Hthat
associates to a parallelogram P= { xµ 1 +yµ 2| x,y∈[0,1] } the elementµ−1
1 µ2∈H. This map is clearly
surjective, and it can be seen that it is also continuous and open. Moreover,ψisC ∗-invariant and thus
descends to a homeomorphismΦ:F/C ∗ −→H.□
Next, consider the SL(2,Z) action on bothF/C ∗ andH. Since it can be shown thatΦis SL(2,Z)-
equivariant the following consequence holds.
Corollary 4.6.The mappingϕ:M 1−→H/SL( 2,Z)is a homeomorphism.
4.3.Volume function.The parallelogram generated by the vectorsµ 1 andµ 2 has a well defined two
dimensional volume, which can be computed using the formulaI(µ1µ2 ). The volume is clearly invariant
under the action ofCby translations. Moreover, it follows from the above that the action of SL(2,Z)
preserves the volume of the parallelogram. More formally, this holds because SL(2,Z)=Sp(2,Z), and
the latter preserves the volume form. Thus there exists a well defined function calledvolume,i.e.a
functional
(4.6) vol:Ω ∗M1−→R

===== PAGE 24 =====
24
that assigns to each element ofΩ∗M1 the volume of the associated translation structure which is defined
as the 2-dimensional volume of the parallelogram. Its image lies inR + because{µ 1,µ 2}is a positively
oriented basis of the complex plane.
4.4.Marked tori.In order to treat translation surfaces under a Teichmüller-like perspective, it is needed
to equip a translation surface with an additional datum. Amarkingon a Riemann surfaceXis the choice
of a system of generators of the homology group H1(X,Z).
Remark4.7.For a general Riemann surface, a marking is defined as a choice of a generating set for the
first homotopy group. However, for surfaces of genus one, the isomorphismπ 1(S 1 )H 1(S 1,Z) is
well known; hence, choosing a marking in homology is equivalent to choosing a marking in homotopy.
Although a marking in homology is generally a weaker notion for higher-genus surfaces, it is the most
convenient framework to adopt when dealing with translation structures on Riemann surfaces.
Equivalently, given a reference topological surfaceΣ, a marking is an identification
(4.7)m: H 1(Σ,Z)−→H 1(X,Z).
Two marked Riemann surfaces of genus one, say (X,m X) and (Y,m Y), are said to be equivalent if there
exists a biholomorphismf:X−→Ysuch thatm X =f ∗mY. The moduli space of marked Riemann
surfaces, commonly referred to as theTeichmüller space of genus one, is denoted byT 1 and the forgetful
map that assigns to each marked surface its underlying complex structure is an SL(2,Z)-invariant map-
pingT 1−→M 1. We will not give further details here and the interested reader may refer to [IT92]. The
following characterisation holds.
Proposition 4.8.The Teichmüller spaceT 1 can be identified withH, the upper half-plane. In particular,
there is a unique complex structure onT 1 that makes the identification a biholomorphism.
Proof.In the light of Proposition 4.5, it is sufficient to show the existence of a bijectionF/C ∗−→T 1.
One direction is as follows. In the first place let us fix a standard ordered generating set for H 1(Σ,Z).
Then, for an element [ P ]λ∈C∗∈F/C∗, let P be any representative and letXbe complex structure arising
by gluing the opposite sides of P by translations. Notice that this is well defined because any other
parallelogram in the same equivalence class differs from P by a dilation. Recall that P yields a lattice,
sayΛ, along with an explicit set of generators. It is possible to find a homeomorphismφ:Σ→C/Λthat
sends the first and second generators of H 1(Σ,Z) to the first and second generators ofΛ. The induced
map in homology provides the desired marking.
Conversely, letXbe a Riemann surface of genus one and recall that its universal cover isC. Endow the
latter with the standard Euclidean metric and thus endowXwith the unique flat metric that makes the
covering projection a local isometry. A markingm X onXyields a set of generators in homology, that is,
a system of generators for the fundamental group. Consider their geodesic representatives and lift them
to the universal cover. They provide a tiling ofCand any tile provides the desired fundamental domain.
We note that the parallelogram depends on the chosen metric onC, but any rescaling of the metric would
produce a parallelogram in the same equivalence class as the one just defined.□
In terms of parallelograms, Proposition 4.8 shows that the Teichmüller space can be identified with the
space
(4.8)T 1 =

fundamental domains
i.e.parallelograms inCbased at 0

C∗ .
As a consequence, amarkedRiemann surface of genus one can be equivalently defined as the choice of
a class of parallelograms P
λ∈C∗, where the parallelogram P is the fundamental domain of some lattice,
sayΛ, such thatC/Λ =X.

===== PAGE 25 =====
25
Given a Riemann surfaceXand a marking  P
λ∈C∗, the choice of parallelogram yields a well defined
translation surface. Conversely, every parallelogram yields a marked translation surface. Therefore, in
terms of fundamental domains the set ofmarked translation structureson the torus is simply defined as
the space
(4.9)Ω ∗T1 =

fundamental domains
i.e.parallelograms inCbased at 0
 =F.
4.5.A more analytic approach.In this section, we aim to provide a more analytical approach to the
moduli space of translation structures. Once again, we proceed almost as if we were defining the space
of complex structures on the torus, but we will place greater emphasis on translation structures. Given
any lattice, let us ignore for the moment the associated translation structure as defined in §4.1.
In §4.2 we showed the existence of a homeomorphismΦ:F/C ∗−→H. For every  P
λ∈C∗ ∈F/C ∗,
there is a unique representative parallelogram of the form P(τ)= { x+yτ | x,y∈[0,1] }. In turns, P(τ)
determines the latticeΛ(1,τ). ThusHcan also be seen as the moduli space of normalised lattices of the
formΛ(1,τ), whereτis a parameter that distinguishes between marked complex structures on the torus.
By normalising a latticeΛinto the formΛ(1,τ) a rescaling is involved, see §4.2. This normalisation
preserves the complex structures, but it does not preserve the translation structure. As a consequence,
the parameterτis not sufficient to account for all possible translation structures defined onC/Λ(1,τ);
hence, it is necessary to introduce an additional parameter to characterise them.
For everyτ∈H, letΛ(1,τ) be the lattice generated by 1 andτand let P=  x+yτ|x,y∈[0,1] 	 be the
fundamental domain for the action ofΛ(1,τ) onC. The holomorphic structure onCnaturally descends
to a holomorphic structure onC/Λ, turning it into a Riemann surface. We next wish to introduce a
translation structure onX. Under the complex-analytic point of view, this amounts to choosing an abelian
differential onCthat is invariant under translations. The question we now ask is the following: how many
translation-invariant differentials exist onC? The following result answers our question.
Lemma 4.9.The only holomorphic1-forms on the complex planeCthat are invariant under translations
are the constant multiples of dz. That is, every holomorphic1-form onCinvariant under all translations
is of the formω=λdz for someλ∈C.
Proof.Letω=f(z)dzbe a holomorphic 1-form onC. The pull back ofωby a translationt a(z)=z+a,
for somea∈C, is given by
(4.10)t ∗
aω=f(z+a)dz.
Requiringωto be invariant under translations means thatt ∗
aω=ωfor alla∈C. Hence, for allz,a∈C,
(4.11)f(z+a)=f(z).
This implies thatfis invariant under all translations ofC, and therefore must be constant. Indeed, the
only entire functions invariant under all translations are the constant ones. It follows thatω=λdzfor
some constantλ∈C, concluding the proof.□
Remark4.10.A Euclidean metric onCis defined by a non-vanishing holomorphic differentialω. For the
metric to be the standard flat one,ωmust take the formω=λdz, whereλ∈C ∗ is a non-zero constant.
The space of such differentials is the space of non-zero translation-invariant differentials onC.
Letω=λdzbe a non-trivial holomorphic 1-form onC,i.e.withλ,0. Sinceωis invariant under
translations, it descends to a well defined holomorphic 1-form onC/Λ, thereby defining a translation
structure. Conversely, a holomorphic 1-form onC/Λlifts to a doubly periodic 1-form on the complex
plane. Therefore, it must be of the formω=λdzfor someλ,0. We observe that here we have tacitly

===== PAGE 26 =====
26
identifiedCwith the universal cover ofX. This is possible only because the developing map is a global
diffeomorphism; see Lemma 3.4 and Remark 2.15. We have the following characterisation result.
Proposition 4.11.LetΣbe a torus. Then for everyτ∈Hand for everyλ∈C ∗ there is a unique marked
translation structure onΣ. In other words, there is a holomorphic bijection between the spaces
(4.12)Ω ∗T1 =

fundamental domains,
i.e.parallelograms inC
 =

marked
translation structures
of genus one

←→H×C\{0},
obtained by associating a parallelogramPdefined by{µ 1, µ2}to(τ, λ)whereτ=µ 1/µ2 andλ=µ 2.
ThusΩ∗T1 is aC∗-bundle over the Teichmüller spaceT 1 and the polar coordinates ofC∗ R×S 1 have
a very concrete meaning: the radial coordinate represents the volume of a translation structure whereas
the angular coordinate inS 1 represents the direction of the north. The following holds.
Corollary 4.12.A marked translation surface of genus one is uniquely determined by its underlying
marked complex structure, its volume and the direction of the north.
Proof.A translation structure clearly determines an underlying marked complex structure and has a well
defined volume and a north direction. Conversely, every parallelogram determines a marked complex
structure. Up to rescaling (dilation) by an appropriate real factor, the parallelogram may have any positive
volume. Finally, choosing a direction of the north means choosing which foliation of the torus is vertical,
namely, induced by the vertical foliation ofC. Since foliations of the torus are parametrised byS 1, we
have the desired result.□
5. Moduli spaces of translation surfaces
We now discuss the moduli space of translation surfaces of genusg≥2. Therefore, from this section
onwards, we shall assume thatg≥2 unless otherwise specified. Occasionally, we will refer to translation
structures in genus one, but mostly as remarks that allow us to draw comparisons with the higher genus
case.
5.1.Marked translation surfaces.The moduli spaceM g of Riemann surfaces of genusg≥2 is a
normal complex analytic space of dimension 3g−3 and it is a complex manifold away from the locus of
surfaces admitting non-trivial automorphisms, see [IT92] and [Nag88]. For our approach, however, it is
more convenient to work with the Teichmüller spaceT g, which is a complex manifold everywhere.
LetSbe a reference surface, namely a closed topological surface of genusg. Amarkingon a Riemann
surfaceXis the data of an isomorphismm X :π 1(S)−→π 1(Σ). TheTeichmüller spaceis defined as the
moduli space of marked Riemann surfaces, where two marked surfaces (X,m X) and (Y,m Y) are declared
to be equivalent if there exists a biholomorphismf:X−→Ysuch thatm X =f ∗mY. Requiring two
marked structures to be equivalent is a stronger condition than merely asking for the underlying complex
structures to be biholomorphic. Indeed, it is required that the biholomorphism preserves the marking,
that is, the biholomorphism must be isotopic to the identity.T g is well-known to be a simply connected
complex manifold of dimension 3g−3. The mapping class group Mod g defined as
(5.1) Mod g  Homeo+(S g )
Homeoo(S g )
acts properly discontinuously onT g and the quotient spaceT g/Mod g M g, see [IT92] for more details.
Amarked translation surfaceis a translation surface along with a marking. In complex-analytic terms,
this can be seen as a triple (X,ω,m X) and two such triples are equivalent if and only if there exists a
biholomorphism isotopic to the identity which is a translation in local charts.

===== PAGE 27 =====
27
5.2.Hodge bundle.The Hodge bundleΩM g→M g is the holomorphic vector bundle overM g, the
moduli space of compact Riemann surfaces of genusg, whose fibre over a pointX∈M g is given by
the space of holomorphic differentials onX,i.e.Ω(X)=H o(X,K X), whereK X denotes the canonical
bundle ofX. It is a direct application of Riemann–Roch’s Theorem to show thatΩ(X) has dimensiong
and hence the total space has complex dimension 4g−3.
The Hodge bundle can be pulled back to a holomorphic vector bundleΩTg−→T g. The strong advantage
of working with the Teichmüller space is thatT g is aStein manifold, see [IT92, §6].
Remark5.1.There are several characterisations of Stein manifolds in the literature, see [For11] for
more details. For our purposes, we recall for the reader’s convenience that an open domain inC n is a
Stein manifold if and only if it is a domain of holomorphy, that is, there exists a holomorphic function
defined on that domain which cannot be extended over the boundary. Bers’ embedding ensures that
the Teichmüller space is biholomorphic to an open subset ofC 3g−3. Independent works of Royden and
Earle–Kra, combined with classical results in the theory of Stein manifolds, imply that the Teichmüller
space is a Stein manifold for every genusg. We refer the reader to [Far20] for a succinct survey, and to
[IT92, §6.4] for a more detailed exposition.
SinceT g is simply connected, it follows that every vector bundle isholomorphicallytrivial. This is, in
fact, a consequence of the Oka–Grauert principle, which asserts that every topological complex vector
bundle over a Stein manifold admits an equivalent holomorphic vector bundle structure. Moreover,
two holomorphic vector bundles over a Stein base are holomorphically equivalent if and only if they are
topologically equivalent. We refer to [For11] and references therein for further details. As a consequence,
ΩTg is biholomorphic toT g×Cas complex vector bundles.
The zero section provides a copy of the Teichmüller space inΩTg and its complementΩ∗Tg is the moduli
space of marked translation surfaces in genusg. In fact, every point inΩ ∗Tg corresponds to a non-
zero holomorphic 1−form on a marked Riemann surface (X,m X) and thus defines a marked translation
structure. By design, the projection mapπ:T g−→M g yields a projection mapΩ(π):ΩT g−→ΩM g
that naturally restricts toΩ ∗Tg. The moduli space of (unmarked) translation surfaces is the image of
Ω(π) and denoted byΩ ∗Mg. The image of the zero section inΩM g via the projectionΩ(π) is the zero
section of the Hodge bundle and it is calledtrivial stratum.
5.3.Strata of differentials.Following Zorich in [Zor06], the notion of “stratum” originates as follows.
As already mentioned in §2.3, and further discussed in Remark 2.19, the sum of the orders of the zeros
of a holomorphic 1-form on a compact Riemann surface of genusgmust be equal to 2g−2. Therefore,
the subspaceΩ∗Mg of the Hodge bundle is naturally stratified into subspaces consisting of holomorphic
differentials whose zeros have prescribed ordersm 1,...,m k, satisfyingm 1 +···+m k =2g−2. In what
follows we shall adopt when necessary the following terminology.
Definition 5.2.We refer to any partition of 2g−2, sayµ, as asignature, and we shall say that a holo-
morphic 1-formωhas signatureµ=(m 1,...,m k) if it has exactlykzeros of ordersm 1,...,m k. We shall
denote byH g(µ) the strata of holomorphic differentials with signatureµ. Finally, for a signatureµwe
denote by|µ|its length, namely the number of entries (counted with multiplicity).
It is a fact that every stratum is non-empty. This follows from a classical result in the theory of Riemann
surfaces: given a Riemann surfaceX, there exists a holomorphic differential with a prescribed signature,
see [FK92, Section III.5]. In §5.7 we provide an alternative and geometric argument, see Lemma 5.24.
A stratumH g(µ) is a complex orbifold whose dimension depends on the signature. The presence of
orbifold points is not really surprising and it is due to the existence of translation surfaces with a non-
trivial group of symmetries, see §5.4. Away from these points, the stratum is a complex manifold. The
following result holds.
Proposition 5.3.Letµbe a signature. ThenH g(µ)has complex dimension2g+|µ|−1.

===== PAGE 28 =====
28
There are several proofs of this result. One is based on a topological approach and consists in suitably
triangulating the surface. An alternative method is based on the construction of an appropriate map in
relative homology. In this exposition, we provide a different proof which relies on the same underlying
ideas as the others but does not make explicit use of the periods of holomorphic differentials, as these
have not yet been introduced. In order to abridge a little the notation, in the proof it is more convenient
to consider a partitionµof 2g−2 of length|µ|=k+1.
Proof.Letµ=(m o,...,m k ) be a signature of holomorphic 1−forms. Let (X,ω)∈H g(µ) be a trans-
lation surface and let∆ ={p o,...,p k}be the set of zeros ofω. For the moment, let us regardXas a
topological surface and define a set of simple closed smooth curves, sayΓ ={γ i|1≤i≤s}, such that
the following holds.
1.X\Γis simply connected.X\Γis topologically a polygon whose sides occur in pairs, each pair
of sides corresponding to a curveγ i∈Γ,
2. the curvesγ i do not intersect except perhaps at the endpoints, and
3. the set of endpoints of the curvesγ i inΓcontains the set of singular points ofX.
Notice that such a set of curvesΓcan always be found. In fact, we may take a standard set of generators
for the fundamental group, say{α i, βi|1≤i≤g}, based atp o, dissectingXinto a 4g-gon. Next, we
considerkadditional curvesδ i going fromp o to each singular pointp i fori=1,...,k. Since there arek
singular points, the construction yields anembeddedtopological (4g+2k)-gon in the universal cover, say
F, whose sides are identified in pairs. The image under the developing map defines, in turn, a polygon
in the plane in a very broad sense: the image is a topological disc immersed (but not embedded) in the
plane and bounded by a piecewise smooth curve with at most 4g+2kcorner points corresponding to the
vertices of the polygon.
Now comes the crucial point of the construction: the curves in the setΓare assumed to be smooth, and
it is not necessary to assume that they are the geodesic representatives in their pointed homotopy classes
based atp o. Indeed, what matters to us ishow the vertices of the polygon are positioned in the plane. Let
us now proceed with the details: the developing map determines a finite set, say{w 1,...,w 4g+2k}⊂C,
which corresponds to the images of the vertices of the polygonF. The labelling is determined by
the order in which the vertices of the polygon appear when traversing the boundary in the clockwise
direction. Therefore, it is unique up to a cyclic permutation. The differencesw i+1−w i fori=1,...,4g+
2k, where indexes are taken modulo 4g+2k, define 4g+2kparameters. If two edges, say those labelled
withiandj, ofFare identified then the corresponding differences,w i+1−wi andw j+1−w j, must be equal.
It follows that half of these parameters are redundant. On the other hand, at least 2g+kof these parameter
are necessary to determine the image of the boundaryF. To show that these parameters indeed provide
local coordinates, it is necessary to prove that deforming (X,ω) continuously within the stratum results
in the parameters varying continuously as well. However, this follows from the fact that continuous
deformations of (X,ω) induce continuous deformations of any polygonal tessellation determined by the
differential, and that the vertices ofFare always vertices of some Euclidean polygonal tessellation (e.g.
by taking the geodesic representatives of the curves involved in their pointed homotopy class atp o).□
Remark5.4.The proof above implicitly uses periods of holomorphic differentials, which we shall in-
troduce later in §6. A sketch of a more common and better-known proof that explicitly uses periods
of holomorphic differentials is as follows. Let (X,ω)∈H g(µ) be a translation surface and let∆be
the set of zeros ofω. Consider the relative homology group H 1(X,∆,Z) and observe that this is aZ-
module of dimensionn=2g+k−1, wherekis the number of singularities. Choose an appropriate basis
{δ1,δ 2,...,δ n}of H 1(X,∆,Z). Then the local coordinates for (X,ω) are defined by
(5.2)
 Z
δi
ω
!
∈C n.

===== PAGE 29 =====
29
Clearly, it is needed to show that such a map is locally one-to-one and is onto an open subset ofC n and,
even in this case, the easiest way is to use flat geometry. We refer to [Wri15, Proposition 1.15] for more
details.
We notice that the projection mapH g(µ)−→M g does not define a fibre bundle because the dimension
of a stratum may be less than 3g−3, the dimension ofM g. In the sequel it may be useful to use the
following terminology:H g( 2g−2 ) is usually calledminimal stratumandH g( 1,...,1 ) is usually called
principal stratum.
5.4.Automorphisms group.We already mentioned that the presence of orbifold points in a given stra-
tum is due to the fact that some translation surfaces possess more symmetries than others. In this para-
graph, we make a short digression in this direction and ask:
how many complex automorphisms preserve the translation structure?
We fix the notation: let (X,ω) be a Riemann surface endowed with a translation structure. Let Aut(X)
be the group of complex automorphisms ofX, that is, homeomorphisms ofXthat preserve the complex
structure. In the same fashion, let Aut(X,ω) be the group of homeomorphisms that preserve the trans-
lation structure determined byω,i.e.automorphisms ofXsuch that the equationf ∗ω=ωholds. By
definition, Aut(X,ω)⊆Aut(X). A classical theorem by Hurwitz states that, for a Riemann surfaceX
of genusg≥2, its group of complex automorphisms is a finite group of cardinality at most 84(g−1),
see [Hur93]. Groups attaining this bound are known asHurwitz groups, and the corresponding surfaces
are calledHurwitz surfaces. It is an interesting fact that Hurwitz surfaces do not exist in every genus.
For example, in genus two, the Riemann surface known as theBolza curveis the most symmetric and
has exactly 48 complex automorphisms, see [Bol87]. The first example of a Hurwitz surface appears in
genus 3.
It follows that the group of automorphisms preserving the translation structure is finite and its cardinality
cannot exceed the Hurwitz bound for Riemann surfaces. In [SPWS17], the authors proved the following:
Theorem 5.5( Schlage–Puchta, Weitze–Schmithünsen, 2017 ).A translation surface of genus g≥2has
at most4g−4translation automorphisms.
More precisely, the authors showed that this upper bound is attained by a particular class of square-tiled
surfaces known asnormal origamis, that is, square-tiled surfaces for which the ramified covering defined
in Example 2 is a normal covering. For more details and further developments in this direction, we refer
the reader to [FR21] and [Far24].
5.5.Additional structures and connected components of strata.In order to state the classification
theorem for connected components of the strataH g(µ), it is first necessary to introduce some additional
invariants: the hyperelliptic structure and the spin structure. In order to define them, we need to introduce
some preliminary notions collected into paragraphs titled asInterlude.
5.5.1.Interlude: hyperelliptic Riemann surfaces.Before introducing hyperelliptic translation surfaces,
we briefly recall some basic notions of hyperelliptic Riemann surfaces. Source references for this topic
are [FK92, Chapter III] and [Mir95, Chapter III].
A compact Riemann surfaceXis said to behyperellipticif there exists a complex automorphism, sayτ,
of order two such thatX/τCP 1 and the quotient mapX−→CP 1 is branched at 2g+2 points known
asWeierstrass points. According to [Mir95, Proposition III.4.11], a Riemann surfaceXis hyperelliptic
if and only if there exists a polynomialp(z)∈C  z of degreedwith simple roots such thatXis
biholomorphic to the Riemann surface obtained by compactifying the affine algebraic curve
(5.3)C=
n
(z,w)∈C 2  w2 =p(z)
o

===== PAGE 30 =====
30
inside the total space of the line bundleO(D) overCP 1, whereD=dor 2D=d+1 depending on the
parity ofd. In the above description, the hyperelliptic involution is given byτ(z,w)=(z,−w), while the
projection ontoCP 1 is the mapπ X(z,w)=z. The fixed points ofτcoincide with the Weierstrass points
ofX. This observation makes it possible to provide an explicit description of the spaces of holomorphic
differentials onX. A proof of the following statement can be found in [FK92, III.7.5 Corollary 1].
Proposition 5.6.Let
n
(z,w)∈C 2  y2 =P(z)
o
be a hyperelliptic Riemann surface X. Then
(5.4)Ω(X)=H o(X,K X)=
* zk dz
w
 k=0,...,g−1
+
.
In particular,τacts as−idon the space of holomorphic differentialsΩ(X),τ ∗ω=−ωfor allω∈Ω(X).
Finally, [FK92, Corollary 2] states that the locus of hyperelliptic Riemann surfaces inM g, forg≥2 is a
subspace of dimension 2g−1. In particular 2g−1=3g−3 if and only ifg=2,i.e.all Riemann surfaces
in genus two are hyperelliptic.
5.5.2.Hyperelliptic translation surfaces.We now extend the notion of hyperellipticity to translation
surfaces.
Definition 5.7.A translation surface (X,ω) is said to behyperellipticif the Riemann surfaceXis hyper-
elliptic with hyperelliptic involutionτ, andωis an anti-invariant abelian differential such that eitherω
has a single zero of maximal order, orωhas exactly two zeros of the same order, which are exchanged
by the hyperelliptic involution.
This definition may look somewhat bizarre at first glance because of the requirements imposed on the
abelian differential. In the present section, we aim to motivate this definition. Following [KZ03], we
introduce the moduli spaces of meromorphic quadratic differentials on a Riemann surface.
Definition 5.8.Leth≥0 be an integer, and let (ℓ 1,...,ℓ n ) be a collection of integers withn≥1 such
that eachℓ j≥−1,ℓ j ,0, andℓ 1 +···+ℓ n =4h−4. Then we denote byQ h(ℓ 1,...,ℓ n ) the moduli space
of pairs (Y,ϕ), whereYis a compact Riemann surface of genush, andϕis a meromorphic quadratic
differential onYwith zeros and poles of orders prescribed by the signature (ℓ 1,...,ℓ n ). That is,ϕhas
a zero of orderℓ j ifℓ j >0, and a simple pole ifℓ j =−1, for eachj. Moreover, we require thatϕis a
primitive quadratic differential, namely it is not the global square of any holomorphic differential onY.
Notice that the condition thatϕis not a global square of an abelian differential is automatically satisfied
if at least one of the integersℓ j is odd. It is known that each stratumQ h(ℓ 1,...,ℓ n ) is a complex orbifold
of dimension 2h+n−2, see [KZ03].
With every meromorphic quadratic differential (Y,ϕ), one canonically associates a connected Riemann
surface, sayX, equipped with an abelian differentialω. More specifically, given a quadratic differential,
sayϕonY, there exists a canonical double coveringπ:X−→Y, which is cyclic of degree 2, such that
the pull back ofϕis the square of an abelian differentialωonX. Moreover,πnaturally comes with an
involutionτsuch that
(5.5)τ ∗ω=−ω.
The resulting pair (X,ω) is called thecanonical double cover. The reader is referred to [Lan04] for a
more concrete construction of this canonical cover. The involutionτinduces an involution in relative
cohomologyτ∗ : H 1(X,∆,C)−→H 1(X,∆,C), where∆is the set of zeros ofω, and defines a decom-
position H1(X,∆,C)E 1⊕E−1 into the direct sum of subspaces invariant and anti invariant under the
involutionτ. By construction,ω∈E −1. Following §5.5.1, the involutionτis hyperelliptic ifYhas genus
zero andπis branched at 2g+2 points.
By means of this canonical cover, one can define a canonical mapping from the stratumQ h(ℓ 1,...,ℓ n )
of quadratic differentials to a stratumH g(µ) of abelian differentials, where the listµ=(m 1,...,m k ) is
determined from the list (ℓ 1,...,ℓ n ) according to the following:

===== PAGE 31 =====
31
Rule 5.9.
•for each even2ℓ j >0, include a pair(ℓ j, ℓj )in the list(m i );
•for each oddℓ j >0, include a single termℓ j +1;
•simple poles, i.e.ℓ j =−1, do not contribute to the list(m i ).
Observe thatµis a signature of the form
(5.6)µ=

mgcd(2,ℓ1)
1 ,...,m gcd(2,ℓn)
n

,wherem i = ℓi +2
gcd(2,ℓ i)−1,
and thengis explicitly determined byµ. By recalling thatµis a signature of 2g−2, and that (ℓ 1,...,ℓ n)
is a partition of 4h−4, we can infer the following formula:
(5.7)g=1+ 1
2
nX
i=1
gcd(2,ℓ i)m i =2h−1+n− 1
2

nX
i=1
gcd(2,ℓ i)
.
Lemma 5.10.The canonical mapQ h(ℓ 1,...,ℓ n )−→H g(µ)just defined is an immersion.
The construction just presented works in the general setting and the image of the canonical map inHg(µ)
consists of pairs (X,q) such thatqis a non-primitive quadratic differential onX, that is,qis the global
square of some abelian differentialω∈Ω(X).
Recall that the aim is to provide a motivation for Definition 5.7. For this purpose we need to work with
translation surfaces whose underlying Riemann surface is hyperelliptic, therefore we seth=0. Two
specific series of such mappings will play a crucial role for our purposes, namely,
(5.8)Q o(−1 2g+1,2g−3 )→H g( 2g−2 ),Q o(−1 2g+2,2g−2 )→H g(g−1,g−1 ),
whereg≥2. In both examples, the base Riemann surfaceYhas genush=0 and hence its canonical dou-
ble coverXis a Riemann surface of genusgthat comes with a hyperelliptic involution by construction.
Let us compare the dimensions of the domain and target strata. From Proposition 5.3, we compute:
dimC Qo(−1 2g+1,2g−3 )=2·0+(2g+2)−2=2g+1−1=dim C Hg( 2g−2 ),(5.9)
dimC Qo(−1 2g+2,2g−2 )=2·0+(2g+3)−2=2g+2−1=dim C Hg(g−1,g−1 ).(5.10)
In both cases the dimensions match, and the canonical maps in (5.8) are local homeomorphisms of
complex orbifolds. For the reader’s convenience, we show that these are the only cases in which the
dimensions match.
Lemma 5.11.Letνbe a signature of quadratic differentials onCP 1 and letµbe the signature of abelian
differential realised fromνby using Rule(5.9). Then the dimensions of the strataQ o(ν)andH g(µ)
coincide if and only if
1.ν=(−1 2g+1,2g−3 )andµ=(2g−2), or
2.ν=(−1 2g+2,2g−2 )andµ=(g−1,g−1).
Proof.Letν=(ℓ 1,...,ℓ n ) be a partition of−4 such thatℓ i≥−1 andℓ i ,0 for alli=1,...,n. Let us
set the following parameters
1.ris the number of indices withℓ i =−1,
2.s=n−ris the number of indices withℓ i≥1, and
3.ois the number of indices such thatℓ i≥1 is odd.
We first provide a lower and upper bound for the possible values ofr. Note that, sinceℓ 1 +···+ℓ n =−4,
it follows thatr≥4. We order the entries ofνso thatℓ 1 =···=ℓ r =−1 andℓ r+i≥1 for 1=1,...,s.
Letµ=(m 1,...,m k ) be the signature of abelian differentials realised fromνby using Rule (5.9). Note

===== PAGE 32 =====
32
thatk≥s=n−rbecause eachℓ r+i≥1 contributes in the realisation ofµ. We now compare the sum of
the entries of the signaturesµandν, that is,
(5.11)
kX
j=1
m j =o+
sX
i=1
ℓr+i
because, as an artifact of Rule (5.9), everyℓ i contributes on the left-hand sum asℓ i if it is even or it
contributes asℓ i +1 if it is odd. Moreover,
(5.12)
nX
i=1
ℓi =
sX
i=1
ℓr+i +
rX
i=1
ℓi =−4=⇒
sX
i=1
ℓr+i =r−4.
By combining equations (5.11) and (5.12) and by recalling the equalitym 1 +···+m k =2g−2, we
deduce that 2g−2=o+r−4, in particular
(5.13) 2g−2≥r−4=⇒r≤2g+2.
We now determine a lower bound. The dimensions of the strataQ o(ν) andH g(µ) coincide if and only
ifn−2=2g+k−1, that is if and only ifn=2g+k+1. Sincen=r+sandk≥s, we get
(5.14)r+s≥2g+s+1=⇒r≥2g+1.
Thereforer∈{2g+1,2g+2}. We now analyse these cases separately.
Case r=2g+1. In this case 2g+k+1=n=r+s=2g+1+sand hencek=s. Equation (5.11) implies
thatℓ r+i is odd for alli=1,...,s. Moreover, sinceµis a partition of 2g−2 andℓ r+1 +···+ℓ n =2g−3
becauseνis a partition of−4, it follows thato=1 that forcesk=s=1. Henceν=(−1 2g+1,2g−3 )
andµ=(2g−2).
Case r=2g+2. Similarly to the case above, sinceµis a partition of 2g−2 andℓ r+1 +···+ℓ n =2g−2
becauseνis a partition of−4, it follows thato=0 and hencek=2s. Since 2g+k+1=n=r+s=2g+2+s
it follows thatk=s+1 and hencek=2 ands=1. Thusν=(−1 2g+2,2g−2 ) andµ=(g−1,g−1) as
desired. □
Remark5.12.Let (Y,ϕ) be any structure inQ o(−1 2g+1,2g−3 ) and let (X,ω)∈H g( 2g−2 ) be its canonical
double cover. As already mentioned above, (X,ω) admits an involutionτsuch that (X,ω)/⟨τ⟩(Y,ϕ).
We may observe that the single zero is a fixed point for the involutionτ. On the other hand, if (Y,ϕ) is
any structure inQ o(−1 2g+2,2g−2 ), then its canonical double cover (X,ω)∈H g(g−1,g−1 ) admits
an involutionτthat swaps the zeros ofω(otherwiseτwould have more than 2g+2 fixed points andX
would not be hyperelliptic).
Before returning to the special cases in (5.8), we state the following fundamental property of the strata
of quadratic differentials in genus zero.
Proposition 5.13.Let g=0. Then every stratumQ o(ℓ 1,...,ℓ n )of meromorphic quadratic differentials
is non-empty and connected.
The proof can be found in [KZ03, Proposition 1]. Lemmata 5.10 and 5.11 and Proposition 5.13 combined
together motivate the following definition.
Definition 5.14.Byhyperelliptic componentwe define the following connected component of the fol-
lowing strata of abelian differentials on compact Riemann surfaces of genusg≥2: the connected com-
ponentH hyp
g ( 2g−2 ) of the stratumH g( 2g−2 ) consisting of abelian differentials on hyperelliptic curves
of genusgarising from the orbifoldQ o(−1 2g+1,2g−3 ) and the connected componentH hyp
g (g−1,g−1 )
ofH g(g−1,g−1 ) of abelian differentials arising from the orbifoldQ o(−1 2g+2,2g−2 ). A translation
surface of genusgis said to behyperellipticif it belongs either toH hyp
g ( 2g−2 ) orH hyp
g (g−1,g−1 ).
Remark5.15.Following Remark 5.12, we also note that ifXis any hyperelliptic Riemann surface with
hyperelliptic involutionτand (X,ω)∈H g(g−1,g−1 ) thenτmay fix the zeros ofω. In this case the
structure (X,ω) does not belong to a hyperlliptic component.

===== PAGE 33 =====
33
Remark5.16.As a consequence, we have the following first rough classification of connected compo-
nents of strata. For every genusg≥2, each of the strataH g( 2g−2 ) andH g(g−1,g−1 ) is either
connected and entirely consists of hyperelliptic translation surfaces, or it has at least two connected
components and only one of which corresponds to hyperelliptic translation surfaces.
5.5.3.Interlude 2: index of curves.Let (X,ω) be a translation surface of genusgand let∆be the set of
zeros ofω. Recall that away from the zeros and poles ofω, there is a well defined horizontal direction and
hence a non-singular horizontal foliation onX\∆that extends to a singular foliation over∆, see §2.6.3.
Letγbe a simple smooth curve parametrized by arc length. Assume in addition thatγavoids all the
zeros and poles ofω. We shall define the index ofγas a numerical invariant given by the comparison of
the unit tangent field ˙γ(t) and the unit vector field alongγgiven by unit vectors tangent to the horizontal
direction. More precisely, let us denote byu(t) the unit vector atγ(t) tangent to the leaf of the horizontal
foliation throughγ(t). Then the assignment
(5.15)t7−→θ(t)=∠   ˙γ(t),u(t) 
defines a mappingf γ :S 1−→S 1.
Definition 5.17.The index ofγis defined as deg(f γ ) and denoted by Ind(γ).
Convention.We agree thatS 1 is counter-clockwise oriented. As a consequence, we agree that the
index Ind(γ)=deg(f γ ) ispositiveifγis counter-clockwise oriented.
The index Ind(γ) of a closed curveγmeasures the number of times the unit tangent vector field spins
with respect to the direction given by the horizontal foliation. Since for translation surfaces the parallel
transport yields a trivial holonomy, see Proposition 2.20, the total change of the angle is 2πInd(γ).
5.5.4.Interlude 3: Spin structures.The last geometric invariant we shall introduce is the spin structure.
LetXbe a compact Riemann surface and letPbe a principalS 1-bundle overX.
Definition 5.18.Aspin structureonXis a choice of a linear functionalξ: H 1(P,Z 2)−→Z 2 having
non-zero value on the cycle representing the fibreS 1 ofP.
Notice that this is equivalent to a choice of a double coveringQ−→Pwhose restriction to each fibre of
Pis a 2-fold covering ofS 1.
An element of H 1(P,Z 2) can be regarded as aframed closed curveinX, by which we mean a closed
curve inXand a smooth unit vector field along it. For a simple closed curveγinX, there is a preferred
frame given by its unit tangent vector field. We shall denote such a framed closed curve as ⃗γ. This is
well defined in the sense that two homologous closed curvesγ, δ∈H 1(X,Z 2) yield homologous framed
closed curves⃗γ,⃗δ, see [Joh80, §3].
Thecanonical liftof a simple closed curveγis defined as eγ= ⃗γ+z, wherez∈H 1(P,Z 2) is the homology
class represented by the fibreS 1. The assignmentγ7−→ eγdefines a mapλ: H 1(X,Z 2)→H 1(P,Z 2),
which fails to be a homomorphism. In fact, [Joh80, Theorem 1B] states that for everyα,β∈H 1(X,Z 2)
the following identity holds:
(5.16) ]α+β= eα+ eβ+  α·β  z,
whereα·βdenotes the intersection form on H 1(X,Z 2), which is symplectic. By post-composing the as-
signmentλwith the spin structureξone obtains aZ 2-valued functionΩξ : H1(X,Z 2)−→Z 2 on H1(X,Z 2)
defined as
(5.17)Ω ξ(γ)=ξ  eγ =⟨ξ, eγ⟩,
which is a quadratic form. Let us explain why this form is indeed quadratic. Since we work over the
fieldZ 2, we recall that every symplectic form is automatically symmetric; in particular, the intersection

===== PAGE 34 =====
34
pairing on H1(X,Z 2) yields a symmetric form. By following [Joh80, §4], the formΩξ is a quadratic form
because it satisfies the identity
(5.18)Ω ξ(α+β)= Ω ξ(α)+ Ω ξ(β)+α·β,
which follows from the identity (5.16) together with the fact thatξ(z)=1. Following [Arf41] and
[Joh80, §5], we shall introduce the following:
Definition 5.19.For a symplectic basis{α 1,β 1,...,α g,β g}of H 1(X,Z 2), the Arf-invariant ofΩ ξ is
defined by the formula
(5.19)
gX
i=1
⟨ξ, eαi⟩⟨ξ, eβi⟩(mod 2).
Theparityof a spin structureξis defined as the Arf-invariant ofΩ ξ. We may notice that the parity ofξ
does not depend on the choice of the symplectic basis.
5.5.5.Spin structure arising from an abelian differential.LetX∈M g be a Riemann surface of positive
genusg≥1 and letω∈Ω(X) be a holomorphic differential onX. In this paragraph, we aim to show in
detail that if (X,ω)∈H g( 2m1,...,2m k ), thenωgives a well defined spin structure onX.
Letγbe a simple closed curve parametrised by arc length and letϑbe a unit vector field alongγ. The pair
(γ,ϑ) defines a framed closed curve,i.e., an element of H 1(P,Z 2). Recall thatωdefines a non-singular
horizontal foliation away from the zeros, hence the unit vector fieldϑcan be compared to the unit vector
field alongγtangent to the horizontal foliation. In fact, as in §5.5.3, this can be done by means of a
mappingf (γ,ϑ) :S 1→S 1 defined as in Equation (5.15). The spin structure induced by a holomorphic
differentialωonXis then defined as theZ 2-valued linear functional
(5.20)ξ: H 1(P,Z 2)−→Z 2,such thatξ(γ,ϑ)=deg   f(γ,ϑ)
 (mod 2).
A direct application of (5.20) shows that, for the canonical lifteγofγ, the spin structure determined byω
satisfies the property
(5.21)ξ( eγ)=⟨ξ, eγ⟩=⟨ξ, ⃗γ+z⟩=Ind(γ)+1 (mod 2).
As a consequence, we can apply formula (5.19) to compute the parityφ(ω) of the spin structure deter-
mined byω. Given a symplectic basis{α 1,β 1,...,α g,β g}of H 1(X,Z 2), it follows that
(5.22)φ(ω)=
gX
i=1
  Ind(α i )+1   Ind(β i )+1  (mod 2).
Since it can be shown thatφ(ω) does not depend on the choice of the symplectic basis, see [Joh80], the
spin structure determined byωis well defined. Finally, it follows from the works of Atiyah in [Ati71]
and Mumford in [Mum71] that the spin parity is invariant under continuous deformations.
5.5.6.Connected components of strata.Let us discuss first the case of holomorphic differentials which
has been studied by Kontsevich–Zorich in [KZ03, Theorems 1 and 2]. We split this classification in two
theorems; one of which is specific to low-genus surfaces,i.e. g=2,3.
Theorem(Kontsevich–Zorich).The moduli space of abelian differentials on a curve of genus g=2
contains two strata:H 2(1,1)andH 2( 2 ). Each of them is connected and coincides with its hyperelliptic
component. Each of the strataH 3(2,2),H 3( 4 )of the moduli space of abelian differentials on a curve
of genus g=3has two connected components: the hyperelliptic one, and one having odd spin structure.
The other strata are connected for genus g=3.
For surfaces of genusg≥4, the following classification holds.
Theorem(Kontsevich–Zorich).All connected components of any stratum of abelian differentials on a
curve of genus g≥4are described by the following list:

===== PAGE 35 =====
35
•The stratumH g( 2g−2 )has three connected components: the hyperelliptic one, and two other
components corresponding to even and odd spin structures;
•the stratumH g( 2m,2m), m≥2has three connected components: the hyperelliptic one and two
other components distinguished by the spin parity;
•all the other strata of the formH g( 2m1,...,2m k ), where all mi≥1, have two connected com-
ponents corresponding to even and odd spin structures;
•the strataH g( 2m−1,2m−1 ), m≥2, have two connected components: one comprises hyper-
elliptic structures and the other does not; finally
•all the other strata of Abelian differentials on the curves of genus g≥4are non-empty and
connected.
5.6.Topology of strata.A question of general interest is to understand the topology of the strata, which,
as of now, is still not fully understood. It is known, however, that strata are generally not connected, and
their connected components were completely classified by Kontsevich and Zorich in [KZ03] as already
discussed in §5.5.6.
5.6.1.Compactness.Given an arbitrary signatureµ, the set of unit area translation surfaces forms a
closed subset of the stratumH g(µ). This follows from the fact that the function assigning to each
translation surface its area with respect to the associated (singular) Euclidean metric is continuous. It is
not difficult to show that, up to rescaling the metric appropriately, each translation surface has a unique
representative in the unit area stratum. This is often calledprojective stratumand denoted byPH g(µ).
Notice that projectivisingH g(µ) means considering the action ofC ∗ onH g(µ), which is continuous.
Hence, the action preserves the connected components.
It is a well-known fact that strata are not compact, and this can be deduced from the non-compactness
of the unit area stratumPH g(µ). Proving the latter, however, is far less obvious and significantly more
interesting. The proof relies on a criterion, known as Masur’s compactness criterion, which states that
a closed subset of the unit area stratum is compact if and only if there exists a positive lower bound
on the lengths of all saddle connections on all translation surfaces in the subset, see [Mas92]. What is
particularly interesting is that this geometric-topological result is proved using the study of a specific
dynamical system defined on the unit area stratum, by constructing sequences of translation surfaces for
which no uniform lower bound exists. In dynamical terms, one may say that there are orbits of translation
structures that eventually leave any compact subset.
Remark5.20.Such sequences are therefore divergent in the unit area stratum. Interestingly, the under-
lying complex structures may still converge. This happens, for instance, when a structure is deformed so
as to collapse two zeros of the differential into a single point on the surface. See [Zor06, §3.7]
5.6.2.Volume of strata.In §5.3, we identified – without providing a detailed proof – a neighbourhood
of a point (X,ω) in the corresponding stratum with a neighbourhood of the cohomology class [ω] in the
relative cohomology group H 1(Σ,∆,C), see Remark 5.4. The space H 1(Σ,∆,C) is a real vector space
and it contains a natural integer lattice H 1(Σ,∆,Z+iZ). There exists a linear volume elementdvol in
the vector space H1(Σ,∆,C) normalised in such a way that the volume of a fundamental domain of the
lattice is equal to one. The volume formdvol naturally restricts to the projectivised stratumPH g(µ) to a
volume formdvol 1. In [Mas82], [Vee82] and [Vee93] it was shown that
Theorem 5.21(Masur, Veech).For every stratumPH g(µ), the total volume
(5.23)
Z
PHg(µ)
dvol1
is finite.

===== PAGE 36 =====
36
Explicit values of these volumes were later computed by Eskin and Okounkov in [EO01]. In a subsequent
paper [EOP08], Eskin, Okounkov, and Pandharipande computed the volumes of all individual connected
components of the strata, showing that each volume is a rational multiple ofπ 2g, wheregdenotes the
genus of the surface. For clear and accessible surveys on these results, the reader is referred to [Esk06]
and [Zor06, §7].
5.6.3.Orbifold fundamental groups.Strata are quasi-projective varieties and thence their (orbifold) fun-
damental groups are finitely presented. Kontsevich and Zorich famously conjectured that connected
components of strata are classifying spaces for their orbifold fundamental group, see [MZ97]. At the
present time only limited progress has been achieved in this direction.
A first interesting case concerns the minimal stratumH 2( 2 ) in genus two. We recall that such a stratum
is connected, see §5.5.6. The preimage ofH 2( 2 ) inΩT 2 via the covering projection consists of exactly
six connected components. We briefly explain the statement: every Riemann surface of genus two is
hyperelliptic and therefore has exactly six Weierstrass points. If (X,ω)∈H 2( 2 ), then this unique zero
must be a Weierstrass point. Indeed, the hyperelliptic involution acts by−1 on holomorphic differentials,
see §5.5.1, and therefore fixes the zero set ofω. Since the zero is unique, it must be fixed by the involution
and hence it is a Weierstrass point. Consequently, for a fixed complex structure onΣ, specifying a
differential in the stratumH 2( 2 ) amounts to choosing one of the six Weierstrass points as the location of
the double zero. Since the zero of the differential varies continuously under deformation, the choice of the
Weierstrass point cannot change continuously. It follows that the preimage ofH 2( 2 ) inΩT 2 splits into
exactly six connected components, each corresponding to one of the six Weierstrass points. Each of these
components determines an odd spin structure onΣ, see Remark 5.22. Hence the orbifold fundamental
group of the projectivised stratumPH 2( 2 ), obtained by quotientingH 2( 2 ) by the naturalC ∗-action
via complex scalar multiplication, can be identified with the finite-index subgroup of the mapping class
group Mod2 that preserves an odd spin structure.
Remark5.22.In this note, the spin structure is defined in topological terms. On a surface of genus 2 there
are exactly six odd spin structures, see for instance [Ati71], and these are in natural bijection with the
Weierstrass points of the surface. This correspondence is most easily seen using the algebraic description
of spin structures as square roots of the canonical bundle, a viewpoint which lies beyond the scope of the
present paper.
In [LM14], Looijenga and Mondello proved the conjecture for the non-hyperelliptic component of the
projectivised stratumPH 3( 4 ), as well as for the stratumPH 3( 1,3 ), which is connected, see §5.5.6. In
both cases, the corresponding orbifold fundamental groups are shown to be quotients of explicit finite-
type Artin groups by their centres. In the same work, they also provide explicit presentations for the
orbifold fundamental group of the non-hyperelliptic component of the projectivised stratumPH 3( 2,2 ),
that is, the connected component with odd parity.
In [Ham20], Hamenstädt significantly extends the work of Looijenga and Mondello by treating the case
of arbitrary genus for projectivised strata of the formPH g(2,...,2). More precisely, she shows that the
orbifold fundamental group of the odd component of this stratum, on a surface of genusg, is a quotient
of an explicit Artin group with 3g−2 generators. The reader is referred to [Ham20] for more details
about this group.
To understand further developments, it is necessary to spend a few more words on the general framework.
There is an obvious forgetful map defined on every stratum, taking values inM g,k, whereM g,k denotes
the moduli space of compact Riemann surfaces of genusgwithkmarked points. Any homotopy class
of loops inH g(µ), based at (X o,ω o), gives rise to an isotopy class of self-homeomorphismX→Xthat
preserves the set∆of zeros ofω. More explicitly, say we have a loop (X t,ω t) of differentials, where
the coordinatetis valued inS 1. To get an isotopy class of mapsX o→X o out of this, mark the original
differential by an isotopy class of mapsm o :S g,k→X o, whereS g,k is a reference topological surface
of the type ofX o, and thekmarked points map to the zeros ofω o. Now astruns from 0 to 1, we can

===== PAGE 37 =====
37
propagate the marking to nearby fibres in a well defined way. After going all the way around the loop,
we have a markingm 1 :S g,k→X 1. ButX 1 =X o, so we can get a self-map ofS g,k by takingm−1
1 ◦m o.
This is the monodromy of the loop. This induces the so-calledtopological monodromy representation
(5.24)ρ:π orb
1 (H,(X,ω) )−→PMod g,k,
whereHis the connected component ofH g(µ) containing (X,ω), and PMod g,k denotes thepuremapping
class group ofX, that is the subgroup of diffeomorphisms ofXthat fix∆. In [Ham18b], Hamenstädt
studied the image of the monodromy representation by providing an explicit set of generators. Around
the same time, further investigations into the monodromy representation were carried out by Calderon
and Salter. Through a series of papers [Cal19], [CS23a] and [CS23b], they showed that forg≥5,
the image of the monodromy representation is isomorphic to certain subgroups of the mapping class
group with a well defined geometric meaning, because these subgroups preserve an additional structure
determined byω.
We observe that if the monodromy representationρis injective, then each connected component of the
preimage ofH⊂H g(µ) inΩT g would be simply connected. Indeed, eH⊂ΩT g is a covering space of
H, and the monodromy representation records how loops inHact on the marked surface. By covering
space theory,π orb
1 (H,(X,ω) )/ker(ρ) is isomorphic to the group of deck transformations eH→H. The
injectivity ofρimplies that ker(ρ) is trivial, so that no non-trivial loop inHlifts to a loop in eH, and
hence eHhas trivial fundamental group.
We cannot hope the monodromy representationρto be injective in general. For instance, Looijenga and
Mondello [LM14] showed that the orbifold fundamental group of the non-hyperelliptic component of the
stratumH 3( 4 ), denoted byH nh
3 ( 4 ), is isomorphic to the quotient of the Artin groupAof finite type E 6
by its centre. In fact, there exists a natural so-called geometric homomorphism fromAinto Mod 3,1 and
a non-trivial result by Hamenstädt [Ham18b, Theorem 2] implies thatρ  πorb
1
  Hnh
3 ( 4 ) coincides with
the image of such a geometric realisation. However, by a result of Wajnryb [Waj99], the kernel of any
geometric homomorphismA→Mod 3,1 cannot be contained in the centre ofA. Thereforeρcannot be
injective.
5.7.Breaking a zero and Schiffer variations.In the present section, we introduce a surgery that al-
lows us to deform structures within the moduli space, possibly remaining in the same stratum to which
they belong, without altering the holonomy of the associated structure. There exists both a geometric-
topological and an analytic version of this construction.
5.7.1.Breaking up a zero.The surgery we are going to describe has been introduced by Eskin–Masur–
Zorich in [EMZ03, Section 8.1] and it literally "breaks up" a zero in two, or possibly more, zeros of lower
orders. Complex-analytically, this can be thought of as the analogue to the classical Schiffer variation
for Riemann surfaces, see §5.7.2 and [Nag85] for more details. This surgery only modifies a translation
surface in a contractible neighbourhood of the initial zero. In particular, after the surgery the resulting
surface has the same genus as the former one, but the type of zero orders is changed. Moreover, the new
translation surface we obtain after the surgery has the same (absolute) period character as the original
one. As a consequence, this operation produces small deformations of the original translation structure
in the same isoperiodic fibre.
Remark5.23.In the context of branched projective structures, such a surgery is also known as the
movement of branched pointsand it has been originally introduced by Tan in [Tan94, §6] for showing
the existence of a complex one-dimensional continuous family of infinitesimal deformations of a given
structure.
Let us now explain this surgery in more detail. Let (X,ω) be a translation surface. Breaking up a zero
is a procedure that takes place in theε-neighbourhood of some zero of ordermof the differential, where
it locally resembles the pull-back of the formdzvia a branched coveringz7−→z m+1. The differential

===== PAGE 38 =====
38
is then modified by a surgery inside thisε-neighbourhood. Once this surgery is performed, we obtain a
new translation structure with two zeros of ordersm 1 andm 2 such thatm 1 +m 2 =m. Furthermore, the
translation structure remains unchanged outside theε-neighbourhood of such a zero of orderm. The idea
is to consider theε-neighbourhood of a zero of ordermasm+1 copies of a discDof radiusεwhose
diameters are identified in a specified way. We can view this family of discs as a collection ofm+1
upper half-discs andm+1 lower half-discs. See Figure 5.
ul0 ur0
ll0 lr0
ul1 ur1
ll1 lr1
ul2 ur2
ll2 lr2
Figure5. Anε-neighbourhood of a zero of order 2.
We now break up a zero of orderminto two zeros of ordersm 1 andm 2. This surgery consists of
identifying the diameters of the initialm+1 discs in a different way, as follows. First, we modify the
labelling on the upper half-disc indexed by 0, the lower half-disc indexed bym1, and all upper and lower
half-discs with index greater thanm 1 accordingly. The modified labelling is shown in Figure 6 for the
case of splitting a zero of order 2 into two zeros of order 1. See also Figure 8.
P
P
P
P
P
P
um
lm
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
ul0
ll0
ul1
ll1
ul2
ll2
ur1
lr0
ur2
lr1
ur0
lr2
Figure6. New labeling for breaking up a zero of order 2 in two zeros of order 1.
Next, we identifyul i withll i andlr i withur i+1 as before (where indexes are taken (modm+1), with the
added identification ofumwithlm. This identification gives two zerospandq, wherepis a zero of the
differential of orderm 1 andqis a zero of orderm 2. We also obtain a geodesic line segment joiningp
andq. Givenc∈C\{0}with length less than 2ε, we can perform the surgery in such a way that the line
segment joiningpandqisc. It is also clear that such a deformation of the translation structure is only
local. This procedure can be repeated multiple times to obtain zeros of ordersm 1,...,m k from a single
zero of orderm 1 +···+m k.
Breaking a zero into zeros of smaller orders satisfies the following useful properties.
1. Let (X,ω) be a translation surface in the hyperelliptic component ofH g( 2g−2 ) and let (Y,ξ)
be the translation surface inH g(g−1,g−1) obtained by breaking the single zero ofωinto two
zeros of orderg−1. Then (Y,ξ) is also hyperelliptic.
2. Let (X,ω) be a translation surface inH g( 2m1,...,2m k ) and letθ∈Z 2 be its spin structure. Let
(Y,ξ) be the translation surface inH g(2m1,...,2m k−1,k 1,k 2) obtained by breaking the zero of
order 2mk into two zeros of lower ordersk 1,k 2 such thatk 1 +k 2 =2m k. Ifk 1,k 2 are both even,
then (Y,ξ) belongs to the connected component with parityθ. In other words, by breaking a zero
into zeros of lower andevenorder does not alter the spin parity.

===== PAGE 39 =====
39
We finally show how this surgery can be used to show that for every signatureµthe corresponding
stratumH g(µ) is not empty.
Lemma 5.24.Letµ=(m 1,...,m k )be any partition of2g−2. Then the stratumH g(µ)is not empty.
Proof.Suppose there is a translation surface (X,ω) such thatωhas a single zero of order 2g−2. By
breaking this zero in a judicious way as described above we find a translation surface inHg(µ) for every
partitionµ=(m 1,...,m k ) of 2g−2. Thus we only need to find a translation surface inH g(2g−2).
Every regular 4g-gon withg≥2 does the job and hence we are done.□
5.7.2.Schiffer variations and movement of zeros.As already alluded above, Schiffer variations are inti-
mately related to the surgery just described in §5.7.1. Geometrically, Schiffer variations can be seen as a
movement of zerosalong a given direction.
Remark5.25.By adopting the language of geometric structures on surfaces, the movement of zeros is
largely known as themovement of branch points, see [CDF14], [CDF23], and [Tan94] where, in that
case, abranch pointis understood as a point around which local charts are branched covers onto some
open subsets of the model space. In this language, translation surfaces are branched geometric structures,
and the zeros thus correspond to the branch points. In the present paper, however, we do not adopt this
terminology.
Before stating the movement of zeros, let us introduce the following terminology as in [CF24, §8].
We remark that this is a different but equivalent formulation compared to the other currently known in
literature, see [CDF14, §2].
Definition 5.26(Twin paths).On a translation surface (X,ω), letpbe a zero ofωof orderm. Consider
a collection ofm+1 embedded pathsc i : [ 0,1 ]−→(X,ω) such thatc i( 0 )=pfori=0,...,m, each of
which is injectively developed, and all of which overlap once developed,i.e.there is a determination of
the developing map aroundc o∪···∪c m such that
•c o,c 1,...,c m injectively develop to the same arcbc⊂C, and
•dev   ci(t)  =dev   c j(t)  for everyt∈[0,1] andi,j∈{0,...,m}.
For any 2≤k≤m, the pathsc i1,...,c ik are calledtwin paths. For any pairc i,c j, notice that the angle at
pbetween them is a multiple of 2π.
Recall that around a singularity of orderm, the horizontal foliation is singular and determinesm+1
sectors of angle 2π. Informally, we may define twin paths as a collection of at mostm+1 segments based
at the singularityp, each lying in a different sector, such that they form the same angle with respect to
the horizontal foliation. Usually all twin pathsc o,...,c m atpas defined above are counter-clockwise
ordered if not otherwise specified.
Definition 5.27(Movement of zeros).Let (X,ω) be a translation surface and letpbe a zero of order
m≥1. Letc o,...,c m be a family of embedded paths atPsuch that, for anyi,j, the pairc i,c j forms a
pair of embedded twin paths, andci(1) is a regular point for alli=0,...,m. Cut (X,ω) alongc o∪···∪c m
and glue backc +
i withc−
i+1 fori=0,...,m−1, and alsoc −
o withc +
m. The resulting structure is a local
deformation of (X,ω), obtained by amovement of zeros. In what follows, whenever necessary, we will
denote by Move  (X,ω),c  such a deformation of (X,ω), wherecdenotes the collection { co,...,c m} of
twin paths.
See Figure 7 for a visual representation. In the study of branched structures on surfaces, the importance
of such a surgery is its key property of preserving the holonomy of the structure. Moreover, it does not
change the structure of the branching divisor. In our language, the holonomy being preserved means
that the absolute periods remain untouched once the surgery is performed. In particular, the resulting
structure lies in the same stratum.

===== PAGE 40 =====
40
8π
2π
2π
2π2π
Figure7. Movement of a zero of order 3.
5.7.3.Geometric interpretation of "movement".We would like to provide an alternative description of
the movement of zeros by using a more geometric and dynamical interpretation of the “movement”. In
this paragraph we shall use the definition of translation surface as in §2.4 and we shall use branched
charts as in Remark 2.14.
For this purpose, let (X,ω) be any translation surface. Letpbe a zero ofωof orderm≥1 and let
B=B ε(p) be an open metric ball embedded in (X,ω). Forεsmall enough,Bhomeomorphically lifts to
an open ball in (eX, eω), and we can assume that the restriction of the developing map is a local branched
chartφ:B−→Cof degreem+1, branched atp. Let bp=φ(p) and let bB=φ(B). Letc= { co,...,c m}
be a collection of twin paths based atp, and letq i denote the endpoint ofc i other thanp. Assume that
cis entirely contained inB. Since all paths incare assumed to be twins, they all develop onto the same
segment, saybc⊂C, having bpand bqas the extremal points. Notice thatφ(q i )= bqfor everyi=0,...,m.
In this setting, sinceφis a local branched cover, bpis a branch value and, by assuming allq i to be regular
points,bqis a regular value.
We then perform the surgery described in Definition 5.27. After the cut-and-paste process, (X,ω) is thus
deformed to a new structure Move  (X,ω),c . In the latter, the local chartφ, seen as a branched cover,
has been deformed to a new local branched chartψ:B−→ bB⊂Cof degreem+1 in which bpis a regular
value, whereas bqis a branch value. More precisely,ψ −1(bq) has only one preimage, sayq, arising from
the collapsing of{q 0,...,q m}, andψ −1(bp) hasm+1 preimages{p o,...,p m}. The mappingψaround
everyp i is now a regular chart.
Keeping in mind this description, we can say that a zero ofωhas been moved to another point, and the
movement is seen in local charts. For a more dynamical interpretation, we observe that the movement
of zeros naturally comes with a one-parameter family. In the above notation, for everyt∈[0,1], we
can consider the structure Move  (X,ω),c t , wherec t is the collection of embedded twin paths made of
those sub-arcs of thec i’s parametrised by the subinterval [0,t]. Fortrunning in the unit interval [0,1],
we see bp,i.e.the developed image ofp,movingalong bc, which motivates the name of this surgery.
Remark5.28.Breaking up a zero, seen as the operation just described in §5.7.1, turns out to be a special
case of the movement of the zero. In fact, letc={c 1,...,c m}be a collection of twin paths based atpas
above. For 0<k<m, given a sub-collection{c i1,...,c ik}of adjacent twin paths, the surgery described
in Definition 5.27 literallybreaks pinto two lower-order zeros of orderm−kandk, and only the latter is
moved away fromp. In the local charts,φ, seen as a branched covering of degreem+1, is deformed to
a new branched chartψof degreem+1 that now has two branch values at bpand bq. In this case,ψ−1(bp)
hasm−k+1 preimages andψ −1(bq) hask+1 preimages. See Figure 8.
Remark5.29.In our setting above, the extremal points{q 0,...,q m}ofcwere all supposed to be regular
points. This surgery extendsmutatis mutandisto the case in which some, possibly all, of theq i’s are also
zeros forω. In this extended setting, two or more zeros ofωcollapse to a new-born zero of higher order.

===== PAGE 41 =====
41
× ×
zero of order 2
{
× ×
zeros of order 1
Figure8. The figure illustrates how a local chart is modified when a zero is split into
zeros of a lower order. In the case shown, a zero of order two is broken into two zeros
of order one. The bold purple lines represent the twin paths used to split the zero.
Under this perspective, the movement of zeros is a surgery that not only extends the breaking of a zero
but also provides its reverse surgery.
6. Periods of translation surfaces
In the theory of geometric structures, the holonomy map plays a pivotal role and has been investigated
through many different lenses. As we have already seen in §2.5, every translation structure defines
a representation of the fundamental group, known as theholonomy. It is worth recalling that this is far
from being a feature specific to translation structures; in fact, any geometric structure defines a holonomy
representation. The holonomy map assigns to each geometric structure its corresponding holonomy
representation. We will not discuss the general case, which requires certain technical considerations, and
will instead focus on the structures considered in this chapter.
6.1.Period map.In our setting, the holonomy map is a function defined in the moduli spaceΩT g that
takes its values on the space of representations of the fundamental group. The first simplification arises
from the fact that the holonomy of any such structure is a representation intoC, seen as an additive group,
which descends to homology since the target group is abelian. As a consequence, the holonomy map is
well defined on an intermediate space between the spacesΩT g andΩM g which is known as the Torelli
space. More specifically, given the map
(6.1) hol:ΩT g−→Hom

π1(Σ),C

,
there is an equivariant action of the Torelli subgroupIg of the mapping class group Modg on both spaces.
This action is trivial on the representation space, but not on the moduli spaceΩT g. Therefore, the
holonomy map descends to a map
(6.2) Per:ΩS g−→Hom

H1(Σ,Z),C

=H 1(Σ,C)
that we shall define as thePeriod map. The spaceΩS g is the moduli space of translation structures
marked inhomology. Alternatively, this space can be defined directly by introducing a homological
marking, in the same spirit as done in §5.1 to defineΩT g. Clearly, both definitions describe the same
space.
6.2.Period coordinates.We first wish to connect the local coordinates provided in Remark 5.4 with the
Period map just defined in (6.2). Apart from the usual complications arising from the orbifold structure,
periods provide local coordinates on any stratum. More precisely, let (X,ω) be a translation surface with
singular locus∆ ={p o,...,p n}, and consider the relative homology group H1(X,∆,Z). Choose a basis,
say{α 1,β 1,...,α g,β g}of H 1(X,Z), and letδ 1,...,δ n be arcs connectingp o top 1,...,p n, respectively.

===== PAGE 42 =====
42
Then, the set{α 1,β 1,...,α g,β g, δ1,...,δ n}forms a basis in the relative homology H 1(Σ,∆,Z). From
the point of view of translation surfaces expressed as pairs (X,ω), one defines the period map as follows:
(6.3) (X,ω)7−→

Z
α1
ω,
Z
β1
ω,...,
Z
αg
ω,
Z
βg
ω,
Z
δ1
ω,...,
Z
δn
ω
.
This gives a local chart
(6.4)H g(µ)−→C 2g+n.
These charts are known as theperiod coordinates. The integrals over the{α i,β i}are calledabsolute
periods, while those over theδ i are calledrelative periods. In this perspective, the period map can be
seen as
(6.5) Per(µ):H g(µ)−→C 2g =H 1(Σ,C),
which assigns to each translation surface its absolute periods:
(6.6) (X,ω)7−→

Z
α1
ω,
Z
β1
ω,...,
Z
αg
ω,
Z
βg
ω
.
By keeping the absolute period fixed, the subspace described by the relative periods is an interesting
object to study known as isoperiodic foliation, see §6.9.
6.3.Period characters.A holomorphic 1-formωon a compact Riemann surface naturally defines a
representation in homology, say
(6.7)χ: H 1(X,Z)−→C, γ7−→
Z
γ
ω,
whose image is the group of periods ofω. The representationχis called theperiod character. Although
the group of periods is intrinsically defined byω, the representation is well defined upon choosing a basis
in homology. The map Per mentioned above assigns to each translation structure marked in homology
the period character determined byω. Since a marking in homology corresponds to a specific choice of
generators of the homology, then the map Per is well defined. Notice that there is no way to define a
similar map onΩMg unless one associates to a translation surface an equivalence class of representations,
see [Nag85, §4.1.1].
Given a pair (X,ω), the period representation and the holonomy of the associated geometric structure are
deeply related. In §2.5 we already observed that the holonomy representation descends to homology by
a purely algebraic argument. Although we have already anticipated that the representation in homology
is called the period character (and therefore the reader might expect it to be the one induced byω) it is
not a priori obvious that the induced representation actually coincides with the period character. As a
consequence we have the following:
Lemma 6.1.LetΣbe a closed surface of genus g≥1. A representationχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Carises as the
period character of some homologically marked pair(X,ω)if and only if it is induced by the holonomy
representation of some translation structure onΣ.
We thus arrive at the central question of this section:
under what conditions is a given representation the holonomy of some translation struc-
ture?
In the next sections we aim to provide an answer to this question.

===== PAGE 43 =====
43
6.4.Algebraic volume.Before we can address the above question, it is necessary to introduce the
notion of volume which plays a pivotal role in the theory. Since we are in real dimension two, perhaps
“area” would be a more appropriate term than “volume”, but this is the terminology commonly used.
There are several ways to define the volume of a representation. In the present chapter, we provide
an algebraic definition that we shall systematically use in the following. Letχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Cbe any
representation and let{α i, βi}1≤i≤g be a symplectic basis of H1(Σ,Z). Then, every representationχdefines
a vector, sayw(χ)∈C 2g, that is,
(6.8)w(χ)=  χ(α 1 ), χ(β1 ),...,χ(α g ), χ(βg ).
We defineℜ(χ) andℑ(χ) as the real and the imaginary part ofw(χ). This approach allows us to regard
every representation as a pair of vectors (u,v)∈R 2g×R 2g H 1(Σ,R)×H 1(Σ,R).
Thevolumeis the quadratic form vol: H 1(Σ,C)−→Rdefined as vol(χ)= Ω  ℜ(χ),ℑ(χ) , whereΩ
is the standard symplectic form onR2g, induced by the symplectic pairing V: H1(Σ,R)×H 1(Σ,R)−→R
determined by Poincaré duality. For a symplectic basis{α 1,β 1,...,α g,β g}of H 1(Σ,Z), it can be shown
that the volume of a representationχis equal to
(6.9) vol(χ)=
gX
i=1
ℑ

χ(α i )χ(β i )

,
whereℑ( z w) is the usual symplectic form onC. As a consequence, this algebraic definition of volume of
a characterχis invariant under precomposition with any automorphisms in Aut   H1(Σ,Z) Sp(2g,Z).
The image ofχ, provided that it has rank 2g, turns out to be a polarised module.
6.5.Holonomy of translation structures on the torus.We aim to determine the image of the period
map Per for genus one surfaces. As a preliminary observation, we note that Lemma 6.1 asserts that, in
this specific case, the period character is not only induced by the holonomy of the associated structure,
but actually coincides with it as a representation. Indeed, it is a well-known classical fact that for genus
one surfaces, the fundamental group coincides with the first homology group. The second key observa-
tion in this setting is that, given a representationχand a specified basis{α, β}in homology, the algebraic
volume as defined in §6.4 coincides, by a mere matter of definitions, with the area of the parallelogram
defined byχ(α) andχ(β). Since a parallelogram defines a fundamental domain for a translation struc-
ture if and only if its two-dimensional volume is positive, it follows that for a representationχto arise
as the holonomy, and hence as the period character, of some translation structure, the volume must be
positive. The goal of this section is to show that this condition is also sufficient.
Proposition 6.2.LetΣbe a surface of genus one. A representationχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Carises as the
holonomy of some marked translation structure onΣif and only ifvol(χ)>0. Moreover, such a structure
is unique up to translations.
Proof.Following the above discussion, it remains to show that the condition vol(χ)>0 is sufficient.
Fix a marking onΣ, that is, a choice of a system of generators in homology, say{α, β}. Letµ 1 andµ 2 be
the images of the generators underχ. Since the volume ofχis positive, it follows by definition that the
two-dimensional volume of the parallelogram determined byµ 1 andµ 2 is positive. By gluing together
the opposite sides of this parallelogram, one obtains a marked translation structure on the torus whose
holonomy is equal toχby design.□
Once a system of generators for homology is fixed, a representation with positive volume encodes exactly
the same data as a parallelogram in the plane: they both define a translation structure and thus a complex
structure, and a lattice along with an explicit system of generators. A translation structure, on the other
hand, encodes less information: the period group,i.e., the lattice, is well defined, but there is no canonical
choice of a system of generators, and hence no uniquely determined fundamental domain. Referring
to the diagram in Table 2, the relationship among holonomy representations, parallelograms inCand
translation structures on a torus is shown in Table 3.

===== PAGE 44 =====
44
( holonomy representations
ρ:π 1(Σ)−→C
) ( fundamental domains
i.e.parallelograms inC
) ( translation structures
on a torus
)
Table3. The solid arrow denotes a complete determination of one object by another; a
broken arrow denotes that some choice is involved.
6.6.Haupt’s theorem.The case of genus one surfaces is interesting because it provides insight into the
general case, which is decidedly less straightforward to handle. We have already observed that not all
representations arise as the holonomy of a translation structure. This remains true in higher genus, but
it will not be the only obstruction to the realisation of representations. The main result is the following
Theorem by Haupt, see [Hau20].
Haupt’s Theorem.LetΣbe a closed surface of genus g≥2. A representationχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→C
arises as the period character of some pair(X,ω)if and only if the following conditions holds:
1.vol(χ)>0, and
2. ifIm(χ)<Cis a lattice thenvol(χ)≥2area   C/Λ.
Haupt’s Theorem has been subsequently rediscovered by Kapovich in [Kap20], by using Ratner’s so-
lution of Raghunathan’s conjecture, thus providing an interesting alternative approach. Kapovich’s key
observation is that the set of periods of holomorphic one-forms on homologically marked Riemann sur-
faces is preserved under the action of the integral symplectic group. In §6.6.1 and §6.6.2 we briefly
explain how the above conditions arise as obstructions and how to realise a structure when they hold. We
notice that the second condition holds if and only if the image of a representation is a discrete subgroup
ofCof rank two, meaning that it is isomorphic toZ 2.
6.6.1.Condition on the volume.The first obstruction is a mere consequence of Riemann’s bilinear rela-
tions. In fact, given any pair (X,ω) the quantity
(6.10) i
2
Z
X
ω∧ ω
is the area of the surfaceΣwith respect to the singular Euclidean metric onXinduced byω, which
must be positive. On the other hand, given a basis{α i,β i}for the homology H 1(X,Z)H 1(Σ,Z), the
following chain of equalities hold:
(6.11) i
2
Z
X
ω∧ ω
RBR
= i
2
gX
j=1

χ(α j )χ(β j )−χ(α j )χ(β j )

=
gX
j=1
ℑ

χ(α j )χ(β j )

=vol(χ),
whereχis the period character ofωand RBR stands forRiemann Bilinear Relations. Under a different
perspective, the developing map of the translation structure determined byω, say dev: eΣ−→C, yields a
multivalued functionF:X−→Cand
(6.12)
Z
X
ω∧ ω=
Z
X
F∗  dz∧d z.
6.6.2.Lattice condition.We now focus on the second obstruction which applies only when the image of
χis a lattice, sayΛ. This obstruction arises for topological reasons. SinceΛH 1(T,Z), whereTis the
topological torus, thenχmay be regarded as a mapχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→H 1(T,Z) in homology. The crux
of the matter is that, up to homotopy,χis determined by a mappingf:Σ−→T. In the following we
may assume  Λ: H 1(T,Z)  =1. If not, we may liftfto a map fonto the covering ofTcorresponding
to the subgroupΛ.
Supposeχarises as the period character of some translation structure, say (X,ω) onΣ. Then, its devel-
oping map dev: eX−→Cboils down to a mapX−→C/Λthat we may assume to bef, up to homotopy,
because dev isχ−invariant. The restriction offaround any zero ofωlooks like the the mapgdefined
in §2.4.2. In particular, ifpis a zero ofωof orderm≥1, then the local degree offaroundpis equal

===== PAGE 45 =====
45
tom+1≥2. Moreover,ωhas at least one zero sinceXhas genus at least two. Hence deg(f)≥2.
In [Edm79], Edmonds shows that a mapfof non-zero degree between orientable and closed surfaces is
homotopic to a pinching map post-composed with a branched covering. However, sincef ∗ =χand the
inequality deg(f)>  Im(χ) : H 1(T,Z)  =1 holds, then the pinching map can be absorbed into the
branched covering map. Therefore,fis homotopic to a branched covering map of surfaces of degree at
least 2.
Remark6.3.By adopting a more analytic perspective, the same bound on deg(f) arises as follows.
Supposeχarises as the monodromy of the first order linear ODE, saydF=ωonX. The multivalued
solution onXyields a non-constant holomorphic mapf:Σ−→Tthat cannot be a homeomorphism for
topological reasons. Hence its degree must be at least two.
We now define a topological invariant naturally attached toχ. Thedegreeofχis the positive integer
defined as the ratio:
(6.13) deg(χ)= vol(χ)
area(C/Λ) .
Since deg(f)=deg(χ), the second obstruction readily follows, that is
(6.14) vol(χ)≥2 area(C/Λ).
Remark6.4 (Maps of degree one).We observe that the constraint deg(f)≥2 vanishes if we do not
assumefto be a branched covering map. Given two surfaceΣ g andΣ h of genusg,hwhereg>h, there
exist mapsΣ g−→Σ h of degree one. By [Edm79], these maps are homotopic to pinching maps, namely
continuous maps that collapseg−hhandles to a point. In the caseg≥2 andh=1, every continuous
map of degree onef:Σ−→C/Λyields a representationχ∈H 1(Σ,C) of volume equal to vol(C/Λ) that
cannot be realised as the period character of some translation structure onΣbecause the second Haupt
condition is violated. Vice versa, every discrete representationχ∈H 1(Σ,C) of degree one is induced by
a pinching map. Finally, we may notice that the complex structure onC/Λcannot be pulled-back onΣ
otherwisefwould be homotopic to a branched covering map of degree one that is a homeomorphism.
6.6.3.Realising representations following Kapovich’s approach.In the previous paragraph, we showed
why the conditions of Haupt’s theorem are, in fact, necessary. In this paragraph we want to give an idea
of why these conditions are also sufficient. Letχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Cbe a non-discrete 1 representation
with positive volume and suppose the existence of a basis in homology which is good in the following
sense.
A basis{α i,β i}in homology is said to be good if and only ifℑ

χ(α i )χ(β i )

>0for
every i=1,...,g.
Under this assumption, each pair{χ(α i ), χ(βi )}yields the fundamental parallelogram of some transla-
tion structure on a torus, by Proposition 6.2, and the desired translation structure onΣarises by gluing
these tori in some appropriate way. More geometrically, we can find a collection ofgparallelograms
such that, once decomposed into polygons,e.g.triangles, and appropriately reassembled by translations,
they determine the desired translation surface. Figure 9 depicts such a situation in genus three.
Determining the existence of a good basis is more of a dynamical problem than a geometric one. In his
paper, Kapovich first observed that it is not necessary to consider all representations, but it suffices to
consider those of volume one. These representations form a subspaceX=  χ∈H 1(Σ,C)|vol(χ)=1 	.
Recall from §6.4 that the standard symplectic form onR4g defines a quadratic form vol: H1(Σ,C)−→R.
The spaceXis identified with the level set vol=1 and it is invariant under the action of the symplectic
group Sp(2g,R). The action is clearly transitive, and the stabilizer of any point inXis identified with the
group Sp(2g−2,R), see Remark 6.5, from which we conclude thatX=Sp(2g,R)/Sp(2g−2,R).
1A representation inCisnon-discreteif the image if not a discrete additive subgroup ofC.

===== PAGE 46 =====
46
1
2
3
4
2
1
4
3
Figure9. The figure shows a collectionPof polygons. Each polygon gives rise to
a specific handle. Each dashed segment in every polygon is labelled so that different
segments have different labels. We then divide the polygons into a new finite collection,
sayQ, entirely made of triangles. Each dashed segment defines a pair of sides, which
we mark with the same label to indicate they are identified (the figure does not show the
labels on the dashed lines in order to avoid too much clutter; the reader is invited to add
them if desired). We note that for each label there is a unique pair, by design. On the
other hand, each blue segment defines two different sides that are labelled differently.
The polygons in the collectionQwill then be glued back together, identifying sides with
the same label. All this is equivalent to splitting the polygons of the former collectionP
along the blue segments and simply identifying the sides with the same label 1,2,3,4.
The resulting surface has genusgand supports a translation structure inH 3(1,1,1,1)
that, by design, has the desired period character.
Remark6.5.By regarding a representation as a pair of vectorsR 2g×R 2g, the stabiliser of a represen-
tation can be seen as the stabiliser of a pair (u,v) under the action of Sp(2g,R). The vectorsu,vspan a
symplectic 2-plane inR 2g, whose symplectic complement therefore has dimension 2g−2. The stabiliser
acts trivially on this plane and symplectically on its complement. Hence the stabiliser of any pair is
isomorphic to Sp(2g−2,R).
LetPΩS g be the subspace ofΩS g of marked translation surfaces with volume one and letRXbe the
image of the map as in (6.2) toPΩSg. HereRXstands for realisable representations inX 2. The restricted
map Per:PΩS g −→RXis an open map meaning thatRXis open inX. Moreover,RXis invariant
under the action of the discrete group Sp(2g,Z) which is a lattice in Sp(2g,R). We recall for the readers’
convenience that an action is said to beergodicif every invariant measurable subset has either full
measure or zero measure. Moore’s Theorem, see [Zim84], applies and as a consequence Sp(2g,Z) acts
ergodically onXandRX⊂Xis an open invariant subset of full measure. LetGX⊂Xbe the subset of
representations for which a good basis as above exist. We have already seen thatGX⊂RX. Ratner’s
theory is then applied to show that for every non-discrete representationχ∈X, the orbit Sp(2g,Z)·χ
intersectsGX, to conclude thatχ∈RX, see [Kap20, §5]. However there are representations inXwhich
do not belong to the orbit Sp(2g,Z)·GX. These correspond to the characters with discrete image.
In case a representationχwith positive volume is discrete, the image ofχis a lattice and there is no loss
of generality in assuming that Im(χ)=Z⊕iZ. This normalisation can be easily explained as follows.
Let us suppose for a moment that a discrete representation with imageZ⊕iZand satisfying Haupt’s
conditions is realisable. Letχbe any such representation. Then there exists a collection of polygons
Pand an explicit pairing via translations, sayτ, see §2.1, such that the resulting translation surface has
period characterχ. Letχ ′ be any other discrete representation with positive volume and letΛ =Im(χ ′ ).
We may notice that there is an elementA∈GL +(2,R) such thatA·Z⊕iZ= Λand, as a consequence,
A·χ=χ ′. This elementAcan be used to define a new collection of polygonsP ′ and a pairing via
2Our notation here is different from that used by Kapovich in his paper.

===== PAGE 47 =====
47
a+
a−
a−
a+
b+
b−
b−
b+
c+
c−
c−
c+
a2
a3
a4
Figure10. The figure shows a rectangle with area equal to the volume of the represen-
tation. By identifying the opposite sides by means of translations the resulting space in
a torus. To create the desired handles, for eachi, consider two segments of the same
arbitrary length separated by a segment of lengthχ(α i )=a i (drawn in blue),i.e., they
differ by a translationz7→z+a i. Sinceχ(β i )=0 fori=2,...,g, the blue segments
are at the same level, that isa i∈Z, fori=1,...,g. The rectangle is then divided into
polygons (squares and rectangles). Each dashed segment in the rectangle is labelled so
that different segments have different labels. We then divide the rectangle into a finite
collection of polygons. Each dashed segment defines a pair of sides with the same label.
We note that for each label there is a unique pair, by design. Each of the blue segments
defines two different sides that are now labelled differently. The polygons in the col-
lection will then be glued back together, identifying sides with the same label. All this
is equivalent to splitting the rectangle along the blue segments and simply identifying
the sides with the same label. The resulting surface will now haveg−1 more handles
and supports a translation structure inH 4(1,1,1,1,1,1) that, by design, has the desired
period character.
translationsτ′ which can be used to realise a translation surface with period characterχ′. Therefore, we
may assume that Im(χ)=Z⊕iZ. Next, even in this case, we assume the existence of agood basisin
homology. For discrete representations, a good basis is a basis{α i,β i}in homology such that
1.χ(α i )∈Zand 0<χ(α i )<χ(α 1 )=vol(χ)∈Zfor alli=1,...,g,
2.χ(β 1 )=iwhereasχ(β i )=0 for alli=1,...,g.
See [Kap20, §4] for details. Under this assumption, the desired structure can be realised by decomposing
a rectangle of size vol(χ)×1 into smaller polygons and then reassembling them properly, see Figure 10.
In summary, in order to realise a given representation, in both cases Kapovich made use of a good
basis adapted to purpose. The bulk of the work in [Kap20] consisted in determining such a basis for an
arbitrary representation and relies on the full strength of Ratner’s theory.
Remark6.6.It is worth mentioning that Kapovich’s approach does not cover the caseg=2. In fact, in
[Kap20, §4] it makes use of the conditiong≥3.
6.7.Recent refined versions.Haupt’s Theorem provides a full description of the image of the Period
map (6.2). In recent times, several refinements of Haupt’s Theorem have been provided by restricting the
period mapping Per to strata or to connected components of strata of holomorphic differentials. Realising

===== PAGE 48 =====
48
a representation as a character in a prescribed stratum turns out to be a more subtle problem, because
in the realisation process the orders of the zeros can no longer be ignored. In [BJJP22], Bainbridge–
Johnson–Judge–Park provided necessary and sufficient conditions for a representation to be realised in
a connected component of a given stratum. Shortly thereafter Le Fils provided in [LF22] necessary and
sufficient conditions for a representationχto be a character in a given stratum, with an alternative proof
in the same spirit as Kapovich. They showed the following:
Theorem 6.7(Bainbridge–Johnson–Judge–Park, Le Fils).LetΣbe a closed surface of genus g≥2
and letµ=(m 1,...,m k)be any signature. A representationχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Carises as the period
character of some pair(X,ω)in the stratumH g(µ)if and only if the following conditions hold:
1.vol(χ)>0, and
2. ifIm(χ)<Cis a lattice, then
vol(χ)≥max
1≤i≤k
 mi +1 	 area  C/Λ.
Theorem 6.8(Bainbridge–Johnson–Judge–Park).LetΣbe a closed surface of genus g≥2and letµbe
any signature. Ifχcan be realised inH g(µ), then it can be realised in every connected component of
the same stratum.
For a non-discrete representation, there are no obstruction to its realisation in any stratum other than the
one given by the volume. For discrete representations, however, the signature plays a fundamental role.
We observe that for the principal stratumHg(1,...,1), the conditions of this refined version are identical
to those of Haupt’s theorem. In fact, for every signatureµ=(m 1,...,m k ),
(6.15) 2≤max
1≤i≤k
 mi +1 	
and the equality holds if and only ifm i =1 for alli=1,...,k.
6.7.1.Refined lattice condition.Let us see where this condition arises when one wishes to realise a
discrete representation in a stratum other than the principal one. Next, we recall from §6.6 that every
discrete representation yields a branched coveringf:Σ−→T, up to homotopy, of degree at least 2.
From the classical theory of branched coverings we recall that, since the local degree offaround a
ramification point of orderm≥1 cannot exceed the total degree, it must follows that deg(f)≥m+1.
In particular, the total degree must be at least equal to the greatest local degree around every ramification
point.
Let (X,ω)∈H g(µ) and let∆ ={p 1,...,p k}be the set of zeros ofωof orders{m 1,...,m k}respectively.
Letχbe the period character of (X,ω) and letΛbe its image. We also assumeχto be a discrete
representation, meaning thatΛis a lattice inC. Let dev: eX−→Cbe the developing map. Since dev is
χ-equivariant, it descends to a branched covering mapf:X−→C/Λwhere the set of ramification points
corresponds to the set of zeros ofω. The local degree aroundp i is equal tom i +1 becauseflocally looks
like the mapgdefined in §2.4.2. It readily follows that
(6.16) deg(χ)=deg(f)≥max
1≤i≤k
 mi +1 	,
wherem 1,...,m k are the orders of the zeros ofω. Equations (6.13) and (6.16) combined together imply
(6.17) vol(χ)≥max
1≤i≤k
 mi +1 	 area  C/Λ.
Recall that given a latticeΛyields a fundamental parallelogram P, andC/Λ, as a translation surface, can
be realised by gluing the opposite sides of P by using translations. Once a signatureµ=(m 1,...,m k ) is
fixed, thend=max 1≤i≤k
 mi +1 	 defines an invariant, namely the least amount of copies of P needed to
realised a translation surface with discrete period character in the stratumH g(µ), see Figure 11. For an
example of realisation in genus 3, see Figures 12 and 13.

===== PAGE 49 =====
49
×
zero of order 2
A branched covering map of degree 3
with a single ramification point of order two
× ×
zeros of order 1
A branched covering map of degree 2
with a two ramification points of order one
× ×
zeros of order 1
A branched covering map of degree 3
with a two ramification points of order one
Figure11. Realisation of a discrete representation in genus 2. If the representation has
degree 2 then it can be realised only in the principal stratumH 2(1,1). If the representa-
tion has degree 3 (or higher), then it can be realised in both strataH 2(1,1) andH 2( 2 ).
6.7.2.Realisation following –Johnson–Judge–Park’s approach.In their paper [BJJP22], the authors dis-
tinguished two cases, depending on whether the representation is discrete or non-discrete, and used a
specific argument for each of them. In the first case, they opted for a direct approach, whereas in the
second case they used an indirect one.
6.7.2.1.Non-discrete representations. The case of non-discrete representations has been handled with an
indirect approach. Based on the earlier work [CDF23] of Calsamiglia–Deroin–Francaviglia, the authors
in [BJJP22] show that the preimage under the period map in (6.2) of every non-discrete representation
intersects every connected component of a stratum. This is an indirect approach because the representa-
tions are not realised explicitly, yet this approach is highly insightful and contributes significantly to our
understanding of the period map.
6.7.2.2.Discrete representations: normalisation and reduction. Let us discuss the discrete case. In this
case the approach adopted is direct, as translation surfaces have been realised explicitly, and it is divided
into three main steps. The first one consists in a normalisation process to reduce the cases of study. We
observe that it is enough to restrict the proof of the discrete case to square-tiled surfaces. Indeed, as
already noted in §6.6.3, there is no loss of generality in assuming that the image of the representation is
the standard latticeΓ =Z⊕iZ.
A second reduction applies. We first recall thatΣis a surface of genusg≥2. Next, we note that if a
representationχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Cis the period character of a translation structure, then so are all those of
the formχ◦h ∗, whereh:Σ−→Σis any homeomorphism andh ∗ is the induced map in homology. In the
case where Im(χ) is a lattice, we have seen in §6.6 thatχyields a branched covering mapf:Σ−→T, up
to homotopy, andf◦h:Σ−→Tis a branched covering map of the same degree. Consider the following
maps

===== PAGE 50 =====
50
sheet one
sheet two
glue these edges
(coloured in cyan)e1,1
e2,1
e1,2
e2,2
e1,1
e2,1
e1,2
e2,2
Projection of
the first sheet
onC/Γ
Projection of
the second sheet
onC/Γ
C/Γ
s1
s2
Figure12. Realisation of a translation surface inH 3( 1,1,1,1 ) with discrete period
character by using two unit squares. The picture shows how to glue two copies of the
bottom square with two marked segments (coloured in blue and violet).
(6.18)B=

translation surfaces arising from
primitive branched covers
f:Σ−→T=C/Γ

Per
−→DR=

(discrete) representations
χ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Γ<C
that satisfy Haupt’s conditions

deg
−→Z
We recall that byprimitivewe mean a branched covering such thatf ∗ :π 1(Σ)−→Γis surjective (and
hence also the representation in homologyχ: H 1(Σ,Z)−→Γis surjective).
The map Per:B→DRassociates to each branched covering the period character of the pull-back
structure onΣand the map deg(·) associates to each representation its degree as defined in (6.13). The
map deg defines a stratification ofDRinto strataDR(d) of representations of degreed. In turns, the
mapping Per◦deg defines a stratification ofBinto strataB(d) of branched covering of degreed. We
now recall that asimple branched coveringis a branched covering with ramification points of order at
most one. Simple branched coverings over the torus exist in every degreed≥2, and the pull-back of the
standard differentialdzonC/Γvia any such covering of degreeddefines a square-tiled surface onΣin
the principal stratumH g( 1,...,1 ), with period character of degreed. In other words, for everyd≥2
the stratumH g( 1,...,1 )∩B(d) is not empty.
By [GK87], given two primitive simple branched coverings, sayp:Σ−→C/Γandq:Σ−→C/Γof the
same degreed≥2, there exists a homeomorphismh:Σ−→Σand a homeomorphismk:C/Γ−→C/Γ

===== PAGE 51 =====
51
e1,1
e1,2
e2,1
e2,2
⟲
Rotate by an
angleπ
Figure13. Realisation of a translation surface inH 3( 1,1,1,1 ) with discrete period
character. The picture shows the torus and the resulting surface of genus three. In this
perspective, the torus and the resulting genus three surface (not depicted) are invariant
with respect to a rotation of angleπ. This rotation swaps the two sheets of the covering.
isotopic to the identity such thatk◦p=q◦h. Since every representationχ∈DR(d) arises as the
period character of some translation surface inH g( 1,...,1 )∩B(d) 3, then for every pair of discrete
representations, sayχ 1, χ2∈DR(d), there exists a homeomorphismh:Σ−→Σsuch thatχ 2 =χ 1◦h∗.
Letµ=(m 1,...,m k ) be any signature andsupposethere is a representationχ∈DR(d) arising as the
period character of some translation surface inH g(µ)∩B(d). Then, there exists a branched covering
mapf:Σ→C/Γof degreedwithkramification points of ordersm 1,...,m k. Leth:Σ−→Σbe any
orientation-preserving homeomorphism, then the mappingf◦h:Σ−→C/Γis a branched covering such
that Per(f◦h)=χ◦h ∗. As a consequence, every representationχ∈DR(d) arises as the period
character of some translation surface inH g(µ)∩B(d). At this point, it remains to show that at least
one representation can be realised. This is what is shown in the next steps.
6.7.2.3.Discrete representations: minimal strata. Letχ∈H 1(Σ,C) be a discrete representation. The
authors in [BJJP22] showed in the first place thatχis realisable in the strata with signatures (2g−2)
and (g−1,g−1), provided that deg(χ)≥d, whered=2g−2 ord=g−1 respectively. If P is a
fundamental domain forC/Γ,e.g.the unit square, the realisation amounts to pick a collection of deg(χ)
copies of P and then finding an appropriate pairing via translations, see Definition 2.4, to realise the
3There is no circularity in the argument; indeed, this is guaranteed by Haupt’s theorem by using the construction shown in
Figure 10.

===== PAGE 52 =====
52
desired translation surface. A pairing via translations is far from unique, and different ones may well
produce translation surfaces in different connected components of the same stratum. Recall that, by
the Kontsevich–Zorich classification of components of strata see §5.5.6, both strataH g( 2g−2 ) and
Hg(g−1,g−1 ) are non-connected and distinguished by topological invariants such as spin parity
and hyperelliptic structure. The former has three connected components and the latter has two or three
connected components depending on the parity ofg. The authors showed that a discrete representationχ,
provided that deg(χ)≥d, can be realised in every component of the strata with signature (2g−2) or (g−
1,g−1) by determining explicit pairings via translations that yield a translation structure with prescribed
zeros and topological invariants. The following pictures show how the same amount of squares (more
generally parallelograms) can be used to realise homeomorphic surfaces with structures having a single
zero of maximal order but different topological invariants. See Figures 14, 15 and 16.
1
2 3
4 5
6 7
8 9
Figure14. Nine squares are used to realise a translation surface in the stratumH 5( 10 )
with odd hyperelliptic structure. Label the lowest square by 1, the topmost by 9, and
those in between sequentially. The pairing via translations, as in Definition 2.4, is given
by the permutationsσ h =(2 3)(4 5)(6 7)(8 9) andσ v =(1 2)(3 4)(5 6)(7 8). We may
notice that by rotating all squares by an angleπ, the labelling remains the same. As a
consequence, the resulting structure admits a hyperelliptic involution.
Remark6.9.We can observe that in Figures 14, 15 and 16 the square labelled with 9 can be replaced
with a rectangle of size 1×dfor everyd∈Z +.
6.7.2.4.Discrete representations: extending to all strata. In terms of branched coverings over the stan-
dard torus, that isT=C/Z⊕iZ, the second step can be summarised as follows. Letµ=(2g−2) or
µ=(g−1,g−1). For any connected componentKof a stratumH g(µ) and for each integerd>2g−2
ord>g−1 respectively, there exists a primitive branched coveringp:X→Tof Riemann surfaces of
degreedsuch that (X,p ∗(dz)) is a square-tiled surface inK. The final step is to extend the above claim
to all signatures.
Given a signatureµ=(m 1,...,m k), for any connected componentKofH g(µ)and for
every d>max{m i}, there exists a primitive branched covering map p:X−→Tof
Riemann surfaces of degree d such that(X,p ∗(dz))is a square-tiled surface inK.
In principle, if we require the existence of a branched covering map forsome d>max{m i}, then the
result immediately follows from the first step by breaking zeros. In fact, by using the first step, a discrete

===== PAGE 53 =====
53
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
Figure15. In this figure, nine squares are used to realise a translation surface in the
stratumH 5( 10 ) with even spin invariant. As before, label the lowest square with 1,
the topmost square with 9, and the ones in between sequentially as shown in Figure
14. Here, the labels are omitted to avoid confusion in the image. The pairing via trans-
lations, as in Definition 2.4, is given by the permutationsσ h =(2 3 4)(6 7)(8 9) and
σv =(1 2)(4 5 6)(7 8). The blue and purple lines, once the sides are glued, define a basis
in homology. The numbers next to these lines indicate the index of the curve in the
resulting surface, and by applying formula (5.22), one directly computes that it has even
spin structure.
representationχcan be realised in theH g( 2g−2 )∩B(d) for everyd>2g−2. Since breaking the
unique zero into zeros of lower orders does not alter the holonomy representations, see Remark 6.10, for
every signatureµ=(m 1,...,m k ) the representationχcan be realised inH g(µ). Therefore a different
argument is needed to cover the realisation in strataDR(d) when max{m i}<d≤2g−2.
Remark6.10 (Breaking a zero does not change the degree).We recall, for the reader’s convenience, that
by breaking a zero, a branched covering map is deformed into another branched covering map of the
same degree. This is essentially a consequence of Remark 5.28 above; see also Figure 8.
Remark6.11.Recall that a stratum does not have any hyperelliptic component unless the signature is of
the form (2g−2) or (g−1,g−1) and these cases have already been handled in the second step. Therefore
this step applies to signaturesµ=(m 1,...,m k) such thatk≥3 ork=2 andm 1 >m 2. Moreover, we
recall that a stratum has two connected components distinguished by the spin parity if and only if all
entries are even.
Letµ=(m 1,...,m k) be such thatm 1≥m 2≥···≥m k >0. The proof in this case is based on a purely
algorithmic process. Before describing the algorithm and its efficiency, it is necessary to mention the
tools used to implement it. These tools consist of two surgeries that modify a given branched covering
mapf: (X,ω)−→C/Γof degreedinto a new branched coveringg: (Y,ξ)−→C/Γof the same degree,
such that
⋆Yhas genus greater thanX, and
⋆ifωhas signature (m 1,...,m k), thenξhas signature (m 1,...,m k,m k+1) withm k+1 even, or with
signature (m1,...,m k,m k+1,m k+2) with bothm k+1 andm k+2 odd,

===== PAGE 54 =====
54
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
Figure16. Realisation of a translation surface in the stratumH 5( 10 ) with odd spin
parity. As before, the lowest square is labelled with 1, the topmost one with 9, and
the ones in between sequentially as shown in Figure 14. The pairing via translations is
now given by the permutationsσ h =(2 3 4)(6 7 8) andσ v =(1 2)(4 5 6)(8 9). The blue
and purple lines, once the sides are glued, define a basis of homology and the numbers
next to these lines indicate the index of the curve in the resulting surface. By applying
formula (5.22), one directly computes that it has odd spin structure.
where (X,ω)∈H g(µ). Notice that (X,ω) has genusg≥2 sinceµis a partition of 2g−2>0 (allm i’s
are strictly positive).
Remark6.12.Observe thatd≥2 because a branched covering map of degree one is a homeomorphism
and two surfaces are homeomorphic if and only if they have the same genus.
These surgeries consist of slitting (X,ω) along a finite collection of segments and then gluing them with
some care to ensure that the resulting structure (Y,ξ) has the desired signature and desired spin parity
(if well defined). More specifically, pick any segment, says⊂C/Γ, with no ramification value in its
interior (ramification values are allowed at the endpoints of the segment if needed). Such a segment is
a one-simplex, and it extends to a triangulationτof the torusC/Γ. By liftingτto a triangulation ofX,
we obtain a collectionPof Euclidean triangles along with a pairing via translations. The gist of the idea
is that the same collection of polygons yields different translation surfaces (with different signature and,
possibly, parity if well defined) by changing the pairing via translations. LetE=  e1,...,e d
	 be the set
of lifts ofs, wheredis the degree off. By fixing an orientation ons, every edgee i has a natural induced
orientation. We next slit all the edges inEand denote the bye +
i ande−
i the left and right side respectively.
See Figure 17.
The way the left and right sides of the edgese i∈Eare glued together determines the resulting surface.
One choice, the obvious one, realises (X,ω) by construction. Other choices yield different topological
surfaces. More precisely, every permutationσ∈S d yields a pairing mapp σ :E−→Ethat associates
with the edgee i the edgeeσ(i) . We define (Xσ,ωσ) the translation surface obtained by slitting the former
translation surface (X,ω) along the edges inEand glued according to the permutationσ, that ise +
i is
glued toe−
σ(i) . Notice thatσ=id gives back the original surface (X,ω).
In [BJJP22], the authors provide a precise recipe for choosing the segmentsinC/Γto lift to (X,ω) and
for choosing an appropriate permutationσ∈S d to obtain the desired differential. More precisely, they
provided a recipe to realise a differential with a single additional zero of even order, and a recipe to

===== PAGE 55 =====
55
ei e−
i
e+
i
Figure17. Comparison of an edgee i ∈Ebefore and after slitting. The picture on
the right does not show the orientation of the edges. However these agree with the
orientation of the edgee i on the left picture.
realise a differential with two additional zeros, both of odd order. By applying these surgeries iteratively
in a suitable way, it is possible to realise any signature. Moreover, in the case the starting signature has
only even entries,e.g.(2m 1,...,2m k), a spin structure is well defined. When performing the surgery that
introduces a zero of order 2m k+1, the resulting structure also has its own parity. Parity is preserved by
the surgery if and only ifm k+1 is even and thence reversed ifm k+1 is odd.
By using these surgeries, the constructive approach adopted by the Bainbridge–Johnson–Jude–Park pro-
vides a quasi-algorithmic method to realise a discrete representation within every stratum, systematically
handling parity and singularity types through a recursive sequence of surgeries and ad-hoc constructions.
Given a signatureµ=(m 1,...,m k) as above, in the casem i∈2Zfor everyi=1,...,k, an additional
parameterθis introduced for the algorithm. This is defined as
(6.19)θ=spin+δ,whereδ=
kX
i=1
mi
2 mod 2
wherespindenotes the desired spin parity andδwill count how many times the parity changes when
zeros of even order are added. In their work [BJJP22, §3.4], the authors provide an algorithm as follows.
Letχbe a discrete representation such that deg(χ)≥m 1 +1. Then:
1. If eachm i is an even integer, and if
1.k=1, thenm k =2g−2: realise a square-tiled surface inH g(2g−2) with prescribed spin
structure or hyperelliptic structure . Else
2.k=2 andm 1 =m 2 =g−1: realise a square-tiled surface inH g(g−1,g−1) with prescribed
spin structure or hyperelliptic structure. Else
3. If
i.θ=0 mod 2: realise a square-tiled surface in the componentKofH g(m 1 ) with
even parity, where 2g−2=m 1 and then to add zeros of orderm 2,m 3,...,m n. Else
ii.θ=1 mod 2: realise a square-tiled surface in the componentKofH g(m 1 ) with odd
parity, where 2g−2=m 1 and then to add zeros of orderm 2,m 3,...,m n.
2. otherwise,i.e.when somem i is odd, if
1.m 1 is even: realise a square-tiled surface in the componentKofH g(m 1 ) with odd parity
and apply both surgeries to the torus cover to add zeros of orderm 2,m 2,...,m n.
2.m 1 is odd: then some other zero, saym j, is odd – notice that odd zeros come in pairs. An ad-
hoc construction is used to realise a structure inH g(m 1,m j ) and both surgeries are applied
to add zeros of orderm i fori,1,j.

===== PAGE 56 =====
56
6.7.3.Realisation following Le Fils’ approach.This second approach is markedly different from the
first one. In his work [LF22], Le Fils relies on the study carried out by Kapovich in [Kap20] and hence
on the existence of a good basis as defined in §6.6.3. Even in this case it is necessary to distinguish two
cases depending on whether the representationχis discrete or non-discrete.
6.7.3.1.A surgery to realise handles. In §6.6.3, we provided a description of how to construct transla-
tion surfaces by gluing handles together along slits. Two handles (or surfaces in general) are cut along
segments of the same length such that (in local charts) they differ by a translation, in order to produce
a surface of higher genus,e.g.see Figure 9. Moreover, this is an iterative process. There is yet another
way to attach a handle, more precisely, to glue in a cylinder. Suppose we have a translation surface (X,ω)
and a parallelogram P={xµ 1 +yµ 2|x,y∈[0,1]}⊂C.Suppose further that on (X,ω) there is a segment
ssuch that, in local coordinates, it differs fromµ 1 by a translation.
CutXalongs. Topologically, the resulting surface has the same genus asXbut a boundary homeomor-
phic toS 1. Geometrically, the resulting surface has a piecewise geodesic boundary: more precisely, the
boundary consists of two segments of equal length separated by two points around which the angle is a
multiple of 2π. The parallelogram P is then glued in a natural way, as shown in Figure 18, and the result-
ing surface has one additional handle. Geometrically, we obtain a translation surface whose differential
has a zero of even order equal to the sum of the orders of the endpoints ofs.
a
b
a
b
Figure18. Slit construction with one handle. Edges with the same colour are glued
together.
6.7.3.2.Non-discrete representations. Letχbe a non-discrete representation. In §6.6.3 we have men-
tioned the existence of a basis, say{α i, βi}, in homology, such thatℑ

χ(α i )χ(β i )

>0 for every
i=1,...,g. In [LF22, Proposition 2.5], Le Fils showed that such a basis can be chosen so that the
followingadditionalconditions hold:
(A1) the parallelogram formed by the vectorsχ(α 1 ) andχ(β 1 ) contains in its interior a translate of a
rectangleR=I×J⊂Csuch that
(6.20)λ(I)≥2g·max
2≤i≤g
ℜ χ(α i ) andλ(J)≥2g·max
2≤i≤g
ℑ χ(α i ),
whereI,Jare open intervals inRandλdenotes the Lebesgue measure onR.
(A2) arg(χ(α i )),arg(χ(α j )) for every 2≤i<j≤g(see Figure 19 to understand why this condition
is useful).
Remark6.13 (How non-discreteness plays a role).The fact thatχis not a discrete representation is a
fundamental assumption, as the first property just listed above is not guaranteed for discrete represen-
tations. Showing the existence of such a good basis is highly non-trivial, as the argument in [LF22,

===== PAGE 57 =====
57
Proposition 2.5] relies on a deep result established by Calsamiglia-Deroin-Francaviglia [CDF14, Theo-
rem 1.5]4. As we shall see briefly, the gist of the idea is to pick a "home" parallelogram and glue the
additionalg−1 handles onto it. The process in itself is similar to that developed by Kapovich in §6.6.3,
but the handles are glued in a different way and the manner in which the additional handles are now
glued matters. Without delving too deeply into technical details, condition (A1) ensures the existence of
a good basis (in Kapovich’s sense for non-discrete representations) such that the absolute periods of the
αi’s, fori=2,...,g, are small enough to largely fit inside the home parallelogram on which we would
like to glue additional handles. To better understand this crucial point, we invite the reader to look at
Figure 9 once again. We may fix the left-most square as the home parallelogram and the blue slits can
be taken sufficiently short so that the remainingg−1 handles can be easily glued. In Le Fils’ approach,
handles are glued as in Figure 18 in a way similar, but not identical, to that of Figure 9. To make sure
all handles can be glued, we need to ensure that the absolute periods of theα i’s are sufficiently short
(by choosing a good set of generators). For discrete representations, we do not have this flexibility. In
fact, ifΓis a lattice, then the evaluation|·|:Γ−→RonΓ\{0}has a minimum (e.g. think of the case
Γ =Z[i]). Notice that such a minimum does not exist for non-discrete representations because there is
always a sequence converging to zero.
Let{α i,β i}1≤i≤g be a good basis for H 1(Σ,Z) that satisfies the additional conditions (1) and (2) above.
As in §6.6.3, each pair{χ(α i), χ(βi)}determines a fundamental parallelogram P i of some translation
structure on a torus, by Proposition 6.2. LetP={P 1,...,P g}be the collection of parallelograms thus
defined. It follows from §6.6.3 that these parallelograms can be glued along slits to realise a structure
in the principal stratumH g(1,...,1); this is Haupt’s theorem. We now summarise the process provided
by Le Fils in [LF22] to glue these parallelograms to realise higher-order zeros. The approach is rather
algorithmic in nature. In fact, the gist of the idea is to first realise structures in strata with even signature,
and then extend the construction to arbitrary strata by observing that zeros of odd order necessarily come
in pairs.
A translation surface in the stratum with signature (2m 1,2m 2,...,2m k) can be realised through an it-
erative process inksteps, starting from an arbitrary parallelogram in the collectionP. By gluing the
opposite sides of this parallelogram, one obtains a translation structure on a torus (this is step 0), and our
aim is to glue the remainingg−1 parallelograms in an appropriate way. LetP 1 denote the collection of
remaining polygons. At thei-th step,m i parallelograms are used, and we denote byP i+1 the collection
of the remaining polygons. Notice that the chain of setsP⊃P 1 ⊃P 2 ⊃ ··· ⊃Pk ⊃P k+1 =∅is
descending and terminates after exactlyksteps. At each step, the resulting surface has higher genus than
the previous one and supports a translation structure associated with an abelian differential that has one
additional zero.
We now proceed to the construction, see Figure 19 for a reference. At thei-th step, choose a regular point,
sayp i, of the surface obtained at the (i−1)-th step, and selectm i parallelograms, say Pi1,...,P i mi from
the collectionP i. Then one choosesm i segmentss i1,...,s i mi, each with endpoints at two regular points,
one of which isp i, and each one parallel to one side of the corresponding parallelogram P i j. Condition
(A2) ensures that no pair of segments overlap. The construction described above is then appliedmi times.
The resulting surface hasm i more handles than the previous one and supports a translation structure in
the stratumH gi(2m1,...,2m i), whereg i =m 1 +···+m i +1.Since 2m 1 +···+2m k =2g−2, the process
terminates precisely afterksteps, withP k+1 =∅and conditions (1) and (2) ensure that there is enough
room on the first parallelogram to perform these surgeries, see [LF22, §3.1].
A generic signature of the formµ=(2m 1,...,2m l,2m l+1+1,...,2m k +1) determines a signature with all
even entriesµ′ =(2m 1,...,2m l,2m l+1,...,2m k).Note thatk≡l(mod 2). One first realises a translation
4In his paper, Le Fils cites [CDF23, Theorem 8.1]. This numbering, however, refers to the arXiv version (V2) of [CDF23],
which was the latest version online at the time of Le Fils’ publication. Shortly after his paper was published, a new version
(V3) of [CDF23] was released, (in which the theorem is renumbered as Theorem 1.5).

===== PAGE 58 =====
58
four handles are glued here
to create a zero of order 8
three handles are glued here
to create a zero of order 6
two handles are glued here
to create a zero of order 4
Figure19. Realising a translation surface in the stratumH 10( 4,6,8 ) with non-discrete
period character. Condition (A2) ensures that we can realisedm i−pods of segments
along which we gluem i parallelograms as in Figure 18.
structure in the stratumH g′(µ′ ) as described above. In this case, the collectionP k+1 is no longer empty,
but it still contains k−l
2 parallelograms. These are then used to realise the odd-order zeros. The zeros
of order 2ml+1 +1,...,2m k +1 are grouped into pairs, and for each pair there exists a segment joining
the two zeros. A parallelogram from the collectionP k+1 is then glue along a segment parallel to the
one joining the two zeros in order to produce an additional handle. After k−l
2 such steps, the resulting
structure belongs to the stratumH g(µ). See Figure 20 for a reference.
6.7.3.3.Discrete representations. A discrete representation can be realised via an iterative process on
the length of the signature. To apply this procedure, however, a good basis as guaranteed by Kapovich
in [Kap20] is not sufficient. It is in fact necessary first to determine a homology basis with suitable
properties whose existence has been established in [LF22, Proposition 2.2]. More specifically, for every
discrete representationχthere exists a basis in homology such that
⋆ χ(α1 )=vol(χ) is a positive integer andχ(β 1 )=i.
⋆ χ(αi )=d, wheredcould be either one or two, for alli≥2 andχ(β i )=0.
With this choice of basis we are in the right position to apply the iterative process mentioned above. Let
µ=(m 1,...,m k) be a signature such thatm i≤m j fori<jandk≥2. Indeed, the realisation in the
minimal stratum is not covered by the process we are about to describe and requires anad hocargument,
which we shall present shortly.
Remark6.14.Along the way, Figures 21, 22 and 23 depict the various steps of the iterative process. For
typographical reasons, the imaginary axis has been rescaled by some appropriate factorλ >1 to make
the pictures easier to consult. Figure 24, instead, has been drawn with the right scale.
The process is as follows: LetRbe the rectangle of size vol(χ)×1, then:
1. Basic step: supposek=2, then
1. ifµ=(g−1,g−1 ), then considergsegmentss 1,...,s g so that two consecutive edges are
at distance one from each other. Slit and re-glue them as shown in Figure 21 to realise the
desired structure.

===== PAGE 59 =====
59
slit and glue these edges
to create two zeros of order one
slit and glue these edges to
create two odd-order zeros
greater than one
slit and glue these edges
to create two odd-order zeros
the order of one of which is greater than one
Figure20. Realising a translation surface in the stratumH 13( 1,1,1,5,7,9 ) with non-
discrete period character.
2. ifµ=(m 1,m 2 ), then takem 2−m 1 segments as in the step (1.1) and then make a slit of
length one joining the rightmost two ends of the last slits, as shown in Figure 22, and some
other slits obtained as translations by multiples of 2 of this one, which are glued in a cyclic
way to adjust the last conical angle.
2. Inductive step: supposek>2. In this caseµ=(m 1,m 2,...,m k). Then
1. slitRalongm 1 +1 segments as in the basic step (1.1) to realise a structure in the stratum
with signature (m1,m 1),
2. then makem 2−m 1 other parallel slits below, such that one of them touches one end of the
rightmost preceding slit, which we glue in a cyclic way. In doing so, we obtain a flat surface
with conical angles 2π(m1 +1), 2π(m 2 +1), and 2π(m 2−m 1 +1). Iterating this process, we
get a flat surface with angles 2π(m 1 +1),...,2π(m k−1 +1), and 2π(l+1), withl≤m k. If
l=m k we are done, see Figure 23. Otherwise
3. apply the step (1.2) to adjust the last conical angle, as shown in Figure 22.

===== PAGE 60 =====
60
s1 s2 s3 s4s4 s1 s2 s3
Figure21. Realising a discrete representation in the stratumH 4( 3,3 ). Slit blue seg-
ments and then re-glue the resulting edges with the same label.
s1 s2 s3 s4s4 s1 s2 s3
a
ab
b
Figure22. Realising a discrete representation in the stratumH 5( 3,5 ). Slit both blue
and red segments and then re-glue the resulting edges with the same label.
As already alluded to above, the minimal strata is not covered by the above algorithm. A different
construction is needed and it is shown in the figure below. We begin, as before, by considering the paral-
lelogram P associated withχ(α 1 ) andχ(β 1 ) inC, which provides complex charts on the corresponding
torus. We first make a horizontal slit of length one in P. Additional slits are then drawn along segments
that are translates of the first one byn=2,3,5,...,2g−3, see Figure 24. Slits with the same label are
identified. Since vol(χ)≥2g−1, there is always enough room to perform this construction.
6.7.3.4.Genus two case. The constructions described above rely on the existence of a “good” homology
basis, which is guaranteed by Kapovich in [Kap20] as soon asg≥3. In principle, the genus two case
remains uncovered. The techniques employed by Le Fils, however, extendmutatis mutandisto genus two
in the case of discrete representations, in particular, he shows the existence of a good basis in genus two
that allows the same construction to be applied. An ad-hoc argument is instead required for non-discrete
representations. To determine a good basis in this case, a direct approach is used. Le Fils shows that
given a representationχ, if there exists a basis in homology{α i,β i}such that
(6.21) 0<ℑ

χ(α 2 )χ(β 2 )

<
√
3
2 ℑ

χ(α 1 )χ(β 1 )


===== PAGE 61 =====
61
s1 s2 s3 s4s4 s1 s2 s3
s6s6s5 s5
a b c ab c
Figure23. Realising a discrete representation in the stratumH 8( 2,3,3,4 ). Slit blue
segments and then re-glue the resulting edges with the same label.
a
b
b
c
c
d
d
e
e
a
Figure24. Realising a discrete representation in the stratumH 5( 8 ). Slit blue segments
and then re-glue the resulting edges with the same label.
holds, thenχis the period character of a translation surface inH 2(1,1) and of a translation surface in
H2( 2 ). Once a homology basis is fixed and given a non-discrete representationχ 1, the proof proceeds
iteratively to show the existence of a representationχ2 such that the fixed basis is a good basis forχ2 and
there exists a homeomorphismh:Σ→Σsuch thatχ 2 =χ 1◦h∗. Sinceχ 2 can be realised in both strata,
the same must hold forχ 1.
6.8.Relative version of Haupt’s Theorem.A representationχencodes the so-called absolute periods,
that is, the periods of all closed curves on the surface. However, the representation also captures infor-
mation about the so-calledrelativeperiods. A relative period is defined as the evaluation of a differential
along a saddle connection. To account for these as well, one needs to consider relative homology. Every
pair (X,ω) determines a set∆as the locus of zeros of the differential, and a representation
(6.22)χ: H 1(Σ,∆,Z)−→C
in relative homology. As in (6.2), one may define arelative period mapas
(6.23) relPer(µ):ΩS g(µ)−→H 1  Σ,∆,C Hom

H1(Σ,∆,Z),C

,
that associates to every homologically marked translation surface its relative period character. There is
an obvious surjection abs: H 1  S g,Z,C −→H 1  S g,C  which may be regarded as a forgetful map.
Convention.It will be useful to adopt the following terminology. Letχ: H 1(Σ,∆,Z)−→Cbe a
relative period representation. Its absolute part, denoted byχ a, is defined as the restriction ofχto the
absolute homology H1(Σ,Z).
The composition map abs◦relPer(µ) thus yields an association whose image is the set of all period
representations that arise as the absolute part of some relative period representationχ. In principle, the
following inclusion holds: Im  abs◦relPer(µ) ⊆Im   Per.

===== PAGE 62 =====
62
Remark6.15.According to Remark 5.4, the moduli spaceH g(µ) is locally modelled on the relative
homology group H1(Σ,∆,C). More precisely, for every translation surface (X,ω)∈H g(µ) there exists
an open setU (X,ω) and a biholomorphismφ:U (X,ω) −→φ(U (X,ω) )⊆H 1(Σ,∆,C). By the analytic
continuation property,φextends to a multivalued map φ:H g(µ)−→H 1(Σ,∆,C). The relPer(µ) map
in (6.23) is the lift of φon the spaceΩS g(µ), the smallest covering ofH g(µ) on which the lift ofφis a
genuine map. In [Fil24], Filip defines theDeveloping map
(6.24) Dev µ : fHg(µ)−→H 1(Σ,∆,C),
as the lift ofφto the the universal cover of the stratumH g(µ). It is equivariant with respect to a
representation
(6.25)ρ µ :π orb
1

Hg(µ),(X,ω)

−→PMod g,k
where PModg,k denotes the pure mapping class group, that is the group of homotopy classes of diffeo-
morphisms ofXthat preserves∆pointwise. We also observe that this terminology is not casual; in fact,
by adopting the language of geometric structures,H g(µ) carries a geometric structure locally modelled
on the vector space H1(Σ,∆,C) for which   Devµ, ρµ
 is the developing-holonomy pair.
In [Fil24, Question 3.1.15], Filip asked to determine the image of the Developing map Dev µ. This is
equivalent to determine the image of the relPer(µ) as in (6.23). In fact, since the Torelli subgroupI g,k5
acts trivially in homology, it follows that Devµ and relPer(µ) have the same image. Recent independent
works by Chen–Faraco [CF25] and Le Fils in [LF25] have shown that
Theorem 6.16( Chen-Faraco, Le Fils ).
Im  abs◦relPer(µ)  =Im   Per(µ) 
by providing a relative refinement of Haupt’s theorem, thereby giving a complete answer to the aforemen-
tioned question posed by Filip. We may notice that, in principle, Im   abs◦relPer(µ) ⊆Im   Per(µ) .
Although it may not be surprising that every non-discrete absolute period representation arises as the
absolute part of some relative period representation, in principle, it is not clear whether other obstruc-
tions arise for relative period representations with discrete absolute period representation. To understand
better this point, we need to make a brief digression into Hurwitz realisation problem in §6.8.1 and then
explain how it is related to Haupt’s theorem in §6.8.2.
6.8.1.Hurwitz realisation problem.Letf:Σ−→Sbe a degreedbranched covering of surfaces. For
everyp∈Sthere is a partitionλ(p)=  m1 +1,m 2 +1,...,m r +1  ofdsuch that, over an appropriate
neighbourhood ofp, the covering mapfis equivalent to a map
(6.26)ϕ:{1,...,r}×C−→C,whereϕ(i,z)=z mi+1,
andpcorrespond to 0∈C, see [EKS84]. Ifλ(p) is the trivial partition  1,1,...,1  for everyp∈S,
thenfis a genuine covering map. Otherwise, the set of points ofSfor whichλ(p) is not trivial forms
thebranched setB(f) off. The collectionD(f)= λ(p)|p∈B(f) 	 is calledbranching datum,
where repetitions are allowed. Sincefis a branched covering map, it is subject to the Riemann–Hurwitz
theorem. In our notation
(6.27) 2g−2=d( 2h−2 )+
X
p∈B(f)
X
i∈λ(p)
mi,
wheregandhdenote the genus ofΣandSrespectively. The branching datumD(f) can be seen as an
algebraic datumdetermined by the branched covering map that satisfies the Riemann–Hurwitz identity.
5This is the subgroup of PModg,k that fixes every class in absolute homology.

===== PAGE 63 =====
63
Hurwitz realisation problem: Given two topological surfacesΣandS, a positive inte-
gerd, a finite setB={p 1,...,p n}⊂Sand an algebraic datumD= λ(p)|p∈B 	,
i.e.a collection of partitions ofdthat satisfies (6.27), determine whether there exists a
branched covering mapf:Σ−→Ssuch thatD(f)=D.
In [EKS84], Edmonds–Kulkarni–Stong show that every algebraic data is realisable as the branching
datum of some branched coverf:Σ−→S, providedh≥1. A branched covering mapf:Σ−→S
is said to beprimitiveif the mapf ∗ between fundamental groups is surjective. Two decades later, in
their works [BGKZ03] and [BGKZ04], Bogatyi–Gonçalves–Kudryavtseva–Zieschang have strengthened
Edmonds–Kulkarni–Stong’s result by showing that an algebraic datumDcan be realised by a primitive
branched covering map providedh≥1.
We now reconnect the Hurwitz realisation problem with Haupt’s theorem. In §6.6 we have seen that
every discrete representationχof degreed≥2 is uniquely determined (up to homotopy) by a branched
covering mapf:Σ−→Twith algebraic branching datumD(f). The leading question here is
How much information ofD(f)does the representationχencode?
It is a consequence of Haupt’s theorem in §6.6 that a discrete representationχencodes very little infor-
mation. In fact, a representationχencodesonlythe degree of the map inducing it. From the point of
view of coverings, a representation in relative homology with discrete absolute period part encodes much
more information. It encodes the degreedof the branched covering and the cardinality of the branched
set (see §6.8.2). A branching datum is specified once a partition ofdis prescribed for every point of the
branching set. The key point is that an algebraic datumDdetermines a well defined a signatureµ, that is,
a partition of 2g−2 (see formula (6.27); ifh=1, then the local degrees determine a partition of 2g−2).
Conversely, from a given signature one can always extract a branching datum, although it need not be
unique, see Example 5. We discuss this in more detail in the following section.
6.8.2.From relative representations to branching datum.We now show how a discrete relative repre-
sentation yields a well defined branching datum and then state the relative version of the Haupt theorem.
Letχ∈H 1(Σ,∆,C) be a representation with discrete absolute period partχ a. Without loss of generality
we may assume that Im(χ a )= Γ =Z⊕iZ. Decompose∆ ={z 1,...,z k}into maximum disjoint subsets,
say∆ 1,...,∆ ℓ, such that for anyγjoining a pair of zerosz i1,z i2∈∆ i the imageχ(γ)∈Γ. Thenχarises
as the period character of some pair (X,ω) of typeµ=(m 1,...,m k) if and only if there exists a primitive
branched covering mapπ:X−→C/Γof degreed≥vol(χ) such thatπhasℓramification points, say
y1,...,y ℓ ∈C/Γ, and over eachy i the ramification points are the zeros in∆ i with ramification orders
given by the zero orders.
Letµ⊢ =(µ 1;...;µ ℓ ) be a partition of a given signatureµintoℓdisjoint subsets, where eachµ i records
the orders of the zeros in∆ i. Let|µ i|be the sum of the entries ofµ i and|∆ i|be the cardinality of the
subset. Define
(6.28) m(χ, µ ⊢ )=max
1≤i≤ℓ
n
|µ i|+|∆ i|
o
.
As a consequence, by considering the degree ofπ, the above description implies that the following
condition is necessary for a period characterχto be realisable:
deg(π)=vol(χ a )≥m(χ, µ ⊢ )=max
1≤i≤ℓ

X
z j∈∆i
(m j +1)
.(6.29)
Theorem 6.17.Letχ∈H 1(Σ,∆,C)andK⊂H g(m 1,...,m k )be a connected component of a stratum
of abelian differentials. There exists(X,ω)∈Kwith period mapχif and only if the following conditions
hold:
(1)vol(χ a )>0,

===== PAGE 64 =====
64
(2) ifIm(χ)is a lattice andµ ⊢ is a partition ofµintoℓ+1disjoint subsets, then
(6.30) vol(χ)≥max
1≤i≤ℓ

X
z j∈∆i
(m j +1)
 Area(C/Λ),
where∆ 1,...,∆ ℓ is the partition of∆determined byχ.
One may easily notice that the following chain of inequalities holds
2≤max
1≤i≤ℓ
(m j +1 )≤max
1≤i≤ℓ

X
z j∈∆i
(m j +1)
.(6.31)
In the first case the equality holds ifm i =1 and the second equality holds if different zeros project to
different ramification values. In fact, the last condition reflects the fact that for a branched covering to
exist the total degree must be at least the maximum of the local degrees of the branched covering around
zeros projecting to the same ramification value on the torus, see Figure 25.
×
zeros of order 1
Branched covering map of degree 4
with a two ramification point of order one
× ×
zeros of order 1
Branched covering map of degree 2
with a two ramification point of order one
Figure25. Realisation of a discrete representationχof a genus two surface in the stra-
tumH 2(1,1). The figure shows the branched covering induced by the developing map.
If the degree ofχ a is two or three, then it does not arise as the period character of a
translation surface whose zeroes project to the same point of the target torus. Compare
with Figure 11.
In both cases, the approaches adopted by Le Fils and Chen–Faraco are constructive and the representa-
tions are realised by explicit translation surfaces with prescribed period characters. We shall not sum-
marise the proofs here. In fact, despite the fact that all constructions are news, the gist of the idea and
techniques used rely on the earlier works [Kap20], [LF22] and [BJJP22].
Example5 (Same signature, different branching dataD).Letµ=( 1,2,2,3 ) be a signature of abelian
differentials on a surface of genus 5. Letχ∈H 1(Σ,∆,C) be a representation whose absolute period part
has volume 7, where∆⊂Σis a finite set of four distinct points. Suppose thatχyields a decomposition
of∆into two disjoint subsets, say∆ 1 and∆ 2, each of which of cardinality two. We ask in how many
and in which ways a branching datumDcan be prescribed. In other words, we ask in how many and
in which ways one can prescribe the local degrees of the covering that we wish to realise. We consider
the multi-set{1,2,2,3}and list all its partitions into two subsets of cardinality two (the order of the pairs
being irrelevant). There are two possibilities given byµ ⊢
1 ={(1,2),(2,3)}andµ ⊢
2 ={(1,3),(2,2)}. A
direct computation shows that m(χ, µ⊢
1 )=7 and that m(χ, µ ⊢
2 )=6. In both cases, vol(χ a )≥m(χ, µ ⊢
i )
and henceχcan be realised in the stratumH 5(µ). By fixing the first partition ofµ, the developing map of
the resulting translation surface yields a branched coveringf 1 :Σ−→C/Γwith two ramification values,

===== PAGE 65 =====
65
× ×
Branched covering mapfof degree 7
with a two ramification point
D(f)=  (1,1,2,3),(3,4) 	
2
3
2
1
0
0
C/Γ
Σ
× ×
Branched covering mapfof degree 7
with a two ramification point
D(f)=  (1,2,4),(1,3,3) 	
0
1
3
2
2
0
C/Γ
Σ
Figure26. Branched coverings of degree 7 associated with different branching data.
The orange labels denote the order of zeros once the translation structure onC/Γis
pulled-back.
sayq 1,q 2, so that∆ i =f −1
1 (q i ) and branching dataD 1 =  (1,1,2,3),(3,4) 	.6 In the same fashion, by
fixing the second partition ofµ, the developing map of the resulting translation surface yields a branched
coveringf 2 :Σ−→C/Γwith two ramification values and branching dataD 2 =  (1,2,4),(1,3,3) 	. See
Figure 26.
6.9.Isoperiodic foliations.Haupt’s theorem, as well as its subsequent refinements, provide only a com-
plete description of the image of the period map. In other words, we know when a representation can be
realised as a period character, but, in principle, the resulting structure may not be unique. In this respect,
the case of tori is not very interesting, since the fibre over the period map is a single point. Things be-
come truly interesting in genus at leastg≥2. Translation structures are flexible in the sense that they
6Recall that the order of a zero is one less the local degree,i.e. d i =m i +1.

===== PAGE 66 =====
66
can be deformed while preserving the absolute periods. The fibre over the holonomy therefore gives a
subset ofΩS g called theisoperiodic foliation. It is also known as theabsolute period foliationor the
kernel foliation. Although the terminology is not unique,isoperiodic foliationis commonly used.
6.9.1.Connectedness of fibres.A leading question is whether a fibre over a representation is connected.
Connectedness means that two structures may be deformed one into another while preserving the abso-
lute periods throughout the deformation. When the absolute periods are preserved, deformations within
an isoperiodic leaf may be carried out by varying the relative periods, and this can be achieved through
processes such as breaking zeros or moving branch points, as described in §5.7.1.
Recall that with any period characterχ, one can associate a numerical invariant, called thedegree, defined
as the integer given by the ratio vol(χ)/area(C/Λ) if the image is a lattice, see (6.13). If the image is not
a lattice we set deg(χ)=∞. A deep result due to Calsamiglia–Deroin–Francaviglia says that the fibre
over a representation of degree at least three is connected in the principal stratumH g(1,...,1). More
precisely,
Theorem 6.18(Calsamiglia–Deroin–Francaviglia, [CDF23]).For g≥2, the fibres of the period map
Perover points of degree at least three are connected.
The strategy these authors adopt is particularly interesting and an outline of the proof is as follows:
1. They analyse the isoperiodic degenerations of abelian differentials towards abelian differentials
on stable nodal curves and show that it is always possible to find such degenerations.
2. They define a bordification of an isoperiodic leaf by adding nodal differentials arising as limits
of degenerations, as in step 1. This bordification is naturally stratified by the number of nodes of
the underlying curves.
3. They show that bordifications are connected and that the connectedness of the fibre is equivalent
to that of its bordification.
As for representations of degree two, the situation is quite different since connectedness also depends
on the genus. Forg=2,3, the fact that the fibres of the period map Per over points of primitive de-
gree two are connected was already shown in an earlier work by McMullen; see [McM14]. Forg≥5,
Calsamiglia–Deroin–Francaviglia established the converse in [CDF23], showing that the fibres over rep-
resentations of degree two are disconnected. It is currently unclear whether, forg=4, the representations
of degree two have connected fibres, although the authors express a favourable opinion in this direction.
An even earlier contribution to the field was provided by Schmoll in [Sch05], based on prior work with
Eskin and Masur in [EMS03]. In [Sch05, Theorem 2], Schmoll shows that in genusg=2, the fibres,
denoted byF d, over discrete representations of degreedare connected. The same result was previously
established by Fulton in [Ful69]; however, Schmoll independently recovers this theorem, by employing a
different methodological framework. These fibres enjoy several desirable properties: they are topological
surfaces and naturally come with a coveringπ F over the standard torusC/Γ, whereΓis the standard
lattice.F d carries a natural translation structure determined byω d =π∗
Fdz, the pull-back of the standard
differentialdzvia the covering projectionπ F. More specifically, (Fd,ω d) is a square-tiled surface whose
conical singularities correspond to translation surfaces in the minimal stratumH2( 2 ) arising as branched
coverings of degreedof the standard torus. Interestingly, the cardinality of the set Z(ω d ) of zeros ofω d
inF d has been explicitly computed:
(6.32) | Z(ω d )| = 3
8 d2(d−2 )
Y
p|d
 
1− 1
p2
!
,
see the Remark after Lemma 4.11 in [EMS03] and [Sch05, Formula (3)].

===== PAGE 67 =====
67
6.9.2.Ergodicity.The preimages of the map Per as in (6.2) define a stratification of the spaceΩS g into
isoperiodic leaves. This foliation has dimension 2g−3 and is also algebraic: its leaves are solutions to
certain systems of algebraic equations with respect to the Deligne–Mumford algebraic structure on the
moduli space. The covering projectionπ:ΩS g−→ΩM g is Sp(2g,Z)-equivariant, and since the leaves
are invariant under the action of Sp(2g,Z), an induced foliation is well defined on the moduli space of
translation structuresΩM g. A central problem is to determine the closures of the leaves.
Theorem 6.19(Calsamiglia-Deroin-Francaviglia, [CDF23]).Let g≥3and(X,ω)∈ΩM g be a transla-
tion surface with period characterχnot of degree two with volumevol(χ). LetΛdenote the closure of
the image of its periods. Then the closure of the isoperiodic leaf passing through(X,ω), up to the action
ofGL(2,R), is:
1 IfΛis discrete: the space consisting of genus g primitive branched coverings over(C/Λ,dz)of
volumevol(χ).
2 IfΛ =R+iZ: the set of abelian differentials with periods contained inΛ, with primitive
imaginary part, and with volumevol(χ).
3 IfΛ =C: the subset ofΩM g consisting of abelian differentials of volumevol(χ).
The same result holds even forg=2 with an additional item in the list above, see [CDF23] and [McM14]
for more details. As a direct consequence, the isoperiodic foliation is ergodic where, here, ergodicity
means that a measurable union of leaves has either zero Lebesgue measure or full Lebesgue measure. In
[Ham18a], the ergodicity of the isoperiodic foliation was proved by Hamenstädt with a different methods.
Theorem 6.20(Calsamiglia-Deroin-Francaviglia, Hamenstädt).The absolute period foliation of the
principal stratum is ergodic in every genus g≥2.
6.10.Isoperiodic foliations on strata.Every fibre of the period map (6.2) naturally restricts to each
stratum, thus defining an isoperiodic foliation on strata. Also in this case, the main questions concern the
connectedness of the fibres and whether the isoperiodic foliation is ergodic or not.
6.10.1.Fake octagons.The simplest case, yet less trivial than one might expect, is given by the isoperi-
odic foliation in the minimal strata. Recall that the minimal stratum consists precisely of those translation
structures with a single conical point; since there are no relative periods, its dimension is 2g. The isoperi-
odic foliation in this stratum forms a subspace consisting of isolated points: no infinitesimal deformation
of the structure yields a different structure. In other words, applying an infinitesimal movements of points
(only one in this case) to a structure in the minimal stratum results in a structure whose developing map
differs from the original by a translation, hence the structures are equivalent and no deformation happens.
This phenomenon was already shown by McMullen in [McM14], where he defined the so-called "fake
pentagons". A unit-area pentagon appropriately glued to a rotated copy of itself byπproduces an oc-
tagon with pairwise parallel sides that, when properly glued, determines a genus-two translation surface
in the minimal stratum. McMullen, in [McM14], showed that by suitably deforming the pentagon into
a fake pentagon, and gluing it to a rotated-by-πof itself, one obtains a genus-two translation surface in
the minimal stratum with the same periods as the initial one but which is not isomorphic to it. The same
procedure actually produces infinitely many such translation surfaces; see [McM07, §10]. More recently,
Dobrilla–Francaviglia in [DF21] provided an alternative proof of the existence of these structures, which
they called "fake octagons". Their proof is more down-to-earth and concrete, as it uses an explicit point
move that, when iterated, produces pairwise non-isomorphic structures.
6.10.2.Ergodicity.Chaika and Weiss have recently provided in [CW24] a new proof of the ergodicity of
the isoperiodic foliation on any connected component of any stratum. Their approach is built upon recent
advances in the ongoing research programme led by Eskin, Brown, Filip, Rodriguez–Hertz, and others,
which aims to generalise the celebrated "Magic Wand Theorem” of Eskin–Mirzakhani, see [EM18].

===== PAGE 68 =====
68
6.10.3.Connectedness of the fibres in strata.The restriction of the isoperiodic foliation to a generic
stratum is generally not connected. A first example of this phenomenon was observed in §6.10.1 in the
case of minimal strata. In [Win21], Winsor provided a number of remarkable results that led to a better
understanding of the fibres of the period map on a specific stratum. In some cases, the fibre turns out
to be connected, while in others, it is highly disconnected. Among the several results shown by Winsor,
one that contrasts with those in [CDF23] is the following:
Theorem 6.21(Winsor).Fix g≥3, and letKbe a component of a stratumH g(µ)with|µ|>1, such
thatKis a spin component or a hyperelliptic component. For any representationχ∈H 1(Σ,C)with
positive volume such thatIm(χ)Z 2g, the fibrePer−1
µ (χ)is disconnected.
6.11.Further developments.Following the extensive study of holomorphic differentials on Riemann
surfaces, the investigation ofmeromorphic differentialshas also attracted considerable attention in recent
years. Given a meromorphic differentialωon a compact Riemann surfaceX∈M g, one obtains aperiod
representationχ: H 1(X\P(ω),Z)−→C,whereP(ω) denotes the set of poles ofω. It is not difficult
to show that every such representation arises as theperiod characterof a meromorphic differential on a
prescribed Riemann surface; see [CFG22]. In contrast to the holomorphic setting,there are no obstruc-
tionsto realizing a given representation in this broader context. More subtle, however, is the problem of
realizing a given representationwithin a specific stratum or connected componentof the moduli space.
These questions have been addressed in detail in [CFG22] and [CF24]. An alternative formulation, where
all singularities are located at punctures, is presented in [FG25]. Even in the meromorphic case, one can
define anabsolute period map, and the aforementioned works provide a complete description of its im-
age when restricted to a stratum or to one of its connected components. On the other hand, the structure
of theisoperiodic fibrationremains largely unexplored: only a few special cases have been studied so
far; see [CD21] and [FTZ23].
References
[AH24] J. Athreya and M. Howard.Translation Surfaces. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2024. University
Lecture Series.
[Arf41] C. Arf. Untersuchungen über quadratische Formen in Körpern der Charakteristik 2.J. Reine Angew. Math.,
183:148–167, 1941.
[Ati71] M. F. Atiyah. Riemann surfaces and spin structures.Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup., 4(4):47–62, 1971.
[BGKZ03] S. Bogatyi, D. L. Gonçalves, E. Kudryavtseva, and H. Zieschang. Realization of primitive branched coverings over
closed surfaces following the Hurwitz approach.Cent. Eur. J. Math., 1(2):184–197, 2003.
[BGKZ04] S. Bogatyi, D. L. Gonçalves, E. Kudryavtseva, and H. Zieschang. Realization of primitive branched coverings over
closed surfaces. InAdvances in topological quantum field theory, volume 179 ofNATO Sci. Ser. II Math. Phys.
Chem., pages 297–316. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 2004.
[BH99] M. R. Bridson and A. Haefliger.Metric spaces of non-positive curvature, volume 319 ofGrundlehren der mathe-
matischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.
[BJJP22] M. Bainbridge, C. Johnson, C. Judge, and I. Park. Haupt’s theorem for strata of abelian differentials.Israel J. Math.,
252(1):429–459, 2022.
[Bol87] O. Bolza. On binary sextics with linear transformations into themselves.Amer. J. Math., 10(1):47–70, 1887.
[Cal19] A. Calderon. Connected components of strata of abelian differentials over teichmüller space.Commentarii Mathe-
matici Helvetici, pages 1–40, 2019. Accepted for publication.
[CD21] G. Calsamiglia and B. Deroin. Isoperiodic meromorphic forms: two simple poles, 2021.
[CDF14] G. Calsamiglia, B. Deroin, and S. Francaviglia. Branched projective structures with Fuchsian holonomy.Geom.
Topol., 18(1):379–446, 2014.
[CDF23] G. Calsamiglia, B. Deroin, and S. Francaviglia. A transfer principle: from periods to isoperiodic foliations.Geom.
Funct. Anal., 33(1):57–169, 2023.
[CF24] D. Chen and G. Faraco. Period realization of meromorphic differentials with prescribed invariants.Forum of Math-
ematics, Sigma, 12:e90, 2024.
[CF25] D. Chen and G. Faraco. Relative period realization of holomorphic differentials with prescribed invariants. Preprint,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.21316, 2025.
[CFG22] S. Chenakkod, G. Faraco, and S. Gupta. Translation surfaces and periods of meromorphic differentials.Proc. Lond.
Math. Soc. (3), 124(4):478–557, 2022.

===== PAGE 69 =====
69
[Cha04] R. Chamanara. Affine automorphism groups of surfaces of infinite type. In William Abikoffand Andrew Haas,
editors,In the Tradition of Ahlfors and Bers, III, volume 355 ofContemporary Mathematics, pages 123–145.
American Mathematical Society, 2004.
[CS23a] A. Calderon and N. Salter. Framed mapping class groups and the monodromy of strata of abelian differentials.
Journal of the European Mathematical Society, 25(12):4719–4790, 2023.
[CS23b] A. Calderon and N. Salter. Higher spin mapping class groups and strata of abelian differentials over teichmüller
space.Algebraic&Geometric Topology, 23(1):185–235, 2023.
[CW24] J. Chaika and B. Weiss. On the ergodic theory of the real rel foliation.Forum of Mathematics, Pi, 12:e7, 2024.
[DF21] D. Dobrilla and S. Francaviglia. An easy (horizontal) walk through fake octagons.Expositiones Mathematicae,
39(2):228–238, 2021.
[Edm79] A. L. Edmonds. Deformation of maps to branched coverings in dimension two.Annals of Mathematics, 110(1):113–
125, July 1979.
[Ehr36] C. Ehresmann. Sur les espaces localement homogènes.L’Enseignement Mathématique, 35:317–333, 1936.
[EKS84] A. Edmonds, R. Kulkarni, and R. Stong. Realizability of branched coverings of surfaces.Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
282(2):773–790, 1984.
[EM18] A. Eskin and M. Mirzakhani. Invariant and stationary measures for the sl(2,R) action on moduli space.Publications
Mathématiques de l’IHÉS, 127:95–324, 2018.
[EMS03] A. Eskin, H. Masur, and M. Schmoll. Billiards in rectangles with barriers.Duke Math. J., 118(3):427–463, 2003.
[EMZ03] A. Eskin, H. Masur, and A. Zorich. Moduli spaces of abelian differentials: the principal boundary, counting prob-
lems, and the Siegel-Veech constants.Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci., (97):61–179, 2003.
[EO01] A. Eskin and A. Okounkov. Asymptotics of number of branched coverings of a torus and volumes of moduli spaces
of holomorphic differentials.Inventiones Mathematicae, 145(1):59–104, 2001.
[EOP08] A. Eskin, A. Okounkov, and R. Pandharipande. The theta characteristic of a branched covering.Advances in Math-
ematics, 217(3):873–888, 2008.
[Esk06] A. Eskin. Counting problems in moduli space. In Boris Hasselblatt and Anatole Katok, editors,Handbook of
Dynamical Systems, Vol. 1B, pages 581–595. Elsevier Science B.V ., Amsterdam, 2006.
[Far20] G. Faraco. Distances on the moduli space of complex projective structures.Expositiones Mathematicae, 38(4):407–
429, 2020.
[Far24] G. Faraco. On the automorphism groups of certain branched structures on surfaces.Milan Journal of Mathematics,
92:123–142, 2024.
[FG25] G. Faraco and S. Gupta. Monodromy of schwarzian equations with regular singularities.Geom. Topol., 29:549–618,
2025.
[Fil24] S. Filip. Translation surfaces: dynamics and Hodge theory.EMS Surv. Math. Sci., 11(1):63–151, 2024.
[FK92] H. M. Farkas and I. Kra.Riemann surfaces, volume 71 ofGraduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New
York, second edition, 1992.
[FM14] G. Forni and C. Matheus. Introduction to teichmüller theory and its applications to dynamics of interval exchange
transformations, flows on surfaces and billiards.Journal of Modern Dynamics, 8(3–4):271–436, 2014.
[For11] F. Forstneri ˇc.Stein manifolds and holomorphic mappings, volume 56. Springer, Heidelberg, 2011.
[FR21] S. Francaviglia and L. Ruffoni. Local deformations of branched projective structures: Schiffer variations and the
teichmüller map.Geometriae Dedicata, 214(1):21–48, 2021.
[FTZ23] G. Faraco, G. Tahar, and Y . Zhang. Isoperiodic foliation of the stratumH(1,1,−2). 2023.
[Ful69] W. Fulton. Hurwitz schemes and irreducibility of moduli of algebraic curves.Ann. of Math. (2), 90:542–575, 1969.
[GK87] D. Gabai and W. H. Kazez. The classification of maps of surfaces.Invent. Math., 90(2):219–242, 1987.
[GS87] B. Grünbaum and G. C. Shephard.Tilings and Patterns. W. H. Freeman and Company, New York, 1987.
[Ham18a] U. Hamenstädt. Ergodicity of the absolute period foliation.Israel J. Math., 225:661–680, 2018.
[Ham18b] U. Hamenstädt. Quotients of the orbifold fundamental group of strata of abelian differentials. 2018.
[Ham20] U. Hamenstädt. On the orbifold fundamental group of the odd component of the stratumh(2,...,2). 2020.
[Hau20] O. Haupt. Ein satz über die abelschen integrale.I. Gattung. Math. Zeit., 6(No. 3-4):219–237, 1920.
[HS06] H. Hubert and T. A. Schmidt. An introduction to veech surfaces. In B. Hasselblatt and A. Katok, editors,Handbook
of Dynamical Systems. Vol. 1B, pages 501–526. Elsevier B.V ., Amsterdam, 2006. Short version of the lecture notes
from the summer school at Luminy, 2003.https://www.math.uchicago.edu/~masur/hs.pdf.
[Hur93] A. Hurwitz. Ueber algebraische Gebilde mit eindeutigen Transformationen in sich.Math. Ann., 41(3):403–442,
1893.
[IT92] Y . Imayoshi and M. Taniguchi.An Introduction to Teichmüller Spaces. Springer-Verlag Tokyo. Springer-Verlag,
Tokyo, 2nd edition, 1992.
[Joh80] D. Johnson. Spin structures and quadratic forms on surfaces.J. London Math. Soc., 22(2):365–373, 1980.
[JW16] G. A. Jones and J. Wolfart.Dessins d’Enfants on Riemann Surfaces. Springer Monographs in Mathematics.
Springer, 2016.

===== PAGE 70 =====
70
[Kap20] M. Kapovich. Periods of abelian differentials and dynamics. InDynamics: topology and numbers, volume 744 of
Contemp. Math., pages 297–315. Amer. Math. Soc., [Providence], RI, [2020]©2020.
[KZ03] M. Kontsevich and A. Zorich. Connected components of the moduli spaces of abelian differentials with prescribed
singularities.Invent. Math., 153(3):632–678, 2003.
[Lan04] E. Lanneau. Hyperelliptic components of the moduli spaces of quadratic differentials with prescribed singularities.
Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici, 79(3):471–501, 2004.
[LF22] T. Le Fils. Periods of Abelian Differentials With Prescribed Singularities.International Mathematics Research
Notices, (8):5601–5616, 10 2022.
[LF25] T. Le Fils. Relative periods of abelian differentials in a prescribed stratum (2025). 2025.
[LM14] E. Looijenga and G. Mondello. The fine structure of the moduli space of abelian differentials in genus 3.Geometriae
Dedicata, 169:109–128, 2014.
[Mas82] H. Masur. Interval exchange transformations and measured foliations.Annals of Mathematics, 115(1):169–200,
1982.
[Mas92] H. Masur. Hausdorffdimension of the set of nonergodic foliations of a quadratic differential.Duke Mathematical
Journal, 66(3):387–442, 1992.
[Mas22] D. Massart. A short introduction to translation surfaces, Veech surfaces, and Teichmüller dynamics. InSurveys in
geometry I, pages 343–388. Springer, Cham, [2022]©2022.
[McM07] C. T. McMullen. Foliations of hilbert modular surfaces.Amer. J. Math., 129:183–215, 2007.
[McM14] C. T. McMullen. Moduli spaces of isoperiodic forms.Duke Math. J., 163(12):2271—2323, 2014.
[Mir95] R. Miranda.Algebraic Curves and Riemann Surfaces, volume 5 ofGraduate Studies in Mathematics. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1995.
[Möl09] M. Möller. Affine groups of flat surfaces. In A. Papadopoulos, editor,Handbook of Teichmüller Theory. Volume II,
pages 369–387. European Mathematical Society, Zürich, 2009.
[Mum71] D. Mumford. Theta characteristics of an algebraic curve.Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup., 4(4):181–192, 1971.
[MZ97] Kontsevich M. and A. Zorich. Lyapunov exponents and hodge theory. In J.-B. Zuber, editor,The Mathematical
Beauty of Physics, pages 318–332. World Scientific, 1997.
[Nag85] S. Nag. Schiffer variation of complex structure and coordinates for Teichmüller spaces.Proc. Indian Acad. Sci.
Math. Sci., 94(2-3):111–122, 1985.
[Nag88] S. Nag.The Complex Analytic Theory of Teichmüller Spaces. Canadian Mathematical Society Series of Mono-
graphs and Advanced Texts. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1988.
[Sch05] M. Schmoll. Spaces of elliptic differentials. InAlgebraic and topological dynamics, volume 385 ofContemp. Math.,
pages 303–320. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2005.
[SPWS17] J.-C. Schlage-Puchta and G. Weitze-Schmithüsen. Finite translation surfaces with maximal number of translations.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 217:1–15, 2017.
[Tan94] S. P. Tan. BranchedCP 1-structures on surfaces with prescribed real holonomy.Mathematische Annalen,
300(4):649–667, 1994.
[Thu97] W. P. Thurston.Three-dimensional Geometry and Topology, volume 1. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
1997.
[Tro86] M. Troyanov. Les surfaces euclidiennes à singularités coniques.L’Enseignement Mathématique, 32:79–94, 1986.
[Tro07] M. Troyanov. On the moduli space of singular euclidean surfaces. In Athanasios Papadopoulos, editor,Handbook of
Teichmüller Theory, Vol. I, volume 11 ofIRMA Lectures in Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, pages 507–540.
European Mathematical Society, 2007.
[Vee82] W. A. Veech. Gauss measures for transformations on the space of interval exchange maps.Annals of Mathematics,
115(1):201–242, 1982.
[Vee93] W. A. Veech. Flat surfaces.American Journal of Mathematics, 115(3):589–689, 1993.
[Waj99] B. Wajnryb. Artin groups and geometric monodromy.Invent. Math., 138:563–571, 1999.
[Win21] K. Winsor. Dynamics of the absolute period foliation of a stratum of holomorphic 1-forms, 2021.
[Wri15] A. Wright. Translation surfaces and their orbit closures: an introduction for a broad audience.EMS Surveys in
Mathematical Sciences, 2(1):63–108, 2015.
[Zim84] R. J. Zimmer.Ergodic theory and semisimple groups, volume 81 ofMonographs in Mathematics. Birkhäuser, 1984.
[Zor06] A. Zorich. Flat surfaces. In P. Cartier, B. Julia, P. Moussa, and P. Vanhove, editors,Frontiers in Number Theory,
Physics, and Geometry I, pages 439–586. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
(Gianluca Faraco) School ofMathematics, MonashUniversity, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
Email address:gianluca.faraco@monash.edu
