===== PAGE 1 =====
Modiﬁed Gravity and the Black Hole Mass Gap
Maria C. Straight, 1,∗ Jeremy Sakstein, 2,† and Eric J. Baxter 3,‡
1Department of Engineering and Physics, Whitworth University, 300 W. Hawthorne Rd., Spokane, WA 99251
2Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Hawai’i,
Watanabe Hall, 2505 Correa Road, Honolulu, HI, 96822, USA
3Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawai’i, 2680 Woodlawn Drive, Honolulu, HI 96822
(Dated: December 14, 2020)
We pioneer the black hole mass gap as a powerful new tool for constraining modiﬁed gravity
theories. These theories predict ﬁfth forces that alter the structure and evolution of population-III
stars, exacerbating the pair-instability. This results in the formation of lighter astrophysical black
holes and lowers both the upper and lower edges of the mass gap. These eﬀects are explored using
detailed numerical simulations to derive quantitative predictions that can be used as theoretical
inputs for Bayesian data analysis. We discuss detection strategies in light of current and upcoming
data as well as complications that may arise due to environmental screening. To demonstrate the
constraining power of the mass gap, we present a novel test of the strong equivalence principle where
we apply our results to an analysis of the ﬁrst ten LIGO/Virgo binary black hole merger events
to obtain a 7% bound on the relative diﬀerence between the gravitational constant experienced by
baryonic matter, and that experienced by black holes, ∆G/G. The recent GW190521 event resulting
from two black holes with masses in the canonical mass gap can be explained by modiﬁed gravity if
the event originated from an unscreened galaxy where the strength of gravity is either enhanced or
reduced by ∼ 30% relative to its strength in the solar system.
I. INTRODUCTION
The advent of gravitational wave astronomy has
opened a new window to the Universe and furnishes us
with new tools for testing the laws of nature. Indeed, the
observation of gravitational waves by the LIGO/Virgo
gravitational wave interferometers has already allowed
for consistency tests of general relativity (GR) on new
scales, and at extreme space-time curvatures [1–3]. The
majority of observations to date have been of merging
black holes. These are useful tools to test small scale
(ultra-violet) modiﬁcations of gravity (e.g. [4]) that could
modify the inspiral and merger dynamics but are less
useful for constraining long distance (infra-red) modiﬁ-
cations of gravity that could drive the acceleration of the
cosmic expansion (i.e. act as dark energy) [5–10] or re-
solve the Hubble tension [11–13]. The underlying reason
for this is that these theories typically introduce new light
degrees of freedom that couple to gravity, most commonly
scalars. Such theories are typically subject to power-
ful no-hair theorems precluding any modiﬁcations of the
black hole solutions [14–16] (see [17–21] for some notable
exceptions). The torrent of binary black hole mergers
(BBHMs) expected in the upcoming LIGO/Virgo data
release and beyond provides strong motivation for the
development of novel probes of infra-red modiﬁcations
of gravity that utilize such observations. In this work,
we explore one such probe: the black hole mass gap
(BHMG).
The BHMG refers to the predicted absence of astro-
∗ mstraight21@my.whitworth.edu
† sakstein@hawaii.edu
‡ ebax@hawaii.edu
physical black holes with masses in the range ∼ 50−
−120 M⊙ (there is some uncertainty due to environment
and stellar uncertainties). The origin of the BHMG is
the pair-instability [22–24]. The core temperatures and
densities of massive stars are suﬃcient for the thermal
production of electron-positron pairs from the plasma.
These act to destabilize the star by reducing the pres-
sure and causing a gravitational contraction. The re-
sultant increase in temperature can ignite oxygen explo-
sively. What happens next depends on the star’s mass.
Stars with initial helium core masses betweenM∼ 40–60
M⊙ (assuming metallicity Z = 10−5) experience a series
of nuclear ﬂashes that drive strong pulsations and cause
severe mass ejections referred to as a pulsational pair-
instability supernova (PPISN). These pulsations are not
energetic enough to disrupt the entire star and the star
ultimately returns to hydrostatic equilibrium before col-
lapsing to form a black hole. The resultant black hole is
signiﬁcantly less massive than the original star. For stars
with initial helium core masses between ∼ 60− 130 M⊙
(for metallicityZ = 10−5), the explosion is so violent that
the entire star becomes unbound and no black hole is left
behind. This process is referred to as a pair-instability
supernova (PISN). The heaviest black hole that can be
formed as a result of the competition between the PPISN
and the PISN deﬁnes the lower edge of the BHMG. At
higher masses ( M ∼ 120M⊙ for Z = 10−5) the PISN
is quenched because some of the energy in the contrac-
tion is utilized to photodisintegrate the heavy elements
instead of raising the temperature to ignite the oxygen,
and black holes can once again be formed after collapse
of the star. The black hole formed from the lightest star
that does not experience a PISN deﬁnes the upper edge
arXiv:2009.10716v2  [gr-qc]  10 Dec 2020

===== PAGE 2 =====
of the BHMG. 1
Current observations by LIGO provide tentative ev-
idence for the existence of a BHMG [27, 28], with fu-
ture upgrades to LIGO expected to improve upon these
constraints [29]. Using the ﬁrst four LIGO detections,
Fishbach and Holz [27] constrained the lower edge of the
BHMG to be at about 41 M ⊙, while the largest black
hole observed by LIGO/Virgo to date has a mass Mg =
50.2+16.2
−10.2 M⊙ [30] (consistent at ∼ 1σ with the inferred
gap location). As LIGO has upgraded the sensitivity
of its detectors and expects a signiﬁcant increase in the
number of detections in the coming O3 run and beyond,
now is an opportune time to consider how to use this up-
coming data to test new physics. Indeed, references [31]
and [32] have recently investigated the eﬀects of light par-
ticle emission on the black hole mass gap, with promising
results. LIGO/Virgo recently announced the detection of
a binary black hole merger event, GW190521, with com-
ponent massesm1 = 85+21
−14M⊙ andm2 = 66+17
−18M⊙, both
of which are located in the GR mass gap [33, 34]. We will
brieﬂy comment on this detection and the modiﬁed grav-
ity scenarios under which they could have formed.
The black holes detected by LIGO/Virgo may be in-
sensitive to long distance modiﬁcations of GR (because of
no-hair theorems), but their progenitors are not. Indeed,
a ubiquitous feature of theories of light scalars coupled
to gravity is screened ﬁfth forces [8, 9, 35], which can al-
ter the structure and evolution of stars [36–51]. Screen-
ing refers to the strong environmental-dependence of the
modiﬁcations of GR that is necessary for the theories
to simultaneously explain the large-scale mysteries such
as dark energy and the Hubble tension and satisfy solar
system and laboratory tests of gravity [8, 52, 53]. These
features make them leading science targets for upcoming
missions such as Euclid [54], and for this reason they will
be the focus of the work presented here.
Screening mechanisms fall into three categories. Thin-
shell screening such as the chameleon [55], symmetron
[56], and dilaton [57] mechanisms screen ﬁfth forces by
suppressing the scalar charge of individual objects so that
they do not respond to external ﬁfth forces. Kinetic
screening models such as Vainshtein screening [58, 59]
and K-mouﬂage [60] instead act to suppress the force
ﬁelds themselves. In a third class of theories, an interac-
tion between dark matter and baryons causes the value
of Newton’s constant to become dependent on the local
dark matter density [11], altering its values in regions
less dense than the solar neighborhood. Independent of
the speciﬁc mechanism, in an unscreened environment
the eﬀective value of the gravitational constant would be
1 We note that there is also evidence for a second black hole mass
gap in the range of 2 to 5 M⊙, between the maximum neutron
star mass and the lowest black hole mass (e.g. [25, 26]). We do
not consider the impact of modiﬁed gravity on this lower mass
gap. As we discuss in §V, the precise value of the lowest black
hole mass has a small impact on our results.
modiﬁed to
G =
(
1 + ∆G
GN
)
GN, (1)
where GN is the value of Newton’s constant measured
in the solar system [12] i.e. ∆ G = 0 corresponds to
screened environments. The screening nature is encap-
sulated because G is environment-dependent.2 This im-
plies that the progenitors of the black holes observed by
LIGO/Virgo may have evolved under a diﬀerent value
of G. The parameterization in equation (1) is exact for
DHOST theories [61–64], which are the leading candi-
date dark energy theories after some simpler ones were
excluded by multimessenger observations of merging neu-
tron stars (GW170817) [53, 65–67]. Similarly, the param-
eterization is exact for the dark-matter–baryon screening
mechanism [11], which can both account for dark en-
ergy [68] and resolve the Hubble tension [12, 13]. Other
screening mechanisms either have additional parameters
that control the eﬃciency of screening as a function
of the environmental variables, or ∆ G/GN is radially-
dependent throughout the star. In the latter case, one
should think of ∆G as an average over the object.
In this work we will be theory-agnostic and investigate
the eﬀects of changingG on the location of the black hole
mass gap. We postpone the more arduous task of corre-
lating each BBHM event with its environment for future
work, although we discuss potential detection strategies
in our conclusions. We numerically simulate the evolu-
tion of population-III stars from zero age helium burning
(ZAHB) to either core collapse or PISN, ﬁnding that in-
creasing G results in a stronger instability. The eﬀects
of this are twofold. First, the mass loss during pulsa-
tions is increased, resulting in lighter black holes being
formed. Second, lighter objects that would have resulted
in a PPISN instead experience a full PISN, removing
black holes from the distribution. Using current observa-
tions from LIGO, we set limits on departures of G from
GN, constraining ∆ G/GN to 7% precision. This proof
of principle analysis demonstrates the exciting potential
of the BHMG as a probe of modiﬁed gravity; as dis-
cussed in §V and Appendix §A, constraints are expected
to improve quickly with larger samples of BBHM events.
We assume throughout that modiﬁed gravity impacts the
progenitor stars of the BBH system, but that once the
black holes have formed, their subsequent interaction is
governed by GR i.e. ∆ G/GN = 0 for black holes; this
assumption is well motivated by the no-hair theorems,
as we discuss in §VI B, and is tantamount to assuming
that the waveforms are identical to GR, as are the in-
ferred black hole masses. For this reason, our bound
does not constitute a measurement of Newton’s constant
2 The manner of this dependence depends on the theory at hand.
See [12] for a discussion of how ∆ G/GN correlates with diﬀerent
astrophysical environments in diﬀerent theories.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
but rather a novel test of the strong equivalence princi-
ple between black holes and baryonic matter, which is a
unique feature of GR.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II we
provide an introduction to the black hole mass gap for
the beneﬁt of the unfamiliar reader and discuss the main
sources of uncertainty in its precise location. In sec-
tion III, we present our numerical methods for modeling
stellar evolution. We discuss the eﬀects of changing G
on individual stars, and on the location of the BHMG
from a grid of stars with diﬀerent masses in section IV.
In section V we present our statistical analysis of the
ﬁrst ten LIGO/Virgo binary black hole events, ﬁnding
a constraint on ∆G/GN. We conclude in section VI by
discussing possible detection strategies, potential compli-
cations due to environmental screening, and future work.
II. PHYSICS OF THE BLACK HOLE MASS
GAP
In this section we brieﬂy introduce the physics of the
BHMG and discuss various sources of uncertainties due
to environment, stellar modeling, and input physics.
We begin with the origin of the instability. The pair-
instability is due to the production of electron-positron
pairs from the thermal plasma once the core density and
temperature are suﬃciently high. The threshold photon
energy for producing such pairs is Eγγ = 2me, corre-
sponding to temperatures of 10 10K, but the onset of the
instability occurs for temperatures of order 8 .5× 108K.
The reason for this is the large number of photons present
in the stellar interior, which partially compensates for the
exponential suppression of the Bose-Einstein distribution
at high photon energies. The electron-positron pairs are
produced with non-relativistic velocities, which has the
eﬀect of lowering the equation of state (EOS), or ﬁrst
adiabatic index,
Γ1≡
(∂ logP
∂ logρ
)
s
. (2)
The stars are radiation dominated so in the absence of
pair-production the EOS is Γ 1≈ 4/3. This is the thresh-
old below which stars are unstable (see e.g. [69, 70]) and
the reduction due to pair-production therefore destabi-
lizes the star. In essence, the e+e− pairs contribute to
the density but not the pressure, so their production robs
the star of its pressure support, resulting in gravitational
contraction. As the star contracts, the resultant increase
in temperature and density does not raise the pressure
to counteract the contraction but instead causes an in-
crease in the production rate of e+e− pairs. The situa-
tion is only reversed when the temperature and density
are high enough to ignite oxygen explosively.
The instability region in the log 10(Tc)–log10(ρc) plane
is shown in Figure 1 along with some representative stel-
lar tracks. Its shape can be understood as follows. The
lower boundary corresponds to temperatures too low for
FIG. 1. The evolution of the central temperature versus
the central density of population-III stars with initial masses
Min = 28M⊙ (blue), 42M⊙ (magenta) and 67M⊙ (green) with
initial metallicity Z = 10−5. The gray region indicates the
area where the pair-instability occurs, and the black lines in-
dicate the onset of helium and carbon burning.
e+e− pairs to be produced in suﬃcient quantities to lower
the EOS below 4 /3. As the temperature increases, the
e+e− pairs are produced with higher energies, and the
upper edge corresponds to temperatures where they are
produced with relativistic velocities. In this case the
electron-positron EOS is Γ 1 ∼ 4/3 so the e+e− pairs
do contribute to the pressure and there is no instabil-
ity. The right hand edge corresponds to densities where
the gas pressure of the ions in the star is not negligible.
These are non-relativistic so have EOS Γ 1 ∼ 5/3 and
thus stabilize the star.
The ultimate fate of the star depends on its mass,
which determines the nature of oxygen ignition after the
initial contraction. Lower mass stars (e.g. the 28M ⊙
track in Fig. 1) miss the instability region entirely. In
this case, heavy element fusion to iron proceeds non-
explosively and the star ultimately undergoes core col-
lapse to form a black hole of mass similar to its initial
mass (minus a small amount of mass lost due to stel-
lar winds). Intermediate mass stars (e.g. the 42M ⊙
track in Fig. 1) graze the instability region and expe-
rience the contraction. After oxygen is ignited, the stars
undergo a series of pulsations (a pulsational pair insta-
bility supernova) where large amounts of mass are shed.
The star ultimately returns to hydrostatic equilibrium
and collapses to form a black hole far lighter than the
star’s initial mass. Heavier stars (e.g. the 67M ⊙ track
in Fig. 1) experience the full instability and the explo-
sive oxygen burning results in a thermonuclear explosion
that unbinds the entire star (a pair instability supernova)
and leaves no black hole remnant. In very massive stars,
the PISN is quenched because some of the energy in the
contraction is used to photodisintegrate heavy elements
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
FIG. 2. Various masses over the course of stellar evolution as
a function of the initial (ZAHB) mass for population-III stars
of initial metallicity Z⊙/10. Stars with the initial masses
shown by the blue dot-dashed line lose mass due to stellar
winds. The black dashed line shows the star masses at helium
depletion, and the gray dashed line shows the CO core masses
at helium depletion. The red dots show the ﬁnal black hole
masses formed for each star after more mass has been lost due
to pulsations. At higher masses, a PISN occurs and no black
hole is formed.
rather than to ignite oxygen. These stars do leave behind
black hole remnants. The black hole mass gap is the un-
populated region formed from the interplay of these pro-
cesses. The lower edge corresponds to the highest mass
black hole that can be formed before the PPISN acts to
signiﬁcantly reduce the mass of higher mass progenitor
stars (the turnover in Fig. 2). The upper edge corre-
sponds to the lowest mass black hole that is formed as a
result of the quenching of the PISN.
An example of the black hole mass distribution as a
function of initial (ZAHB) mass below the lower edge of
the BHMG is shown in Fig. 2. Its shape can be under-
stood as follows. During core helium burning, stars lose
mass to stellar winds. For stars that avoid the instability
region, this is the only source of mass loss so the ﬁnal
black hole mass is given by the mass at helium deple-
tion i.e. the mass remaining after wind-losses have termi-
nated. Stars that graze the instability region experience
further mass loss due to the PPISN and so form black
holes with masses MBH < MHD. As the initial mass is
increased and the pulsations become increasingly violent
the mass loss is signiﬁcant enough that the distribution
turns over and the black holes formed are lighter than
those formed from lighter progenitors. Eventually, the
stars undergo a PISN and no black holes are formed, cor-
responding to the steep fall to zero at high initial masses.
The precise location of the lower edge of the mass gap
is subject to several sources of uncertainty due to en-
vironment (metallicity, binarity), stellar modeling (wind
loss, rotation, mixing length, numerical resolution etc.),
and uncertainties on the input physics (nuclear reaction
rates, neutrino loss rates etc.). Reference [71] has stud-
ied these in detail (see also [72] for the case of nuclear
reaction rates, [73] for binarity, [74] for rotation, and [75]
for time-dependent convection). We summarize the most
signiﬁcant uncertainties below.
• Metallicity: The rate of wind loss is proportional
to Z 0.85 [76, 77] so more metal rich objects lose
more mass to stellar winds. This results in a spread
of∼ 3M⊙ [71] in the location of the lower edge.
Since we expect stars of all metallicities to exist
this is less of an uncertainty for us and more of
a feature, although it may become an important
systematic once one tries to correlate speciﬁc grav-
itational wave observations with their host galaxies.
For the purposes of this work, we are interested in a
universal lower edge (rather than an environment-
dependent one) so we will take Z = 10−5, which
corresponds to the highest possible lower edge due
to the minimum wind loss. The upper edge corre-
sponds to Z∼ 10−3, so we will take Z = Z⊙/10 =
0.00142 when studying the upper edge.
• Wind Loss: The wind loss prescription we use
(see section III) includes a free parameter η, which
is an overall scaling factor for the rate. Varying this
over the range 0.1≤η≤ 1.0 results in a variation
in the location of the lower edge of ∼ 3M⊙ [71].
We takeη = 0.1 corresponding to the ﬁducial value
assumed by reference [71].
• Nuclear reaction rates: Uncertainties in the nu-
clear reaction rates propagate into the ﬁnal black
hole mass. The reason for this is that the strength,
or even existence, of the PPISN is strongly depen-
dent on the ratio of carbon to oxygen at the end
of helium burning. A higher ratio of 12C/16O sup-
presses the PPISN (and PISN) [71]. There are two
competing rates that determine the 12C/16O ratio:
the triple-α process, which converts 4He to 12C,
and the 12C(α,γ )16O reaction, which converts 12C
to 16O. The latter is by far the most important
reaction. Using the most up to date rates [78],
the uncertainty in the location of the lower edge is
Mlower = 51+0
−4M⊙. In this work we will use mesa’s
default reaction rate in order to allow for a direct
comparison with previous works, so our lower edge
(assuming GR) lies at Mlower∼ 47M⊙, consistent
with the results of [71].
All other sources of uncertain input physics result in
changes of 1M⊙ or less in the location of the mass gap.
The upper edge is subject to similar uncertainties.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
III. STELLAR MODELING
We numerically simulate helium cores from the ZAHB
to either core collapse or PISN using the stellar structure
code mesa version 12778 [79–82], modiﬁed to change the
value of G for entire simulations.
Our procedure closely follows the one described in
[71, 73, 81] with one important exception during the
PPISN phase. Individual pulses during a PPISN cause
large fractions of the star’s mass to be removed at high
velocities, while the remaining material returns to hy-
drostatic equilibrium with a lower central temperature
than before the pulse. mesa cannot compute the long-
term evolution of both the ejected mass and the bound
core, so the unbound layers are removed from the model
and a new stellar model is relaxed using the procedure
described in Appendix B of [81] such that it has the
same mass, entropy, and composition proﬁles as the ma-
terial that was bound in the hydrodynamical model. Ap-
pendix C of [73] explores how well the relaxation proce-
dure reproduces the pre-relaxation model. As a starting
point for the relaxation, MESA calls a pre-made zero
age main sequence (ZAMS) model. The choice of initial
model is arbitrary and the ﬁnal state of the star post-
relaxation is independent of the initial conditions. The
ZAMS models come pre-packaged with MESA and, as
such, assume GR so they are not in hydrostatic equilib-
rium for diﬀerent values ofG. This causes the relaxation
process to fail. To remedy this, we have computed new
ZAMS models for the values of G we investigate in this
work and call these during the relaxation process. All
of the ﬁles necessary to reproduce our results are avail-
able at https://zenodo.org/record/4037390, includ-
ing our routines to generate the modiﬁed ZAMS models.
We use the following prescriptions for stellar processes,
which correspond to the ﬁducial choices of references
[71, 73]. Mass loss due to stellar winds uses the prescrip-
tion of [77] and is proportional to ( Z/Z⊙)0.85 [76], im-
plying higher metallicity stars experience a greater mass
loss. The free parameter η that scales the overall mass
loss rate is taken to beη = 0.1 corresponding to the ﬁdu-
cial value of [71]. The lower edge of the BHMG in GR is
due to stars with metallicityZ = 10−5 so we use the same
metallicity for our simulations of the lower edge. The lo-
cation of the upper edge corresponds to higher metallicity
stars so we take Z = Z⊙/10 = 0 .00142 when simulat-
ing upper edge progenitors. Convection is modeled using
mixing length theory (MLT) [69] with eﬃciency parame-
terαMLT = 2.0 and semi-convection is modeled using the
prescription of [83] with eﬃciency parameter αsc = 1.0.
Convective overshooting is described by an exponential
proﬁle which has two free parameters: f0, which sets the
point inside the convective boundary where overshooting
begins, and fov, which sets the scale height of the over-
shoot. We set these parameters to the ﬁducial choices
made by [71] f0 = 0.005 and fov = 0.01. The nuclear
reaction rates are set to the mesa defaults, which are a
mixture of the NACRE [84] and REACLIB [85] rates. The
other controls are set to the recommended values given
in the test suite ppisn (which comes prepackaged with
mesa) with the exception of mesh delta coeff, which
determines the number of cells used by mesa’s adaptive
grid. We set this to 0.5.
Quantities of interest are the mass at helium deple-
tion, the carbon-oxygen (CO) core mass, and the black
hole mass. These are deﬁned as in [73] and [71] to allow
for direct comparisons. In particular, helium depletion is
deﬁned as the time when the central helium mass frac-
tion falls below 0 .01. The CO core mass is deﬁned at
this time as the innermost mass coordinate with a helium
mass fraction greater than 0 .01. The black hole mass is
calculated at core collapse as the mass of bound mate-
rial. This is deﬁned as the mass within the outermost
coordinate in which the layer’s velocity is less than the
escape velocityvesc =
√
2GM/R (note that this depends
on G). If all of the layers are expanding with a velocity
v >vesc during a pulse then then entire star has become
unbound, signaling a PISN. No black hole is formed in
this case.
IV. EFFECTS OF MODIFIED GRAVITY ON
THE BLACK HOLE MASS GAP
There are several competing eﬀects of changing the
strength of gravity on the evolution of population-III
stars. We discuss these in detail below, exemplify-
ing them by considering values of G larger than GN
(∆G/GN > 0) since the screening mechanisms we have in
mind typically increase the strength of gravity. We will
also study ∆ G/GN < 0 when discussing the BH mass
distribution since some theories (e.g. beyond Horndeski
and subsets of DHOST) have this qualitative eﬀect.
FIG. 3. Stellar tracks in the log Tc–logρc plane for values of
G indicated in the ﬁgure. The tracks correspond to stars with
metallicityZ = 10−5 and zero age helium branch mass 56M⊙.
The pair-instability region is indicated in gray.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
FIG. 4. Mass versus central temperature (a proxy for time) for
a star with initial mass 56M⊙ and initial metallicityZ = 10−5
for GR and the values of ∆ G/GN shown. The star evolves
from low to high temperatures, but this trend is reversed dur-
ing pulsations. The sudden vertical drops indicate a single
pulse.
The ﬁrst eﬀect is that the structure and evolution of
the star is altered because the pressure support required
to maintain hydrostatic equilibrium is increased. Indeed,
consider the hydrostatic equilibrium equation
dP
dr =−GM(r)ρ(r)
r2 (3)
which must be satisﬁed for the pressure support to bal-
ance the inward gravitational force. Considering a ra-
diation pressure-supported star with P ∝ T 4, we can
obtain scaling relations for a star of mass M and core
radiusR by setting d/dr∼R−1,r∼R,M(r)∼M, and
ρ(r)∼M/R3 to ﬁnd
log(Tc) = 1
3 log(ρc) + 1
4 log(G) + 1
6 log(M) +c, (4)
where c is a constant that is independent of the stellar
parameters and G. A similar argument holds for gas
pressure-supported stars where P ∝ ρT , in which case
one ﬁnds log(Tc)∝ log(G). The true equation of state
will be a mixture of the two. The eﬀect of increasing G
at ﬁxed mass is then to raise the central temperature at
ﬁxed central density, implying that tracks in the log(Tc)–
log(ρc) plane pass closer to the instability region. This
is borne out in our numerical simulations, an example
of which we plot in ﬁgure 3 where we plot the tracks at
ﬁxed mass for a 56M⊙ star for three diﬀerent values ofG.
The eﬀect we describe here is clearly evident. The result
of this is that the instability experienced is more vio-
lent, with two eﬀects. First, more mass is lost during the
pulses, resulting in lighter black holes, and, second, stars
that would have undergone a PPISN now experience a
PISN, which removes the heaviest black holes from the
spectrum. The ultimate result of the altered stellar evo-
lution is then to lower the edges (both upper and lower)
of the BHMG.
A second eﬀect of increasing G is that the escape ve-
locity
vesc(r) =
√
2GM(r)
r (5)
is enhanced. This is relevant for both the pulsation and
collapse phases. In particular, larger escape velocities
implies that more mass is retained during the pulsations
since less material becomes unbound, and that more ma-
terial remains bound at core collapse. These eﬀects com-
pound to increase the ﬁnal black hole mass, raising the
edges of the mass gap. The highly dynamical and non-
linear nature of the pulsations and core collapse preclude
any analytic treatment of this eﬀect. Furthermore, such
a treatment is diﬃcult numerically. This is because the
pulsations begin after the helium burning phase when
other eﬀects of changing G have already signiﬁcantly al-
tered the structure of the star. With no way of disentan-
gling the separate eﬀects, direct comparisons are diﬃcult.
Similarly, by the time stars of ﬁxed initial mass have
reached core collapse, their properties (including their
masses) are diﬀerent.
Finally, increasingG reduces the lifetime of the helium
burning phase. One can see this using scaling relations.
The lifetime of helium burning is given by
τHe∼ MHe
L (6)
where L is the luminosity and MHe is the mass of he-
lium in the core. Scaling arguments [36, 40, 43] predict
thatL∝GM for radiation pressure-supported stars and
L∝ G4M 3 for gas pressure-supported stars (the true
equation of state is a mixture of the two), implying that
increasing G reduces the helium burning lifetime. The
eﬀects of this are two-fold. First, there is less time for
mass to be lost due to stellar winds, which acts to raise
the ﬁnal black hole mass since more mass is retained at
the onset of the pulsations, and, second, the ratio of C
to O is increased. This is because there is less time for
the 12C(α, γ)16O reaction, which converts C to O during
core helium burning, to operate. Increasing the C to O
ratio acts to quench the pulsations (either partially or
fully depending on the star’s mass and the ratio itself)
[72] resulting in less mass loss. The reasons for this are
that oxygen is the fuel for the PPISN and PISN, and
the convective motion of carbon being drawn from the
shells into the core acts to suppress thermonuclear burn-
ing. The ultimate result for the reduced helium burning
lifetime is then to allow heavier black holes to form, rais-
ing the edges of the mass gap. See [31, 32] for more
details on this.
We have run grids of mesa simulations of the evolu-
tion of stars from the ZAHB to core collapse or PISN in
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
FIG. 5. Black hole mass as a function of the star’s carbon-oxygen (CO) core mass for values of ∆ G/GN indicated in the ﬁgure.
The metallicity of the progenitor stars was taken to be Z = 10−5. The right panel shows component masses of binary black
hole mergers detected by the ﬁrst and second LIGO/VIRGO observing runs [30]. Error bars show 90% conﬁdence intervals
on individual black hole masses. The navy horizontal line shows the median value for Mg, and the shaded regions show 68%
(darker) and 95% (lighter) conﬁdence intervals on the lower edge of the black hole mass gap, computed from the ten detections
as described in §V.
intervals of 1M⊙ for numerous values of ∆ G/GN in the
range−0.35≤ ∆G/GN≤ +0.50 (the asymmetric range
and frequency was determined by the requirements of
the statistical analysis, see section V). Our numerical in-
vestigations revealed that the most important eﬀect of
changingG is the ﬁrst one in our list above, namely that
the altered stellar evolution results in more violent pul-
sations. This is exempliﬁed in ﬁgure 4 where we plot the
mass vs central temperature (which is a proxy for time)
of a star of initial mass 56M ⊙ evolving under GR and
both reduced and enhanced values of G. Evidently, the
diﬀerences in the amount of mass lost due to the alter-
ation in the duration of the wind loss phase is negligi-
ble compared with those lost during the pulsations. The
∆G/GN = +0.07 model exhibits two pulsations (steep
vertical drops) in which 18.6M⊙ of material is shed. The
GR model exhibits three pulsations and sheds a total of
10M⊙ of material. The ∆G/GN =−0.05 model similarly
experiences three pulsation but only sheds 6.6M⊙ of ma-
terial. To exhibit the eﬀects of this on the black hole
mass function, we plot some representative grids in ﬁg-
ure 5. Note that we plot black hole mass as a function of
CO core mass rather than initial mass due to the tighter
correlation [71]. The eﬀect of the more violent pulsa-
tions is evident from the lighter black holes formed when
∆G/GN > 0, and the eﬀect of lighter stars undergoing
PISN instead of PPISN is also evident. The ultimate ef-
fect of unscreening stars is then to lower the edge of the
black hole mass gap (assuming ∆G/GN > 0, appropriate
for the majority of screened modiﬁed gravity models).
In ﬁgure 6 we plot the black hole mass gap (both up-
per and lower edges) as a function of ∆ G/GN. The gray
region in Fig. 6 shows the location of the mass gap for
∆G/GN = 0. From the ﬁgure, it is evident that increas-
ing ∆G/GN lowers both edges. The upper edge corre-
sponds to the smallest mass progenitor where the PISN
is quenched and so the eﬀect of increasing ∆ G/GN is
to cause this to occur for lower mass objects. The shift
in the lower edge is due to the eﬀects discussed above,
namely that the pair-instability is exacerbated, result-
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
FIG. 6. Upper and lower edges (shown by teal and red points respectively) of the black hole mass gap as a function of ∆ G/GN.
Astrophysical black holes can form below the red points or above the teal points. The shaded region indicates the BHMG in
GR and the black points indicate results for ∆G/GN = 0. The red band show the results of ﬁtting the lower edge measurements
with a cubic polynomial, as described in §V; we adopt an uncertainty of 2M⊙ for each point when performing this ﬁt.
ing in stronger pulsations, and that the PISN occurs in
lighter objects, removing heavy black holes from the mass
spectrum.
V. DATA ANALYSIS AND CONSTRAINTS
FROM CURRENT DATA
We now use the LIGO/Virgo observations of BBHMs
to place constraints on the modiﬁed gravity model de-
scribed above. Our analysis in this section is based
largely on the statistical methodology developed in [27],
and we refer the interested reader to that work for more
details.
A. LIGO/Virgo Data
Our analysis relies on BBHMs detected during the
ﬁrst and second observing runs of LIGO and Virgo,
which ran from September 2015 to August 2017. Ten
BBHMs were detected at high signiﬁcance in these runs,
as shown in Fig. 5. We use the posterior samples on
the detector frame component masses and redshifts made
available at https://dcc.ligo.org/LIGO-P1800370/
public, converting these to posterior samples on the
source frame masses for the purposes of our analysis.
B. Methodology
Observations of BBHMs by LIGO constrain the loca-
tion of the BHMG [e.g. 27]. Since all black hole detec-
tions from LIGO to date have masses signiﬁcantly below
the expected (in GR) upper edge of the BHMG, we focus
our data analysis on the lower edge of the gap, which will
yield tighter constraints on ∆G (although see the discus-
sion of a recent BBH merger in §VI C). Armed with our
knowledge of the location of the lower edge, Mg, as a
function of ∆G/GN (Fig. 6), constraints on Mg can be
translated into constraints on ∆ G/GN, eﬀectively con-
straining theories of modiﬁed gravity. We remind the
reader that we assume the waveform is unaltered by mod-
iﬁed gravity i.e ∆ G/GN = 0 for the black hole merger
process. See §VI B for a discussion of this.
One caveat of our analysis is our simplifying assump-
tion that all black holes in the LIGO sample experience
the eﬀects of ∆ G. This need not be the case if, for in-
stance, some of the LIGO-detected black holes originated
in screened environments. For future analyses with large
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
samples of well-localized BBHMs, it may be possible to
ﬁrst determine whether a black hole binary is in an un-
screened environment using, e.g., the local distribution
of galaxies [e.g. 86]. Then, the methodology presented
below could be applied only to the subset of systems
that are believed to be unscreened. The present analysis
should therefore be viewed as a proof of principle. Alter-
natively, the constraints derived below can be interpreted
as limits onG coming from extra degrees of freedom that
satisfy no-hair theorems, independent of the motivation
of screened modiﬁed gravity theories.
A second caveat of our analysis is that we consider
the impact of modifying G only on the location of the
BHMG, and do not consider how changingG may impact
the black hole mass distribution in other ways, such as by
changing the mass function of the stellar progenitors. As
we discuss in more detail below, our analysis marginalizes
over a parameter, α, that characterizes the power law
index of the underlying black hole mass function. As
long as changing G does not cause signiﬁcant non-power
law behavior in the black hole mass function, our analysis
should yield correct results. However, one could imagine
a more sophisticated analysis that includes the impact of
∆G on all aspects of the black hole mass distribution,
i.e. eﬀectively making α a function of ∆G. By including
this additional information, it may be able to improve
constraints relative to those presented here.
Given the LIGO/VIRGO-derived posterior samples on
the primary and secondary (source frame) black hole
masses, m1 and m2, we wish to obtain a posterior on
∆G. Following [27], we write the likelihood for the ob-
servations of the ith BBHM, di, as
P (di|θ)∝⟨P (m1,m 2|θ)⟩m1m2
β(θ) , (7)
where θ represents the parameters specifying the mass
distribution of the black holes (including ∆G, which will
modify the cutoﬀ in this distribution), P (m1,m 2|θ) rep-
resents the probability of a BBH system with masses m1
and m2 given parameter values θ, and the expectation
value⟨...⟩m1m2 denotes an average over the posterior
samples of m1 and m2 provided by LIGO for the ith
event. This average eﬀectively integrates P (m1,m 2|θ)
over the posterior distribution P (m1,m 2|di), as shown
in [27]. The quantity β is deﬁned as
β(θ)≡
∫
P (m1,m 2|θ)VT (m1,m 2)dm1dm2, (8)
whereVT (m1,m 2) is the population-averaged spacetime
volume [27]. If we are sensitive to a BBH merger of m1
andm2 over a small range of spacetime volume, then we
are unlikely to measurem1 andm2 in the data, even if the
mass distribution is such that these masses are common;
β(θ) accounts for this fact.
We computeVT (m1,m 2) as detailed in [27], using the
expression for the optimal matched ﬁlter signal to noise
from [87, 88] and the estimated noise PSDs from [89].
Since we view this analysis as a proof of principle, these
noise power estimates should be suﬃciently accurate for
our purposes.
Information about ∆ G enters via the quantity
P (m1,m 2|θ), which eﬀectively controls the mass distri-
bution of the black holes. We begin by assuming that
the probability distribution function for m1 is given by a
power law over Mmin <m 1 <M g(∆G):
P (m1|θ)∝m−α
1 H(Mg(∆G)−m1), (9)
whereH is a Heaviside function, and we implicitly re-
strict m1 > Mmin. Assuming a uniform prior on the
mass ratio for the binary pair, q≡m2/m1≤ 1, over the
allowed range ofq, the joint mass distribution form1 and
the mass of the smaller black hole, m2, is given by
P (m1,m 2|θ)∝ m−α
1 H(Mg(∆G)−m1)
min(m1,M tot,max−m1)−Mmin
, (10)
where Mtot,max is the maximum allowed value of m1 +
m2, and again we implicitly restrict m1,m 2 > Mmin.
The complete set of model parameters is therefore θ =
{∆G,α,M min,M tot,max}. As noted previously, the mini-
mal black hole mass is thought to be roughly 5M ⊙ [25],
and we set Mmin = 5 M⊙ accordingly. Following [27], we
set Mtot,max = min(2Mg(∆G), 100M⊙).
Assuming uniform priors on ∆ G and α, the posterior
P (∆G,α|di) is proportional to the likelihood in Eq. 7.
We compute this posterior for each of the LIGO BBHM
detections, and take the product across all events (under
the assumption that they are independent) to compute a
joint posterior:
P (∆G,α|{di})∝
N∏
i=1
P (di|∆G,α ), (11)
where N is the total number of BBHM events observed
by LIGO. Note that we can trivially replace ∆ G by Mg
in Eq. 7 as the parameter being varied in order to directly
constrain Mg (i.e. for Fig. 5).
As seen in Fig. 6, there is some scatter in the values of
Mg computed by MESA. Part of this uncertainty is due
to the ﬁnite resolution of the grids we have used to com-
puteMg for each value of ∆G; we refer to this scatter as
numerical noise. We adopt an approximate model for the
numerical noise, assuming that it is Gaussian, that it is
uncorrelated between diﬀerent masses, and that its am-
plitude is σ = 2M⊙. Since the true relation between Mg
and ∆G is likely to be a smooth function, we ﬁt the data
points shown in Fig. 6 with a cubic polynomial, adopt-
ing the numerical noise model described previously. The
resultant errorband is shown in Fig. 6 by the red lines.
As seen in the ﬁgure, this band ﬁts the Mg data well,
and allows for some reasonable level of uncertainty in
the Mg(∆G) relation. For each set of polynomial coef-
ﬁcients in the posterior chain resulting from the cubic
ﬁt, we compute the resultant posterior on ∆G andα. By
summing these posteriors, we eﬀectively marginalize over
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
FIG. 7. Top panel: the joint posterior on ∆ G/GN and the
mass function power law index α. Blue contours show the
posterior without including the impact of numerical noise in
the Mg vs. ∆G/GN relation, while the orange curves do in-
clude this source of uncertainty. Inner and outer contours
enclose 68% and 95% of the posterior mass, respectively. Bot-
tom panel: constraints on ∆G/GN after marginalizing overα.
We ﬁnd ∆G/GN = 0.1+0.04
−0.1 at 68% conﬁdence.
the uncertainty on the Mg(∆G) relation from numerical
noise.
Note that the numerical noise is not the only source
of uncertainty in the Mg(∆G) relation. Other sources
of uncertainty, such as in various nuclear reaction rates,
can also lead to uncertainty in this relation. In the in-
terest of simplicity, we ignore these additional sources of
uncertainty in this ﬁrst analysis.
C. Constraints on ∆G From Current Data
The joint posterior on ∆ G and α is shown in the top
panel of Fig. 7. The blue contours indicate the pos-
terior in the absence of the numerical noise described
above, while the orange curves include this source of un-
certainty. We ﬁnd that the scatter about the Mg(∆G)
relation caused by numerical noise has an essentially neg-
ligible impact on our posteriors.
Our constraints on the ∆G/GN and α parameters are
somewhat degenerate, with largerα preferring lower ∆G.
As α is increased, the mass distribution of BHs falls oﬀ
more steeply; this eﬀect can be oﬀset by pushing Mg
to higher values by decreasing ∆ G. These eﬀects are
not perfectly degenerate, though, as α changes the dis-
tribution of BH masses near the gap, while ∆ G in our
model only changes its location. As noted before, since
we have ignored the impact of modiﬁed gravity on the
mass distribution of stellar progenitors in our analysis,
the constraints on α should be interpreted with caution.
Marginalizing over α yields the constraints on ∆ G
shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 7. We ﬁnd ∆ G/GN =
0.1+0.04
−0.1 at 68% conﬁdence. The data prefer a somewhat
positive ∆G, but are consistent with ∆ G/GN = 0 (i.e.
GR) at 68% conﬁdence. Again, the impact of numerical
noise is minimal. We also repeat our analysis adopting
Mmin = 2M⊙ rather than Mmin = 5M⊙; this shifts the
posterior very slightly to higher ∆ G, but the shift is al-
most completely negligible relative to the errorbars.
D. Comparison with Existing Bounds
The analysis above assumed that all ten LIGO/Virgo
BBM events were unscreened. Extending this analysis
to theories with screening mechanisms requires one to
account for either the time-dependence of G or environ-
mental screening that we discuss in section VI. Despite
this, it is instructive to compare the bound we derived
above with others already in the literature to determine
if or when our test could become competitive with these.
1. Bounds on Screened Modiﬁed Gravity
For theories such as dark matter–baryon screening, one
can obtain the bounds ∆G/GN < 0.05 from a comparison
of Cepheid and tip of the red giant branch distances to
unscreened galaxies [12, 13] so it is likely that competitive
constraints will be achieved only after LIGO/Virgo’s sen-
sitivity is upgraded and the number of detections has in-
creased suﬃciently. Modiﬁed gravity theories that screen
via the thin-shell eﬀect e.g. chameleon models typically
predict 0.1≤ ∆G/GN≤ 1. Constraints on ∆ G/GN ap-
ply as a function of a second parameter that determines
the ability of an object to self screen (denotedχ0 orfR0 in
the literature). Population-III stars have Newtonian po-
tentials of orderGM/Rc2∼ 10−8 so are some of the most
unscreened objects in the universe. It is then likely that
the lower edge of the BHMG could form a novel and pow-
erful probe of these theories, if a suitable observational
strategy that accounts for environmental screening can
be developed (see section VI A for a discussion of this).
For theories that do not include environmental screen-
ing, such as DHOST and beyond Horndeski, the Sun
and other Milky Way objects provide strong constraints
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
on ∆G/GN [42, 44, 48, 64]. In these theories, ∆ G/GN
is time-dependent, so it is possible that our black hole
mass gap test, which can reach luminosity distances of
order Gpc, could complement these low redshift bounds
by testing this feature.
Our results indicate that the upper edge of the BHMG
is a promising novel probe of modiﬁed gravity. Refer-
ence [29] have demonstrated that black holes from the
upper edge may be detectable by LIGO/Virgo once they
are upgraded to ‘A+’ sensitivity. A striking prediction of
modiﬁed gravity theories is that these upper edge objects
would exist with lower masses, making them more readily
detectable. For large enough values of ∆ G/GN & +0.3,
black holes with masses MBH ≲ 85M⊙ are predicted.
These lie squarely in the mass gap predicted by GR
and are detectable with LIGO/Virgo’s current sensitiv-
ity. Chameleon theories, and in particular f(R) theories,
predict ∆G/GN = 1/3 so this eﬀect represents a promis-
ing probe of such models.
2. Bounds on Strong Equivalence Principle Violations
The bound obtained in this analysis is strictly a bound
on the strong equivalence principle between black holes
and baryonic matter. Similar tests are few and far be-
tween, with the most notable being the prediction of oﬀ-
set supermassive black holes from the centers of galax-
ies due to their insensitivity to ﬁfth forces implied by
the no-hair theorem [90]. Reference [91] found a bound
on the E¨ otv¨ os parameterη < 0.68 for black holes and
baryons using this eﬀect applied to M87. Theories such
as galileons that screen using the Vainshtein mechanism
are diﬃcult to test using conventional methods due to
their high screening eﬃciency. For this reason, strong
equivalence violation tests are the most constraining for
these theories [92].
E. Improvements with Future Data Sets
With the analysis described above, we have achieved
a roughly 7% constraint on ∆G using ten BBHM detec-
tions from the ﬁrst two runs of LIGO and Virgo. Future
data from LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA [93] will signiﬁ-
cantly expand the sample size of BBHM events. Inter-
estingly, the constraints on a parameter representing the
maximum value in a population of observed events (such
as Mg) can improve faster than the usual 1 /
√
N, where
N is the number of observed events (see Appendix §A for
a toy model that illustrates this fact). Consequently, we
expect constraints onMg and thus ∆G to improve signif-
icantly in the future. O3 observations from LIGO/Virgo
are expected to increase the number of BBHM events
by roughly a factor of ﬁve, leading to a decrease in the
∆G uncertainty by a corresponding factor of ﬁve, since
the dependence of Mg on ∆G in the region of interest is
roughly linear. Improved constraints on ∆ G can also be
achieved by including more information in the analysis.
For instance, one could include the impact of ∆G on the
entire distribution of BBH masses, rather than its impact
on only the location of the mass gap. We postpone such
an analysis for future work.
As suggested by the right panel of Fig. 5, current un-
certainties on the BBH component masses signiﬁcantly
degrade our constraints on the location of the mass gap,
and thus ∆G. Additional detections with reduced error
bars — for example from systems with highly asymmet-
ric mass ratios, which help to break some degeneracies
— would allow for tighter bounds.
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
A. Observational Signatures and Detection
Strategies
In the previous section we demonstrated the constrain-
ing power of the BHMG by obtaining a bound on the
ratio of the gravitational constant experienced by black
holes and baryonic matter, a novel test of the strong
equivalence principle, which is generically violated in the-
ories beyond general relativity. Implicit in this analysis
was the assumption that the change in this due to modi-
ﬁed gravity is universal, implying the absence of a screen-
ing mechanism. Theories without screening mechanisms
are best probed using other means e.g. laboratory tests
or test of post-Newtonian gravity so our primary focus is
on those that do include such mechanisms. In this case,
the environmental dependence of the ﬁfth force strength
implies that the change in the location of the BHMG
is not universal but instead that there exist two sepa-
rate populations of astrophysical black holes: those that
formed in screened galaxies where ∆G/GN = 0 and those
that formed in unscreened galaxies where ∆ G/GN > 0
and galaxy-dependent. The former are by far the more
numerous. In this section we discuss several potential de-
tection strategies for this smaller population, postponing
the development of such pipelines for future work.
• Black hole population statistics: With the
large number of detections expected in the coming
years, it will not only be possible to measure the
position of the lower edge with sub-M ⊙ precision
[94] but also to perform detailed population stud-
ies [95]. The expected population can be computed
using the initial mass function and by accounting
for other astrophysical eﬀects [96]. The mass gap
for the black hole population in unscreened galaxies
begins at lighter masses, implying a lack of heavy
black holes. A sparser population of observed black
holes around the lower edge of the BHMG pre-
dicted by GR could then form a potential obser-
vation probe.
• Detections in the mass gap: For suﬃciently
large values of ∆G/GN & 0.2 (these values are typ-
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
ical of chameleon andf(R) theories) the black holes
formed at the upper edge of the modiﬁed gravity
mass gap lie squarely in the mass gap predicted
by GR. Similarly, for ∆ G/GN ≲−0.25. Having
masses in the range 60M ⊙ ≤ M ≤ 90M⊙, these
objects are detectable by LIGO/Virgo. The detec-
tion of these objects could then constitute a novel
probe of screened modiﬁed gravity. There are some
potential backgrounds for the detections of such
black holes. Black holes that formed from previous
black hole-black hole mergers [97] or that accrete
gas from proto-globular clusters [98, 99] could have
masses that place them within the GR BHMG. The
rate of such mergers is expected to be signiﬁcantly
smaller than the rate of black hole formation from
the core collapse of population-III stars [96]. Simi-
larly, it is possible to form black holes in the mass
gap from population-I or population-II stars due to
stellar process that signiﬁcantly inhibit wind loss.
[100, 101]. Modeling and characterizing these pop-
ulations e.g. [102] would aid in reducing these back-
grounds and enabling constraints on any additional
events due to screened modiﬁed gravity. Recently,
LIGO/Virgo announced the detection of a binary
black hole merger with both components in the GR
mass gap: GW190521 [33, 34]. We comment on this
below. See [34] for a discussion of possible standard
model formation mechanisms for the heavy black
holes inferred from this event.
• Time-variation of G: There has been a recent
interest in modiﬁed gravity theories where there is
a strong time-variation ofG. In particular, theories
whereG increases in the past may provide a partial
resolution of the Hubble tension [103, 104]. This
would imply that there is a redshift-dependence of
the location of the BHMG, with the lower edge
shifting to smaller values in the past and the up-
per edge potentially being visible. This could be
searched for by splitting the LIGO/Virgo obser-
vations into diﬀerent luminosity distance bins and
looking for such a variation. The current number of
data points are too few and the current error bars
are too large to allow for a meaningful attempt at
this at the present time. A suﬃcient number of
events with optical counterparts may allow for a
similar test in redshift space. Some screened the-
ories such as DHOST and beyond Horndeski also
include a time-dependence of G, and it is possi-
ble that they too could be constrained using this
method.
• Localization of speciﬁc events: It is possible
to localize the origin of binary black hole merg-
ers. If the event is accompanied by an electromag-
netic counterpart then this is possible using follow
up observations to determine the position of the
optical source but even if no such counterpart is
observed, one can correlate the LIGO/Virgo de-
tection region with galaxy catalogs to ﬁnd candi-
date host galaxies [105–109]. The screening sta-
tus of the host galaxy can then be determined
using screening maps [86, 110–112], which deter-
mine whether an individual galaxy is screened or
not and provide the (environment-dependent) value
of ∆G/GN as a function of the theory param-
eters. Localizing events containing black holes
in the GR mass gap can then directly constrain
∆G/GN and the other model parameters where
present. LIGO/Virgo’s ability to localize speciﬁc
events will dramatically improve once additional
detectors come online [113].
B. Impact of Modiﬁed Gravity on the Waveform
Throughout the data analysis, and the discussion of
observational strategies above, we assumed that modi-
ﬁed gravity has no eﬀect on the waveform observed by
LIGO/Virgo. This assumption is well motivated by the
no-hair theorems. Even though their progenitor stars are
sensitive to the modiﬁcations of gravity through the ef-
fects of ﬁfth forces, the black holes themselves are not due
to absence of any hair (see [90] for a discussion of this).
One potential caveat to this is if a large amount of radia-
tion in the form of additional polarizations of the graviton
are emitted during the merger, especially in the form of
monopole or dipole modes. This is not expected to be
the case in the theories of interest since the same non-
linearities responsible for the screening mechanisms sup-
press the power emitted in these modes [114, 115]. An-
other possibility is that the signal could be produced as in
GR but altered by new eﬀects on cosmological scales such
as damping from a running of the Planck mass [116, 117].
In light of this, the results of our data analysis are not
a measurement of Newton’s constant because changing
this for all objects would also impact the waveform, but
more of a test of the strong equivalence principle by con-
straining deviations between the strength of gravity felt
by black holes and baryonic matter. In light of this dis-
cussion, we emphasize that the application of our results
to constraining modiﬁed gravity theories must be consid-
ered on a theory-dependent basis.
C. GW190521
As this work was being prepared, the LIGO/Virgo
collaboration announced the discovery of GW190521
[33, 34]. This was identiﬁed as a binary black hole
merger with components m1 = 85 +21
−14M⊙ and m2 =
66+17
−18M⊙ (although see [118] for an alternative interpre-
tation where one component is a lower edge black hole
and the other is an upper edge black hole). Both of these
lie directly inside the canonical black hole mass gap pre-
dicted by general relativity. In light of the results of
our study, these objects could have formed if their host
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
galaxy was unscreened provided ∆ G/GN = 0.3+0.15
−0.2 or
∆G/GN =−0.3+0.05
−0.1 . The lower limit in the former case
corresponds to the upper limit on m1 and conversely for
the upper limit. In the latter case, the upper limit cor-
responds to the lower limit on m1 and conversely for
the lower limit. We consider the former scenario more
likely on theoretical grounds. There is no deﬁnitive way
to falsify this hypothesis. An accompanying electromag-
netic counterpart could have allowed for a localization of
the host galaxy, in which case its screening status could
be determined. A candidate event was identiﬁed by the
Zwicky Transient Facility in the form of a ﬂare [119].
Such events are not typically associated with merging
black holes, and there was no prompt counterpart re-
ported by any other facilities. Whether this event was
indeed associated with GW190521 remains unclear. Ei-
ther way, the screening maps to do not currently extend
to the distances associated with this event ( ∼ 5 Gpc),
so we are unable to determine the screening status of the
associated host object. Reference [120] examines possible
beyond the standard model explanations of GW190521,
including modiﬁed gravity.
D. Conclusions
In this work we have initiated the study of the eﬀects
of modiﬁed gravity on the location of the black hole mass
gap. The theories motivating this are those that are
highly relevant to dark energy and the Hubble tension,
namely those with screening mechanisms. A generic fea-
ture of these theories is the presence of new or ﬁfth forces
that arise from the coupling of light gravitational degrees
of freedom (typically scalar ﬁelds) to matter. Screening
mechanisms hide these in the solar system, thereby allow-
ing consistency with laboratory and solar system tests of
gravity, but they can emerge on cosmological scales to
drive the acceleration of the cosmic expansion.
On intermediate scales, unscreened galaxies and their
constituents exhibit novel phenomenologies, making
them prime laboratories for testing these theories. The
eﬀects on the BHMG that we have studied in this arise
because the population-III progenitors of the binary
black holes observed by LIGO/Virgo are unscreened in
these galaxies and experience the ﬁfth force. This acts to
alter the structure and evolution of these objects because
the conditions required to maintain hydrostatic equilib-
rium are modiﬁed. In theories where the strength of grav-
ity is enhanced in unscreened environments (this is the
majority of theories of interest), the eﬀects of the ﬁfth
force are to raise the star’s central temperature at ﬁxed
initial mass and central density. This results in a larger
number of electron-positron pairs being produced ther-
mally, exacerbating the pair-instability. There are two
consequences of this. At ﬁxed mass, the pulsations are
more violent and more mass is shed when they are ac-
tive. Similarly, stars with masses that would have im-
plied a pulsational pair-instability now end their lives in
a pair instability supernova instead. The ultimate ef-
fect on the black hole mass distribution is that heavier
black holes disappear from the spectrum, resulting in a
shift in the location of the lower edge of the mass gap
towards lighter masses. Similarly, the quenching of the
pair-instability due to the photodisintegration of heavy
elements occurs in lighter mass objects, resulting in the
upper edge moving towards lighter masses. Interestingly,
for values of ∆G/GN relevant for the chameleon screening
mechanism (and similar) we found that the upper edge
black holes would lie in the mass gap predicted by GR.
These objects have masses 60M ⊙ < M < 90M⊙, and
are observable by LIGO/Virgo. They may even explain
the recent GW190521 binary black hole merger event, for
which both merging black holes have inferred masses in
this range.
As a proof of principle to demonstrate the constrain-
ing power of the mass gap, we performed a statistical
analysis of the ﬁrst ten LIGO/Virgo binary black hole
merger events to obtain a measurement of the value of
Newton’s constant. We ﬁnd ∆ G/GN = 0.1+0.04
−0.1 at 68%
conﬁdence. The theories probed by this measurement are
those without screening mechanisms. The true power of
our results lie in their ability to constrain theories that
do utilize screening mechanisms, and for which solar sys-
tem tests are unconstraining. This requires the develop-
ment of dedicated detection strategies that account for
the uncertainties introduced by environmental screening
and possibly modiﬁcations of the waveform. We have dis-
cussed several possibilities at length, and proposed sev-
eral methods by which they could be executed. We intend
to develop this program in future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Robert Farmer, Pablo Marchant,
and the MESA community for answering our many
questions about MESA. We would like to thank Djuna
Croon, Harry Desmond, Samuel D. McDermott, Maya
Fischbach, and Robert Jedicke for enlightening discus-
sions. MCS acknowledges support from the Research Ex-
perience for Undergraduates program at the Institute for
Astronomy, University of Hawai’i-Manoa funded through
NSF grant 6104374.
[1] B. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo), Phys. Rev.
Lett. 116, 221101 (2016), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.Lett.
121, 129902 (2018)], arXiv:1602.03841 [gr-qc].
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
[2] B. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo), Phys. Rev.
Lett. 123, 011102 (2019), arXiv:1811.00364 [gr-qc].
[3] B. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo), Phys. Rev. D
100, 104036 (2019), arXiv:1903.04467 [gr-qc].
[4] E. Berti et al., Class. Quant. Grav. 32, 243001 (2015),
arXiv:1501.07274 [gr-qc].
[5] E. J. Copeland, M. Sami, and S. Tsujikawa, Int. J.
Mod. Phys. D 15, 1753 (2006), arXiv:hep-th/0603057.
[6] K. Koyama, Rept. Prog. Phys. 79, 046902 (2016),
arXiv:1504.04623 [astro-ph.CO].
[7] A. Joyce, B. Jain, J. Khoury, and M. Trodden, Phys.
Rept. 568, 1 (2015), arXiv:1407.0059 [astro-ph.CO].
[8] C. Burrage and J. Sakstein, Living Rev. Rel. 21, 1
(2018), arXiv:1709.09071 [astro-ph.CO].
[9] J. Sakstein, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 27, 1848008 (2018),
arXiv:2002.04194 [astro-ph.CO].
[10] T. Baker et al., (2019), arXiv:1908.03430 [astro-ph.CO].
[11] J. Sakstein, H. Desmond, and B. Jain, Phys. Rev. D
100, 104035 (2019), arXiv:1907.03775 [astro-ph.CO].
[12] H. Desmond, B. Jain, and J. Sakstein, Phys. Rev. D
100, 043537 (2019), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 101, 069904
(2020), Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 101, 129901 (2020)],
arXiv:1907.03778 [astro-ph.CO].
[13] H. Desmond and J. Sakstein, Phys. Rev. D 102, 023007
(2020), arXiv:2003.12876 [astro-ph.CO].
[14] J. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 51, 6608 (1995).
[15] P. O. Mazur, (2000), arXiv:hep-th/0101012.
[16] L. Hui and A. Nicolis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 241104
(2013), arXiv:1202.1296 [hep-th].
[17] T. P. Sotiriou and S.-Y. Zhou, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112,
251102 (2014), arXiv:1312.3622 [gr-qc].
[18] E. Babichev, C. Charmousis, and A. Leh´ ebel, Class.
Quant. Grav. 33, 154002 (2016), arXiv:1604.06402 [gr-
qc].
[19] H. O. Silva, J. Sakstein, L. Gualtieri, T. P. Sotiriou,
and E. Berti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 131104 (2018),
arXiv:1711.02080 [gr-qc].
[20] G. Antoniou, A. Bakopoulos, and P. Kanti, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 120, 131102 (2018), arXiv:1711.03390 [hep-th].
[21] J. Noller, L. Santoni, E. Trincherini, and L. G.
Trombetta, Phys. Rev. D 101, 084049 (2020),
arXiv:1911.11671 [gr-qc].
[22] G. Rakavy and G. Shaviv, ApJ 148, 803 (1967).
[23] G. S. Fraley, Ap&SS 2, 96 (1968).
[24] J. R. Bond, W. D. Arnett, and B. J. Carr, ApJ 280,
825 (1984).
[25] W. M. Farr, N. Sravan, A. Cantrell, L. Kreidberg, C. D.
Bailyn, I. Mandel, and V. Kalogera, The Astrophysical
Journal 741, 103 (2011).
[26] M. Fishbach, R. Essick, and D. E. Holz, Astrophys. J.
Lett. 899, L8 (2020), arXiv:2006.13178 [astro-ph.HE].
[27] M. Fishbach and D. E. Holz, Astrophys. J. Lett. 851,
L25 (2017), arXiv:1709.08584 [astro-ph.HE].
[28] B. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo), Astrophys. J.
Lett. 882, L24 (2019), arXiv:1811.12940 [astro-ph.HE].
[29] J. M. Ezquiaga and D. E. Holz, (2020),
arXiv:2006.02211 [astro-ph.HE].
[30] B. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo), Phys. Rev. X
9, 031040 (2019), arXiv:1811.12907 [astro-ph.HE].
[31] D. Croon, S. D. McDermott, and J. Sakstein, (2020),
arXiv:2007.00650 [hep-ph].
[32] D. Croon, S. D. McDermott, and J. Sakstein, (2020),
arXiv:2007.07889 [gr-qc].
[33] R. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration and
Virgo Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 101102
(2020).
[34] R. Abbott et al. , The Astrophysical Journal 900, L13
(2020).
[35] J. Sakstein, Phys. Rev. D 97, 064028 (2018),
arXiv:1710.03156 [astro-ph.CO].
[36] A.-C. Davis, E. A. Lim, J. Sakstein, and D. Shaw,
Phys. Rev. D85, 123006 (2012), arXiv:1102.5278 [astro-
ph.CO].
[37] B. Jain, V. Vikram, and J. Sakstein, Astrophys.J. 779,
39 (2013), arXiv:1204.6044 [astro-ph.CO].
[38] J. Sakstein, Phys. Rev. D88, 124013 (2013),
arXiv:1309.0495 [astro-ph.CO].
[39] J. Sakstein, B. Jain, and V. Vikram, Int. J. Mod. Phys.
D 23, 1442002 (2014), arXiv:1409.3708 [astro-ph.CO].
[40] K. Koyama and J. Sakstein, Phys. Rev. D 91, 124066
(2015), arXiv:1502.06872 [astro-ph.CO].
[41] R. Saito, D. Yamauchi, S. Mizuno, J. Gleyzes, and
D. Langlois, JCAP 1506, 008 (2015), arXiv:1503.01448
[gr-qc].
[42] J. Sakstein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 201101 (2015),
arXiv:1510.05964 [astro-ph.CO].
[43] J. Sakstein, Astrophysical Tests of Modiﬁed Grav-
ity, Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge U., DAMTP (2014),
arXiv:1502.04503 [astro-ph.CO].
[44] J. Sakstein, Phys. Rev. D 92, 124045 (2015),
arXiv:1511.01685 [astro-ph.CO].
[45] R. K. Jain, C. Kouvaris, and N. G. Nielsen, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 116, 151103 (2016), arXiv:1512.05946 [astro-
ph.CO].
[46] E. Babichev, K. Koyama, D. Langlois, R. Saito, and
J. Sakstein, Class. Quant. Grav. 33, 235014 (2016),
arXiv:1606.06627 [gr-qc].
[47] J. Sakstein, M. Kenna-Allison, and K. Koyama, JCAP
03, 007 (2017), arXiv:1611.01062 [gr-qc].
[48] I. D. Saltas and I. Lopes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 091103
(2019), arXiv:1909.02552 [astro-ph.CO].
[49] G. J. Olmo, D. Rubiera-Garcia, and A. Wojnar, (2019),
arXiv:1912.05202 [gr-qc].
[50] J. Sakstein, H. Desmond, and B. Jain, Phys. Rev. D
100, 104035 (2019), arXiv:1907.03775 [astro-ph.CO].
[51] A. Wojnar, (2020), arXiv:2007.13451 [gr-qc].
[52] C. M. Will, Living Rev. Rel. 17, 4 (2014),
arXiv:1403.7377 [gr-qc].
[53] J. Sakstein and B. Jain, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 251303
(2017), arXiv:1710.05893 [astro-ph.CO].
[54] L. Amendola et al. , Living Rev. Rel. 21, 2 (2018),
arXiv:1606.00180 [astro-ph.CO].
[55] J. Khoury and A. Weltman, Phys. Rev. D 69, 044026
(2004), arXiv:astro-ph/0309411.
[56] K. Hinterbichler and J. Khoury, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104,
231301 (2010), arXiv:1001.4525 [hep-th].
[57] P. Brax, C. van de Bruck, A.-C. Davis, and D. Shaw,
Phys. Rev. D82, 063519 (2010), arXiv:1005.3735 [astro-
ph.CO].
[58] A. Vainshtein, Phys.Lett. B39, 393 (1972).
[59] A. Nicolis, R. Rattazzi, and E. Trincherini, Phys. Rev.
D 79, 064036 (2009), arXiv:0811.2197 [hep-th].
[60] E. Babichev, C. Deﬀayet, and R. Ziour, Int. J. Mod.
Phys. D 18, 2147 (2009), arXiv:0905.2943 [hep-th].
[61] M. Crisostomi and K. Koyama, Phys. Rev. D97, 084004
(2018), arXiv:1712.06556.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
[62] A. Dima and F. Vernizzi, Phys. Rev. D97, 101302
(2018), arXiv:1712.04731 [gr-qc].
[63] D. Langlois, R. Saito, D. Yamauchi, and K. Noui, Phys.
Rev. D97, 061501 (2018), arXiv:1711.07403 [gr-qc].
[64] M. Crisostomi, M. Lewandowski, and F. Vernizzi,
(2019), arXiv:1903.11591 [gr-qc].
[65] T. Baker, E. Bellini, P. G. Ferreira, M. Lagos, J. Noller,
and I. Sawicki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 251301 (2017),
arXiv:1710.06394 [astro-ph.CO].
[66] J. M. Ezquiaga and M. Zumalac´ arregui, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 119, 251304 (2017), arXiv:1710.05901 [astro-
ph.CO].
[67] P. Creminelli and F. Vernizzi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119,
251302 (2017), arXiv:1710.05877 [astro-ph.CO].
[68] L. Berezhiani, J. Khoury, and J. Wang, Phys. Rev.
D95, 123530 (2017), arXiv:1612.00453 [hep-th].
[69] J. P. Cox and R. T. Giuli, Principles of stellar structure
(1968).
[70] R. Kippenhahn, A. Weigert, and A. Weiss, Stellar
Structure and Evolution (2012).
[71] R. Farmer, M. Renzo, S. de Mink, P. Marchant,
and S. Justham, (2019), 10.3847/1538-4357/ab518b,
arXiv:1910.12874 [astro-ph.SR].
[72] R. Farmer, M. Renzo, S. de Mink, M. Fishbach, and
S. Justham, (2020), arXiv:2006.06678 [astro-ph.HE].
[73] P. Marchant, M. Renzo, R. Farmer, K. M. Pap-
pas, R. E. Taam, S. de Mink, and V. Kalogera,
(2018), 10.3847/1538-4357/ab3426, arXiv:1810.13412
[astro-ph.HE].
[74] P. Marchant and T. Moriya, Astron. Astrophys. 640,
L18 (2020), arXiv:2007.06220 [astro-ph.HE].
[75] M. Renzo, R. Farmer, S. Justham, S. de Mink,
Y. G¨ otberg, and P. Marchant, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc. 493, 4333 (2020), arXiv:2002.08200 [astro-ph.SR].
[76] J. S. Vink, A. de Koter, and H. J. Lamers, Astron.
Astrophys. 369, 574 (2001), arXiv:astro-ph/0101509.
[77] I. Brott, S. E. de Mink, M. Cantiello, N. Langer,
A. de Koter, C. J. Evans, I. Hunter, C. Trundle,
and J. S. Vink, Astron. Astrophys. 530, A115 (2011),
arXiv:1102.0530 [astro-ph.SR].
[78] R. deBoer et al. , Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 035007 (2017),
arXiv:1709.03144 [nucl-ex].
[79] B. Paxton, L. Bildsten, A. Dotter, F. Herwig, P. Lesaf-
fre, and F. Timmes, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 192, 3 (2011),
arXiv:1009.1622 [astro-ph.SR].
[80] B. Paxton et al. , Astrophys. J. Suppl. 220, 15 (2015),
arXiv:1506.03146 [astro-ph.SR].
[81] B. Paxton et al. , Astrophys. J. Suppl. 234, 34 (2018),
arXiv:1710.08424 [astro-ph.SR].
[82] B. Paxton, R. Smolec, J. Schwab, A. Gautschy,
L. Bildsten, M. Cantiello, A. Dotter, R. Farmer,
J. A. Goldberg, A. S. Jermyn, S. M. Kanbur,
P. Marchant, A. Thoul, R. H. D. Townsend, W. M.
Wolf, M. Zhang, and F. X. Timmes, ApJS 243, 10
(2019), arXiv:1903.01426 [astro-ph.SR].
[83] N. Langer, M. F. El Eid, and K. J. Fricke, A&A 145,
179 (1985).
[84] C. Angulo et al., Nucl. Phys. A 656, 3 (1999).
[85] R. H. Cyburt, A. M. Amthor, R. Ferguson, Z. Meisel,
K. Smith, S. Warren, A. e. Heger, R. D. Hoﬀman,
T. Rauscher, A. e. Sakharuk, H. Schatz, F. K. Thiele-
mann, and M. Wiescher, ApJS 189, 240 (2010).
[86] H. Desmond, P. G. Ferreira, G. Lavaux, and
J. Jasche, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 474, 3152
(2018), arXiv:1705.02420 [astro-ph.GA].
[87] H.-Y. Chen and D. E. Holz, “The loudest gravitational
wave events,” (2014), arXiv:1409.0522 [gr-qc].
[88] L. S. Finn, Physical Review D 53, 2878–2894 (1996).
[89] Abbott et al. , “Prospects for observing and localizing
gravitational-wave transients with advanced ligo, ad-
vanced virgo and kagra,” (2013), arXiv:1304.0670 [gr-
qc].
[90] L. Hui and A. Nicolis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 051304
(2012), arXiv:1201.1508 [astro-ph.CO].
[91] A. Asvathaman, J. S. Heyl, and L. Hui, Mon. Not.
Roy. Astron. Soc. 465, 3261 (2017), arXiv:1506.07607
[astro-ph.GA].
[92] J. Sakstein, B. Jain, J. S. Heyl, and L. Hui, Astro-
phys. J. Lett. 844, L14 (2017), arXiv:1704.02425 [astro-
ph.CO].
[93] Nature Astronomy 3, 35–40 (2019).
[94] M. Fishbach and D. E. Holz, Astrophys. J. Lett. 891,
L27 (2020), arXiv:1905.12669 [astro-ph.HE].
[95] B. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo), Astrophys. J.
Lett. 882, L24 (2019), arXiv:1811.12940 [astro-ph.HE].
[96] L. van Son, S. de Mink, F. Broekgaarden, M. Renzo,
S. Justham, E. Laplace, J. Moran-Fraile, D. Hen-
driks, and R. Farmer, Astrophys. J. 897, 100 (2020),
arXiv:2004.05187 [astro-ph.HE].
[97] A. Mangiagli, M. Bonetti, A. Sesana, and M. Colpi,
Astrophys. J. Lett. 883, L27 (2019), arXiv:1907.12562
[astro-ph.HE].
[98] Z. Roupas and D. Kazanas, Astron. Astrophys. 621, L1
(2019), arXiv:1809.04126 [astro-ph.GA].
[99] Z. Roupas and D. Kazanas, Astron. Astrophys. 632, L8
(2019), arXiv:1911.03915.
[100] M. Limongi and A. Chieﬃ, Astrophys. J. Suppl. 237,
13 (2018), arXiv:1805.09640 [astro-ph.SR].
[101] K. Belczynski, R. Hirschi, E. Kaiser, J. Liu, J. Casares,
Y. Lu, R. O’Shaughnessy, A. Heger, S. Justham,
and R. Soria, (2019), 10.3847/1538-4357/ab6d77,
arXiv:1911.12357 [astro-ph.HE].
[102] J. Flitter, J. B. Mu˜ noz, and E. D. Kovetz, (2020),
arXiv:2008.10389 [astro-ph.HE].
[103] G. Ballesteros, A. Notari, and F. Rompineve, (2020),
arXiv:2004.05049 [astro-ph.CO].
[104] M. Braglia, M. Ballardini, W. T. Emond, F. Finelli,
A. E. Gumrukcuoglu, K. Koyama, and D. Paoletti,
Phys. Rev. D 102, 023529 (2020), arXiv:2004.11161
[astro-ph.CO].
[105] S. Nissanke, J. Sievers, N. Dalal, and D. Holz, Astro-
phys. J. 739, 99 (2011), arXiv:1105.3184 [astro-ph.CO].
[106] B. Abbott et al. (KAGRA, LIGO Scientiﬁc, VIRGO),
Living Rev. Rel. 21, 3 (2018), arXiv:1304.0670 [gr-qc].
[107] M. Oguri, Phys. Rev. D 93, 083511 (2016),
arXiv:1603.02356 [astro-ph.CO].
[108] I. Bartos, Z. Haiman, Z. Marka, B. Metzger, N. Stone,
and S. Marka, Nature Commun. 8, 831 (2017),
arXiv:1701.02328 [astro-ph.HE].
[109] F. Calore, A. Cuoco, T. Regimbau, S. Sachdev, and
P. D. Serpico, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 023314 (2020),
arXiv:2002.02466 [astro-ph.CO].
[110] A. Cabre, V. Vikram, G.-B. Zhao, B. Jain, and
K. Koyama, JCAP 07, 034 (2012), arXiv:1204.6046
[astro-ph.CO].
[111] S. Shao, B. Li, M. Cautun, H. Wang, and J. Wang,
Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 489, 4912 (2019),
arXiv:1907.02081 [astro-ph.CO].
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
[112] H. Desmond and P. G. Ferreira, (2020),
arXiv:2009.08743 [astro-ph.CO].
[113] C. Pankow, E. A. Chase, S. Coughlin, M. Zevin, and
V. Kalogera, Astrophys. J. Lett. 854, L25 (2018),
arXiv:1801.02674 [astro-ph.HE].
[114] C. de Rham, A. Matas, and A. J. Tolley, Phys. Rev. D
87, 064024 (2013), arXiv:1212.5212 [hep-th].
[115] F. Dar, C. De Rham, J. T. Deskins, J. T. Giblin, and
A. J. Tolley, Class. Quant. Grav. 36, 025008 (2019),
arXiv:1808.02165 [hep-th].
[116] S. Mastrogiovanni, D. Steer, and M. Barsuglia, (2020),
arXiv:2004.06102 [gr-qc].
[117] T. Baker and I. Harrison, (2020), arXiv:2007.13791
[astro-ph.CO].
[118] M. Fishbach and D. E. Holz, (2020), arXiv:2009.05472
[astro-ph.HE].
[119] M. Graham et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 251102 (2020),
arXiv:2006.14122 [astro-ph.HE].
[120] J. Sakstein, D. Croon, S. D. McDermott, M. C. Straight,
and E. J. Baxter, (2020), arXiv:2009.01213 [gr-qc].
Appendix A: Toy Model Illustrating Improvement
in Constraints on the Maximum of a Distribution
In this appendix we show that for some sample of ob-
served events,{x1,x 2...x N}, the constraints on the in-
ferred population maximum, xmax, can improve faster
than the usual 1/
√
N, whereN is the number of observed
events.
For simplicity, we assume that the population is uni-
formly distributed between 0 and xmax, i.e.
xi∼U(0,x max), (A1)
whereU(a,b ) represent the uniform distribution between
a and b. The likelihood for an individual event is
P (xi|xmax)∝
{
1/xmax for xi <x max
0 otherwise. (A2)
Adopting a ﬂat prior on xmax and assuming the xi are
independent, the total posterior is
P (xmax|{xi}) =
{
A
xNmax
for xmax > max[xi]
0 for xmax < max[xi], (A3)
where A normalizes the distribution, and its value is
given by
A =
∫ ∞
max[xi]
dxmax
1
xNmax
= (max[xi])1−N
N− 1 . (A4)
The ﬁrst moment of the total posterior is
⟨xmax⟩ = (1/A)
∫ ∞
max[xi]
dxmax
xmax
xNmax
= max[xi](N− 1)
(N− 2) ,
(A5)
and the second moment is
⟨x2
max⟩ = (1/A)
∫ ∞
max[xi]
dxmax
x2
max
xNmax
= (max[xi])2(N− 1)
(N− 3) .
(A6)
The variance is then given by
var(xmax) = (max[xi])2 (N− 1)
(N− 3)(N− 2)2 (A7)
∼ (max[xi])2
N 2 , (A8)
and we see that the uncertainty on xmax, σ(xmax) ≡√
var(xmax), will go scale as 1 /N rather than the usual
1/
√
N.
16
