===== PAGE 1 =====
A Flat Connection:
The Pooling Factor and the Geometry of
Centring in Hierarchical MCMC ∗
Aidan D. Bindoff
University of Tasmania
aidan.bindoff@utas.edu.au
Abstract
Standard MCMC diagnostics ( ˆR, effective sample size, divergence counts) detect
whether a chain has mixed, but not why it has not. We ask whether the centring/non-
centring obstruction in hierarchical models has ageometriccause beyond the metric.
The joint parameter space is a fiber bundle (hyperparameters the base, group-level
parameters the fibers), and the Fisher information metric induces an Ehresmann
connection A = −G−1
FFGBF ; the natural hypothesis is that the obstruction is its
curvature, felt by the sampler as holonomy. We prove this false. The connection isflat
foranysmooth hierarchical posterior, not only the Gaussian or conjugate case, because
its horizontal leaves are the level sets of the fiber score ∂α logp : there is no geometric
obstruction above the metric. What remains is statistical, not geometric, and the flat
connection identifies it as a single quantity: the conditional dependence of fiber on base,
governed per group by theprior fraction πj, the classical pooling factor. From it the
framework recovers the established picture, that the prior-dominated groups are the
ones that mix slowly and that the optimal per-group non-centring weight follows in
closed form, and a simulation study then separates this base–fiber coupling from the
funnel, a distinct base-space pathology, by their opposite dependence on the hierarchical
variance. A direct attribution test confirms that NUTS does not transport the fiber:
the chain-level footprint is excess conditional autocorrelation in prior-dominated groups,
exactly as πj predicts. Genuine, even rotational, curvaturedoesappear — but only
for connections built from a sampler’sworkingmetric (a fixed mass matrix), where
holonomy re-enters as an algorithmic rather than geometric phenomenon. The prior-
fraction diagnostic is distributed as the open-source R package fibr, with the geometric
methods as accompanying reproduction code.
Keywords:Markov chain Monte Carlo, hierarchical models, fiber bundles, Ehresmann
connection, flat connection, holonomy, prior fraction, pooling factor, centering, convergence
diagnostics.
∗Code and package available athttps://github.com/ABindoff/fibr.
1
arXiv:2606.19655v1  [stat.CO]  17 Jun 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents
1 Introduction 4
1.1 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2 Background 7
2.1 Hierarchical models and the centering problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2 Riemannian manifold HMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.3 Fiber bundles in statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3 The Geometric Framework 8
3.1 Fiber bundle structure of hierarchical posteriors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 The Fisher metric and its block structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.3 The Ehresmann connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.4 Which connection? A disambiguation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.5 Holonomy and curvature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.6 Universal flatness: the score is a first integral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.7 The linearised curvature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.8 What the framework requires of a model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 The Loop-Conditional Dependence Diagnostic 12
4.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Loop detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3 Transport map estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4 Per-group dependence coefficients and scalar summary . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.5 Bootstrap uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.6 Gap sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7 Attribution: empirical transport vs. integrated connection . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.8 Comparison: centred vs. non-centred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5 Analytic Connection for the Centred Logistic GLMM 17
5.1 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2 Fisher metric blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.3 Connection form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.4 Curvature: linearised and full . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.5 Prior fraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.6 Synthetic loop validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
6 Simulation Study 21
6.1 Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
7 What to Do About It: Guidance for Practitioners 23
7.1 Per-group (partial) non-centering, guided by the prior fraction . . . . . . . . 23
7.2 Interweaving (ASIS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7.3 Marginalising the fiber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7.4 The connection as a fixed linear reparameterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.5 Connection-corrected proposals (proof of concept) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.6 Reading the prior fraction: influence and sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
8 ThefibrR Package 26
9 Discussion 27
9.1 Coupling vs. the funnel: two distinct pathologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
9.2 The connection is flat; curvature lives in the working metric . . . . . . . . . 28
9.3 Limitations and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
9.4 Note on methods of discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
1 Introduction
A central challenge in Bayesian computation is the hierarchical model. The joint parameter
space of a two-level model − hyperparameters (µ,σ ) and group-level parameters (α1,...,α J)
− has a geometry that makes it simultaneously natural to write and difficult to sample
from. The pathology is well documented: the centred parameterisation develops a funnel,
non-centred parameterisations help when the prior dominates, and the right choice depends
on a balance of prior and likelihood information that varies by group and dataset.
A geometric account of this trade-off already exists, at the level of themetric. Betancourt
and Girolami (2015) anatomised the funnel and showed that the optimal parameterisation is
governed by the relative contribution of prior and likelihood to a group’s posterior (centred
when the likelihood dominates, non-centred when the prior does) and Papaspiliopoulos et al.
(2007) characterised the centred/non-centred trade-off in the same terms. Betancourt (2019)
sharpened this into an equivalence: an incomplete reparameterisation such as centering
versus non-centering is equivalent to modifying the Riemannian metric directly, so the two
parameterisations are mirror-image metric geometries rather than genuinely different targets.
At the metric level, then, the obstruction is well understood.
What is not yet settled is whether there is structurebeyondthe metric. The base–fiber
split of the joint space is a fiber bundle, and a metric on the total space induces not only
a Riemannian geometry but aconnection, a rule for how the fiber must co-move with the
base as the hyperparameters change. A natural hypothesis, which we state here as our own,
since to our knowledge it does not appear in the statistics literature, is that the residual
obstruction is thecurvatureof this connection, carried into the chain asholonomy: a net
contraction of the fiber after the hyperparameters traverse a closed loop (Figure 1). Were
it true, this would be a connection-level account sitting above the metric-level one, and it
would tell the sampler something the metric does not: that closed excursions in ( µ,σ ) leave a
systematic, transportable imprint on the group parameters.
This hypothesis belongs to the geometric program in MCMC, and it is that program the
proof is aimed at. Riemannian-manifold HMC (Girolami and Calderhead, 2011) and the
differential-geometric account of Hamiltonian flow (Betancourt, 2017; Livingstone et al., 2019)
navigate hierarchical posteriors by exploiting the curvature of the Fisher metric, while a parallel
line learns reparameterising transformations that absorb the funnel automatically (Gorinova
et al., 2020). A connection-curvature account of centering would slot directly into this program:
it would licence samplers thatparallel-transportthe fiber as the hyperparameters move, rather
than only reparameterise, and would motivate proposals built from the connection. Whether
that structure exists is therefore worth settling before such a method is built.
Our central finding is that this hypothesis is false, and not just for the canonical model.
The object is themetric-orthogonal Ehresmann connection A =−G−1
FFGBF , the horizontal
distribution G-orthogonal to the fibers, and we prove it isflatforanysmooth hierarchical
posterior (Proposition 1): its horizontal leaves are the level sets of the fiber score ∂α logp ,
so a global flat trivialisation always exists and there is no holonomy to obstruct mixing.
Gaussianity, conjugacy, and the dimension of the fiber are irrelevant; the logistic GLMM
(Proposition 4) is one closed-form instance. The connection-level account collapses onto the
metric-level one. What survives is not geometric but statistical: the conditional dependence
of the fiber on the base, governed per group by the prior fraction πj, the pooling factor
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
B
(µ,σ)θ1
Fθ1
θ2
Fθ2
θ3
Fθ3
π
E
(α1,...,α J)
s
(a) Fiber bundle π:E → B.
Each base pointθ = (µ,σ ) has
a fiberFθ∼= RJ of group pa-
rameters; a sections picks one
fiber point per base value.
B
γθ0
Fθ0
Hjα0
j
∆αj
∆αj=0
α0
j
(b) Apparent holonomy is a lin-
earisation artifact. The fiber-
frozen (linearised) connection
seems to contract the fiber
aroundγ toHjα0
j (faded), but
the true connection transports
it back to itself: ∆ αj = 0
(Prop. 4).
δα
δθ
(θ,α)
Vp
Hp
Aδθ
δθ
X
XV
A=−G −1
FFGBF
(c) The connection A =
−G−1
FFGBF decomposes the
tangent space at ( θ,α ) ∈ E
into vertical Vp (fiber direc-
tions) and horizontal Hp (pre-
scribed co-movement δα =
Aδθ ). A NUTS proposal
X carries a non-zero vertical
residualX V .
Figure 1: Geometric structure of a hierarchical posterior.(a)The joint space E is a fiber
bundle over the hyperparameter base B; each fiberFθ∼= RJ carries the group parameters
(α1,...,α J).(b)The naive holonomy picture, in which a closed loop γ inB contracts the
fiber by Hj < 1. This is the behaviour of the linearised connection only; we prove the
true connection is flat (Prop. 4), so its holonomy is trivial.(c)The Ehresmann connection
A =−G−1
FFGBF defines a horizontal subspace Hp at each point; a generic NUTS proposal X
has a non-zero vertical residualX V because the sampler does not knowA.
of Gelman and Pardoe (2006), the precise form of the prior/likelihood balance whose role
Betancourt and Girolami (2015) established geometrically, which the bundle geometry now
produces in closed form, and which, once the connection is known to be flat, is theonlything
left governing the obstruction. The Fisher information actually carries several connections,
of which only this one is at issue; we keep them apart in Section 3.4. The geometry is not
thereby vacuous, however: genuine, even rotational, curvature reappears as soon as one
transports along a sampler’sworkingmetric rather than the true Hessian, and that is where
holonomy returns — as an algorithmic rather than a geometric phenomenon (Section 9.2).
Standard diagnostics do not identify this mechanism. ˆR (Gelman and Rubin, 1992; Vehtari
et al., 2021) measures chain-to-chain variability. ESS measures autocorrelation. Divergence
counts flag regions of high curvature in the Hamiltonian, not in the parameter-space geometry.
All of these register thesymptomsof the obstruction (slow mixing in the affected coordinates),
but none localises the base–fiber coupling to specific groups, and none indicates the remedy
(which groups to reparameterise). The empirical sections show that the mechanism’s chain-
level signature is structured conditional autocorrelation localised in prior-dominated groups
and predicted by the analytic prior fraction πj, rather than transport-following drift —
consistent with the connection being flat.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
1.1 Contributions
This paper makes the following contributions.
1. Geometric framework and a universal flatness theorem(Section 3). We formalise
the fiber bundle structure of hierarchical posterior parameter spaces, on which the
Fisher information metric induces a natural Ehresmann connection A =−G−1
FFGBF .
Our main geometric result (Proposition 1) is that this connection isflatforanysmooth
hierarchical posterior, of any fiber dimension and any prior: its horizontal leaves are
the level sets of the fiber score ∂α logp , so the holonomy is trivial and the closed-form
logistic-GLMM case (Proposition 4) is a corollary. The nonzero exterior-derivative
curvatureFj =−2/(σ5G2
FF,j ) is only the fiber-frozenlinearisation; the true connection
transports trivially, and the synthetic “holonomy” it appears to show is that linearisation
artifact.
2. The prior fraction as the operative quantity(Section 5). With the connection
flat, the obstruction reduces to the conditional dependence of fiber on base, governed
per group by the prior fraction πj = (1/σ2)/GFF,j . This quantity is not new: it is
exactly the pooling factor ω of Gelman and Pardoe (2006) and the per-group form of
the prior/likelihood balance that Betancourt and Girolami (2015) tied to the optimal
parameterisation. Our contribution is to derive it from the bundle geometry as theonly
quantity left governing the obstruction once the connection is known to be flat, to give
it in closed form for the GLMM, and to compute it per coordinate from a fitted model.
3. A loop-conditional dependence diagnostic and an attribution null(Section 4).
We propose a chain-based diagnostic that estimates per-group loop-conditional de-
pendence coefficients ˆρj by weighted least squares over approximate loops in the
hyperparameter chain. A direct attribution test, comparing observed fiber displace-
ments with parallel-transport predictions along the same chain segments, returns a
null result, exactly as flatness requires: NUTS does not transport the fiber, so the
chain-level signature is excess conditional autocorrelation localised in prior-dominated
groups, not transport-following drift.
4. Where curvature genuinely lives: working-metric connections(Section 9.2).
Flatness holds for the connection of thetrueHessian metric. For a connection built
from aworkingmetric (a sampler’s fixed mass matrix), the curvature is generically
nonzero and can be rotational, which we demonstrate with derivatives validated against
automatic differentiation. A fixed-metric sampler transports along this curved connec-
tion, so holonomy re-enters as analgorithmicrather than geometric phenomenon — the
natural bridge to connection-aware sampling.
5. Simulation study(Section 6). A 4 × 4 factorial study over observations per group
(nj∈{ 3, 10, 30, 100}) and hierarchical standard deviation ( σtrue∈{ 0.5, 1, 2, 3}), 10
replicates per cell, confirms that the diagnostic signal tracks the analytic prior fraction.
The relationship with σ is non-monotone, separating funnel severity (a base-space
pathology) from the base–fiber coupling thatπ j measures.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
6. Practitioner guidance and a controlled comparison(Section 7). We situate
πj within established remedies, per-group partial non-centering (Papaspiliopoulos
et al., 2003; Gorinova et al., 2020), interweaving (Yu and Meng, 2011), and fiber
marginalisation, so a flagged group comes with a standard-tool response, with wj≈π j
supplying the per-group weight analytically. A controlled mixed-design comparison
shows this rule is a safe interpolator that tracks the better uniform parameterisation
without surpassing it when the min-ESS bottleneck is the σ-funnel. A connection-
corrected block sampler (horizontal mcmc) is included as a proof of concept.
7. The fibr R package(Section 8). The prior fraction (with a brms adapter) and the
smoothbp advisor() companion are distributed as the open-source R package fibr
(Bindoff, 2026a); the connection, dependence, and sampler methods accompany the
paper as reproduction code in the repository.
1.2 Notation
Scalars are unadorned (µ,σ,α j). Vectors are lower-case bold (α). Matrices are upper-case
(G,A,H ). We write J for the number of groups, K for the dimension of the base space
(K = 2 throughout: θ = (µ,σ )),M for the number of detected loop pairs, and N for the total
number of observations. The notation [J] denotes{1,...,J}.∥·∥ F is the Frobenius norm.
2 Background
2.1 Hierarchical models and the centering problem
The two-level normal hierarchy, and its generalisations to GLMMs, are the canonical setting
where posterior geometry creates sampling difficulty. Papaspiliopoulos et al. (2003, 2007)
characterised the centering/non-centering trade-off: the centred parameterisation is efficient
when the likelihood identifies the group-level parameters well, while the non-centred parame-
terisation is efficient when the prior dominates. Betancourt and Girolami (2015) described
the geometric anatomy of the resulting funnel and established the role of the prior/likelihood
balance in determining the optimal parameterisation. Betancourt (2019) gave the sharpest
geometric statement to date: centering versus non-centering is anincompletereparameteri-
sation, equivalent to a change of the Riemannian metric, so the two parameterisations are
mirror-image metric geometries. These are metric-level accounts, and they are essentially
complete at that level; what they leave open, and what we take up, is whether the base–fiber
connectionadds anything beyond the metric. The per-group quantity at the centre of our
answer, the prior fraction πj, makes this balance precise and coincides with the shrinkage
/ pooling factor of Gelman and Pardoe (2006); Sections 3 and 5 derive it from the bundle
geometry.
2.2 Riemannian manifold HMC
Girolami and Calderhead (2011) proposed Riemannian manifold Langevin and Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (RMHMC), using the Fisher information metric as a position-dependent mass
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
matrix. This adapts the sampler to the local curvature of the posterior manifold and
dramatically improves performance in the funnel and related geometries. Betancourt (2013)
extended this to a general metric framework. Zhang and Sutton (2014) proposed a semi-
separable decomposition for hierarchical models, splitting the Hamiltonian into base and
fiber contributions with a Schur complement correction. Kleppe (2024) showed that the
log-density gradient covariance provides a practical proxy for the Fisher metric without
requiring analytical computation.
These are all metric-adaptation methods: they precondition with the Fisher metric
or a proxy for it. Our results bear on them in two opposite ways. First, the base–fiber
Schur-complement correction of Zhang and Sutton (2014) is built from the same blocks as
our connection A =−G−1
FFGBF , which is the horizontal lift of a base move; Proposition 1
shows this connection is flat, so for thetrueFisher metric there is no horizontal information
beyond the metric to exploit — consistent with the reparameterisation–metric equivalence of
Betancourt (2019). Second, and conversely, a sampler thatfixesits mass matrix, as adaptive
HMC does after warmup, transports the fiber along the connection of thatworkingmetric,
which is generically curved (Section 9.2). That is the regime in which a connection-aware
correction has genuine content, and it is the subject of a companion paper.
2.3 Fiber bundles in statistics
Differential and information geometry have a long history in statistics: the dually-flat structure
of exponential families and the α-connections of Amari and Nagaoka (2000) are standard, and
tangent-bundle constructions appear throughout that literature. What is new here, to our
knowledge, is the specific object: the metric-orthogonalEhresmann connectionof the base–
fiber split of a hierarchical posterior, A =−G−1
FFGBF , together with its curvature analysis and
the resulting flatness theorem. The connection describes how fibers are parallel-transported
as the base moves. We give a self-contained treatment of the necessary geometry in Section 3;
accessible references include Kobayashi and Nomizu (1963) and Nakahara (2003).
3 The Geometric Framework
3.1 Fiber bundle structure of hierarchical posteriors
Consider a two-level hierarchical model with hyperparametersθ∈B⊆R K (thebase space)
and group-level parameters α∈R J (thefiber). The joint parameter space is thetotal space
E=B×R J, equipped with the projectionπ:E→B,π(θ,α) =θ.
The fiber over a pointθ∈B isFθ =π−1(θ)∼= RJ, representing the group-level parameters
conditioned on the hyperparameters. In the canonical GLMM:
B={(µ,σ) :µ∈R, σ >0}, K= 2,(1)
F(µ,σ) =R J with priorα j|µ,σ∼N(µ,σ 2).(2)
Fixed effects β may be treated as part of the base space or marginalised; for clarity we
include them in the base throughout and writeθ= (µ,σ,β) when they are relevant.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Remark 1.The bundle E→B is topologically trivial (E∼=B×R J). The off-diagonal Fisher
metric blocks GBF couple base and fiber in a way that depends on the current parameter
values, so the induced connection is non-trivial as adistribution; whether it iscurvedis a
separate question, and Section 5 shows that for the GLMM it is not (the connection is flat).
The centering/non-centering debate is, geometrically, a search for a trivialisation that flattens
the induced connection; flatness guarantees one exists.
3.2 The Fisher metric and its block structure
The Fisher information metric onEis the expected negative Hessian of the log-posterior:
Gpq(θ,α) =−E y|θ,α
∂2 logp(y,θ,α)
∂ξp∂ξq

,(3)
whereξ = (θ,α ) concatenates all parameters. The block structure of G in the base–fiber
decomposition is
G=
GBB G⊤
BF
GBF GFF

,(4)
where GFF ∈R J×J is the fiber metric block, GBF∈R J×K is the off-diagonal coupling block,
andGBB∈R K×K is the base metric block. The off-diagonal block GBF encodes how base and
fiber directions are coupled: it is non-zero whenever the prior creates statistical dependence
betweenθandα.
Two points fix the precise object the connection is built from. First, GBF arises only from
the prior p(α|θ ), the likelihood does not depend on the hyperparameters, so it carries no
expectation over y: GBF =−∂α∂θ logp (α|θ ). Second, the connection (5) and the flatness
analysis below use the negative Hessian of therealisedlog-posterior, the observed information
the sampler sees at a point. This coincides with the expected Fisher metric (3) whenever the
likelihood Hessian is data-independent, as it is for canonical-link GLMs, including the logistic
GLMM of Section 5, where−∂2
αj logp (y|α j) =P
ipji(1−pji) does not depend ony. We keep
the nameFisher information metricfor both, in keeping with the RMHMC literature; the
distinction matters only for non-canonical links, where the observed-information connection
is the relevant object.
3.3 The Ehresmann connection
Definition 1(Ehresmann connection).Given the block metric (4), theEhresmann connection
formis theJ×Kmatrix-valued function
A(θ,α) =−G FF (θ,α)−1GBF (θ,α).(5)
Thehorizontal liftof a base tangent vector vB∈T θB to a point( θ,α )∈E is the total-space
vector ˜v= (v B, AvB): the unique direction inTEthat isG-orthogonal to the fiber.
Geometrically,A tells us how the fiber must co-move with the base to remain “stationary”
relative to the posterior geometry. Moving the hyperparameters by δθ while keeping the fiber
on the horizontal slice requires a simultaneous fiber displacement ofδα=Aδθ.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Remark 2(Relationship to centering).In the centred parameterisation of a normal–normal
hierarchy,Aj,µ = 1/(σ2GFF,j )(derived in Section 5). This is positive and large when σ is
small (tight prior, high prior precision), meaning the conditional posterior of every αj tracks
µ tightly. The centred chain explores this slowly; we show below that the obstruction is this
conditional dependence rather than any holonomy ofA.
3.4 Which connection? A disambiguation
The Fisher information carries several connections, and our results concern one of them
specifically. We separate three objects on which the words “flat” and “curved” have different
answers.
(i) The Levi-Civita connection of the Fisher–Rao metric on the base.The intrinsic
Riemannian geometry of the location-scale family (µ,σ ) is hyperbolic: the Fisher–Rao metric
has constant negative curvature and isnotflat (Amari and Nagaoka, 2000). This is the
genuine curvature of the base manifold, and it is the geometric content of the funnel. Nothing
in this paper removes or trivialises it.
(ii) The Amari e- and m-connections.Because the Gaussian is an exponential family, the
dual α =±1 connections are flat: affine (natural and expectation) coordinates exist in which
they vanish (Amari and Nagaoka, 2000). That the α =±1 connections are flat while the
α = 0 (Levi-Civita) connection of (i) is not is the standard fact that dual flatness does not
imply Riemannian flatness.
(iii) The metric-orthogonal Ehresmann connection A of (5).This is not an affine
connection on a statistical manifold but an Ehresmann connection on the parameter bundle
E→B : a horizontal distribution, G-orthogonal to the fibers. Propositions 1 and 4 concern
this object, andonlythis object: its curvature, the obstruction to integrability of the
horizontal distribution, vanishes identically.
Every “flat”, “curvature”, and “holonomy” statement in Sections 4–9 refers to A of (iii).
The nonzero Fj of (7) below is the curvature of thelinearisedconnection ˜A(θ) :=A(θ,α 0)
obtained by freezing the fiber, a different Ehresmann connection that approximates A near
a fixed fiber point, and is the quantity our synthetic-loop validation integrates. When we
later call this nonzero Fj an “artifact,” we mean precisely that it is the curvature of ˜A, not
of A; we donotmean the Fisher–Rao curvature of (i), which is real and which we leave
untouched. Why A is flat, its horizontal leaves are the level sets of the fiber score, is the
subject of Section 3.6. The flat coordinate that results is the conditional score, which for the
GLMM is theprecision-weighted residual ( αj−µ )/σ2, not the SD-weighted non-centering
(αj−µ)/σ; both reparameterise the fiber, but only the score is horizontal forA.
3.5 Holonomy and curvature
Definition 2(Holonomy).Let γ : [0, 1]→B be a closed loop in the base ( γ(0) =γ(1) =θ0).
Starting from a fiber point α0∈F θ0, theparallel transportof α0 along γ is the path t7→α (t)
inEsatisfying
˙α(t) =A(γ(t),α(t)) ˙γ(t),α(0) =α 0,(6)
and theholonomyis the net displacement∆α=α(1)−α 0 after traversing the loop.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Thecurvatureof the connection is the obstruction to integrability of its horizontal
distribution, equivalently, the vertical component of the Lie bracket of two horizontal lifts,
and it governs holonomy: for a small loop enclosing areaA, the holonomy is ∆α≈ (curvature)·
A+O(A3/2), so a connection of zero curvature, aflatconnection, has trivial holonomy around
contractible loops. The entire centring/non-centring intuition rests on the hypothesis that A
is curved. The next subsection shows it is not.
3.6 Universal flatness: the score is a first integral
The curvature in (7)–(8) is the linearised one. Thefullcurvature of A is governed by a single
fact that does not depend on the model at all.
Proposition 1(Universal flatness of the metric connection).Let ℓ(θ,α )be a smooth log-
posterior onE =B×RJ with fiber-precision blockGFF =−∂2
αℓ nonsingular on an open region
U⊆E , and GBF =−∂α∂θℓ. The metric-orthogonal Ehresmann connection A =−G−1
FFGBF
isflaton U: its horizontal distribution is integrable, with thefiber score s(θ,α ) =∂αℓ as
a (vector) first integral. On any simply connected subregion the holonomy is trivial; and
where the conditional score α7→∂ αℓ is a diffeomorphism (in particular when the conditional
posterior is log-concave, as in the logistic GLMM), the map( θ,α )7→ (θ,s )is a global flat
trivialisation; otherwise it is local.
Proof.The horizontal lift ofv∈T θBis (v,Av). Differentiating the score along it,
ds(v,Av) =∂ 2
ααℓ(Av) +∂ 2
αθℓv= (−G FF )(−G−1
FFGBFv) + (−GBF )v=0.
Sos is constant along horizontal curves and the horizontal distribution lies in kerds . Where
GFF is nonsingular,ds has rankJ (its fiber block−GFF is invertible), so kerds has dimension
K, equal to the rank of the horizontal distribution; the two coincide. The horizontal
distribution is therefore the tangent distribution of the foliation of U by the level sets of the
globally defined maps, hence integrable, and its curvature vanishes.
Three consequences are worth stating. First,the flatness has nothing to do with conjugacy,
Gaussianity, or the dimension of the fiber: the proof uses only that ℓ is smooth and GFF
is nonsingular. The closed-form GLMM computation of Section 5 (Proposition 4) is one
instance, retained because the explicit cancellation is instructive and because it pins down
the linearised curvature Fj (Section 3.7). Second, the flat coordinate is the conditional score
s =∂αℓ, equivalently the residual to the conditional mode (where s =0); for a Gaussian
prior this is the precision-weighted residual ( αj−µ )/σ2. Third, the hypotheses are sharp.
Flatness can fail only where GFF issingular(a degenerate or unidentified conditional, the
fiber-degeneracy mode of Section 9) or for a connection built from a metric other than the
true Hessian. The latter is where genuine, and even rotational, curvature appears; we return
to it in Section 9.2.
3.7 The linearised curvature
A non-zero curvature reappears the moment onefreezesthe fiber. Treating A as a function
of the base alone, holding α at a fixed α0, its exterior derivative gives, for the K = 2 base, a
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
J-vector
Fj = ∂Aj,2
∂θ1 − ∂Aj,1
∂θ2 , j∈[J],(7)
where Aj,k is the (j,k ) entry of A (for a base of dimension K the curvature is a J×K×K
antisymmetric tensor; only K = 2 is needed here). This is the curvature of thelinearised
(fiber-frozen) connection ˜A(θ) =A(θ,α 0). The full curvature of A adds the vertical terms
A∂ αA that Proposition 1 cancels exactly; Fj keeps only the first piece. Its Stokes prediction,
∆αj≈F j(θ0,α 0)A+O(A 3/2),(8)
is therefore the holonomy of ˜A, not of A, whose holonomy is zero. The linearised object
is not a fiction: it is what one obtains by evaluating the connection at a fixed fiber point
and ignoring its motion, which is exactly what a numerical validation that holds α0 fixed
computes (Section 5.6) and what the chain diagnostic sees at the loop time-scale. We compute
Fj in closed form for the GLMM in Section 5.
3.8 What the framework requires of a model
To apply the dependence diagnostic (Section 4) to a new hierarchical model, the practitioner
needs only a posterior chain: the diagnostic algorithm uses the chain draws themselves and
requires no analytical computation. To compute the analytic connection and curvature (Sec-
tion 5), one additionally needs closed-form or automatic-differentiation-computed expressions
for GFF and GBF . For the two-level logistic GLMM, both are available analytically; the
extension to models where AD must be used is future work (Section 9).
4 The Loop-Conditional Dependence Diagnostic
Because the connection is flat (Section 5), the chain-level quantity this diagnostic estimates
is not geometric holonomy butloop-conditional fiber dependence: the residual dependence of
the fiber at the end of an approximate base-space loop on its value at the start. We denote
the per-group coefficient ˆρj to distinguish it from the (trivial) geometric holonomy Hj of
Section 5. The diagnostic is implemented as holonomy diagnostic() in fibr; the function
name is retained for continuity.
Why estimate this at all, given that Proposition 1 already settles the geometry and the
analytic prior fraction πj (Section 5) localises the coupling more cleanly? The diagnostic is
secondaryto πj and we treat it as such, but it earns a place on three grounds. First, it is
model-agnostic: it uses only the posterior draws and needs no closed-form or differentiated
metric blocks, so it applies to models where GFF and GBF are unavailable and πj cannot be
computed. Second, it isloop-conditional— it measures fiber dependence conditioned on the
hyperparameters returning to (approximately) where they started, which is not the same
as a plain per-group effective sample size: that conditioning is what isolates the base–fiber
coupling from generic fiber autocorrelation. Third, it is theempiricalcounterpart of πj, and
the agreement between the two (Section 6) is what ties the analytic theory to chain behaviour.
Where πj is available it is the primary, more robust per-group flag (Section 9); the diagnostic
corroborates and extends it.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
4.1 Overview
Given a posterior chain on (θ,α ), the diagnostic proceeds in four steps: (1) detect approximate
loops in the base space B, (2) estimate per-group loop-conditional dependence coefficients ρj
from the fiber values at loop endpoints, (3) assess sensitivity to the minimum loop gap g, and
(4) corroborate flatness empirically (the attribution test) by comparison with the analytically
integrated parallel transport (Section 4.7).
A point of interpretation governs everything that follows, so we state it up front. For
a chain in equilibrium, the fiber value at the end of a detected loop is a draw from the
conditional posterior given (approximately) the same base point as at the start. If the chain
mixed instantly,αe andαs would be independent draws from that conditional, and the best
linear dependence map would be P≈ 0 (after residualisation; Section 4.3). A slowly mixing
chain instead retains memory of αs, giving P closer to the identity. The raw coefficients
therefore measureloop-conditional fiber dependence at the loop time-scale. In principle this
could be driven by connection geometry (systematic, signed, area-dependent transport) as well
as by generic autocorrelation (unsigned persistence); the flatness result rules out the former,
but we retain the attribution step in Section 4.7, which tests directly whether thedirection
and magnitudeof fiber displacement across each loop matches the analytic parallel-transport
prediction, and which returns the null result that flatness predicts.
4.2 Loop detection
Aloop pairis a pair of chain iterations ( s,e ) with e−s≥g (minimum gap g) such that
the base-space distance∥θe−θs∥2 is small. The gap g ensures that loop endpoints are not
simply adjacent autocorrelated states.
Algorithm 1Loop detection in base space
Require: Base-space chain{θt}T
t=1, tolerance ε, minimum gap g, number of neighbours k,
maximum loopsL max
1:Standardise columns of{θ t}to unit variance.
2:Ifε=NULL: setεto the 5th percentile of a sub-sampled pairwise distance distribution.
3:Build ak-nearest-neighbour index over{θ t}.
4:foreacht= 1,...,T:
5: Query the k nearest neighbours of θt; letNt be those with distance <ε and index gap
>g.
6:Record pairs (t,s) for eachs∈N t.
7:Keep theL max tightest pairs (smallest∥θ e−θs∥2).
Ensure:Data frame of loop pairs (s,e,d) whered=∥θ e−θs∥2.
Loop detection is runper chainso that independent chains are never spliced. Pairs from
all chains are pooled for the subsequent regression.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
4.3 Transport map estimation
By Remark 5, the transport map for the GLMM class is diagonal with real entries: parallel
transport scales each fiber coordinate independently. We therefore estimate J per-group
scalars rather than a full J×J matrix. Given M loop pairs with fiber start values αsk,j and
end valuesα ek,j, the weighted least squares estimate for groupjis
ˆρj =
PM
k=1wkαek,jαsk,j
PM
k=1wkα2
sk,j +δ
,(9)
where wk are loop weights and δ >0 is a small ridge penalty. We write ˆP = diag(ˆρ1,...,ˆρ J).
The fibr implementation retains the unrestricted J×J estimator ˆP = (EWS⊤)(SWS⊤ +
δI)−1 as an option ( structure = "full" ) for models with genuinely coupled fibers, but
for diagonal-transport models the full estimator fits J2 parameters to M noisy pairs and
manufactures spurious off-diagonal structure, including spurious complex eigenvalues that
can be mistaken for rotational holonomy. All results in this paper use the diagonal estimator.
Weights are based on loop tightness: wk∝exp (−dk/ ¯d), where dk =∥θek−θsk∥2 and
¯d is the mean distance, so that tighter loops (better approximations to true closed loops)
contribute more.
Residualisation.Before estimating ˆP , the fiber draws are residualised against the base
draws via OLS, removing the linear base-to-fiber effect (e.g., αj≈µ in the centred GLMM).
This isolates the vertical fiber component where geometric holonomy lives.
Interpretation.The model αe≈Pα s is the simplest linear summary of loop-conditional
dependence. For a well-mixed chain the endpoints are independent draws from the same
conditional, so ˆρj≈ 0; a slowly mixing chain gives ˆρj closer to unity. Note that geometric
holonomy would also have produced ˆρj̸= 0, but with a loop-orientation- and area-dependent
signature; since the connection is flat, no such geometric contribution exists, and any nonzero
ˆρj is conditional autocorrelation. This is what the attribution test of Section 4.7 confirms.
4.4 Per-group dependence coefficients and scalar summary
The estimated coefficients ˆρ1,...,ˆρ J are read as follows:
•ˆρj≈ 0: loop endpoints are approximately independent draws from the conditional
posterior; the chain mixes faster than the loop time-scale and no signal survives.
•ˆρj substantially above 0: the fiber retains loop-conditional dependence at the loop
time-scale. Under flatness this is conditional autocorrelation; the attribution step
(Section 4.7) and the gap profile (Section 4.6) confirm there is no additional geometric
component.
•ˆρj > 1: indicates numerical instability or insufficient residualisation rather than a
genuine effect.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
The mean coefficient ¯ρ= J−1P
j ˆρj is our primary scalar summary, ranging from 0
(independent endpoints) toward 1 (full persistence). The Frobenius deviation



 ˆP−I



F
is also reported but is a less discriminating summary: it equals
√
J in both the P≈ 0
and P≈I limits. Because the coefficients are group-aligned, ˆρj can be compared directly
with per-group analytic quantities: the prior fraction πj (20) and the integrated transport
prediction (Section 4.7).
4.5 Bootstrap uncertainty
Uncertainty is quantified by resampling loop pairs with replacement. For each of B bootstrap
replicates, equation (9) is re-solved on the resampled pairs, and the resulting factors are
recorded. Because the diagonal estimator preserves group identity, the bootstrap distribution
of each ˆρj is directly interpretable as per-group uncertainty, displayed as intervals on the
per-group transport plot.
4.6 Gap sensitivity
The minimum gap g sets the time-scale at which loops are detected. If g is inside the
integrated autocorrelation time (IACT) of the fiber chain, ˆρj is dominated by ordinary
autocorrelation; as g grows past the IACT, the autocorrelation contribution decays. Had the
connection been curved, a systematic transport contribution would re-accumulate on every
loop regardless of elapsed time and persist beyond the IACT; the gap profile was designed
to expose such a component. Flatness implies there is none, and the profiles bear this out.
We report ˆρj as a profile over a grid of gaps (e.g. g∈{ 3, 10, 25, 50}) rather than at a single
value, alongside the estimated IACT of the base and fiber chains. Two components can
contribute to a signal surviving at g beyond the IACT: ordinary autocorrelation (decays with
gap) and residualisation leakage (gap-independent, arising because OLS removes only the
linearbase-to-fiber dependence, while loop endpoints share the same base point and hence
the same nonlinear conditional mean). A negative-control experiment reported in Section 4.7
separates these contributors empirically.
4.7 Attribution: empirical transport vs. integrated connection
A sharper test of the geometric interpretation bypasses the transport factors entirely. For each
detected loop, integrate transport() numerically integrates the analytic connection (6)
along the actual chain trajectory between the loop endpoints, producing a per-loop, per-group
predictionof the fiber displacement attributable to parallel transport, together with the
signed enclosed area of the base trajectory. Holonomy predicts displacements whose sign
tracks loop orientation and whose magnitude tracks the enclosed area and local curvature Fj;
generic autocorrelation predicts displacements uncorrelated with orientation and area.
On the sparse GLMM benchmark analysed here, this attribution test yields a null result.
Regressing empirical displacement on the integrated-connection prediction gives slopes near
zero for all groups (range −0.001 to 0.005; one borderline significant at p = 0.025), and
empirical displacements show no dependence on signed loop area in any group.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Two caveats scope this null.Test harshness: integrated parallel-transport predictions
reach|∆α|≈ 100–200 against observed displacements of 2–5, because the linear-transport
approximation breaks down along long, jagged MCMC paths through high-curvature regions.
A restricted test on only the shortest, tightest loops (length ≤ 50, tightest distance quartile)
also yields null results: 38 loops survived the filter and per-group slopes are of order 10 −5 per
posterior SD.
Negative control: for each gap g, we construct matched-gap control pairs chosen to have
largebase distance (above the median of pairwise distances at that gap). On the prior-
dominated cell (nj = 3, σtrue = 0.5, high πj), true loops give ¯ρj≈ 0.03–0.07 while controls
give ¯ρj≈ 0: base-closure conditioning carries signal in exactly the cell where πj predicts it.
On the likelihood-dominated cell (σtrue = 3.0, low πj), both arms give ¯ρj≈ 0. Figure 2 shows
the full gap profile for all four experimental cells: the contrast between true-loop ˆρj and the
near-zero control band is confined to the high- πj cell, in quantitative agreement with the
analytic prediction.
This null is exactly what the flatness of the connection (Proposition 4) requires: there is
no curvature, so there is no parallel-transport displacement for the chain to track, whether or
not the sampler follows horizontal lifts. The geometry’s chain-level signature is insteadexcess
conditional autocorrelation localised in prior-dominated groups—precisely what base-closure
conditioning isolates and what the analytic πj predicts. The analytic πj is the primary and
more robust diagnostic output: it requires no chain-based estimation, is free of residualisation
leakage, and directly identifies which groups will show elevated ˆρj. The chain-based ˆρj and
its gap-sensitivity profile serve as empirical corroboration of the πj prediction, confirming
that the conditional dependence is detectable in actual chains, but πj remains the headline
flag. The diagnostic workflow (loop detection, estimation of ˆρj, and gap-sensitivity profiling)
remains a valid probe of loop-conditional fiber dependence; flatness tells us that what it
measures is conditional autocorrelation rather than holonomy.
4.8 Comparison: centred vs. non-centred
Figure 3 shows the per-group dependence coefficients across the gap grid for the centred and
non-centred parameterisations of a sparse logistic GLMM ( J = 8 groups, nj = 3 observations
each,σtrue = 3). At the shortest gap (g = 3), the centred chain shows a modestly larger mean
coefficient ( ¯ρ≈0.044) than the non-centred chain ( ¯ρ≈0.022). The centred profile decays
with gap (to≈ 0.005 at g = 50), while the non-centred profile is flat across all gaps (≈ 0.022–
0.023). The gap-independence of the non-centred factors, for a parameterisation in which
˜αj is conditionally independent of (µ,σ ) by construction, is consistent with residualisation
leakage rather than geometric signal (Section 4.7). At long gaps the centred profile falls
below the non-centred level; the short-gap excess in the centred chain (≈ 0.044 at g = 3 vs
≈ 0.005 at g = 50) is the autocorrelation contribution that decays with lag, while the flat
non-centred baseline (≈ 0.022–0.023 across all gaps) is the leakage floor, confirmed by the
negative-control experiment.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
5 Analytic Connection for the Centred Logistic GLMM
5.1 Model
We work throughout with the two-level logistic GLMM:
yji∼Bernoulli
 
logit−1(αj +x⊤
jiβ)

, j∈[J], i= 1,...,n j,(10)
αj∼N(µ,σ 2),(11)
µ∼N(0,25), σ∼Exponential(1),β∼N(0,4I).(12)
The base space is B = R×R >0 with coordinates (µ,σ ), and the fiber is RJ with coordinates
α = (α1,...,α J). We write pji = logit−1(αj +x⊤
jiβ) for the success probability of observation
iin groupj.
5.2 Fisher metric blocks
We instantiate the block metric (4) for the GLMM. Because the logistic link is canonical,
the observed information used below equals the expected Fisher information (Section 3), so
naming these “Fisher metric blocks” is unambiguous here.
Proposition 2(Fisher metric blocks for the centred GLMM).The negative Hessian of the
log-posterior for model (10)–(12) has the following blocks, evaluated at a single parameter
point(µ,σ,α,β):
GFF,jj = 1
σ2 +
njX
i=1
pji(1−p ji),(13)
GBF,j1 =− 1
σ2,(base direction:µ)(14)
GBF,j2 =− 2(αj−µ)
σ3 ,(base direction:σ)(15)
whereG FF is diagonal andG BF∈R J×2.
Proof.The log-posterior is
logp∝
X
j∈[J]
njX
i=1

yji logpji +(1−y ji) log(1−pji)

−
X
j
(αj−µ) 2
2σ2 −Jlogσ−priors onµ,σ,β.
Taking second derivatives: the cross term between αj and αk (j̸ = k) vanishes because
observations within group j do not depend on αk. The diagonal ∂2/∂α2
j gives (13). Cross
terms ∂2/∂αj∂µ and ∂2/∂αj∂σ give (14) and (15) respectively, from the prior term−(αj−
µ)2/(2σ2).
Remark 3.The full base–base block GBB is not positive definite outside the posterior mode
in the centred parameterisation. This is the fingerprint of the funnel: the realised geometry of
the total space is indefinite in the( µ,σ )directions when the chain is in the neck of the funnel.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
The indefiniteness is confined to GBB, however; the fiber block GFF,jj = 1/σ2 +P
ipji(1−pji)
is strictly positive throughout, so the connection A =−G−1
FFGBF and its G-orthogonality are
globally well-defined and never see the funnel. This is the two-pathologies distinction already
visible in the metric: the fiber geometry is always benign, the funnel is purely base-space. The
SoftAbs regularisation (Betancourt, 2013) resolves the base indefiniteness for the RMHMC
sampler (Section 2.2).
5.3 Connection form
From (5) and Proposition 2, the connection coefficients are:
Aj,µ = 1
σ2GFF,j
,(16)
Aj,σ = 2(αj−µ)
σ3GFF,j
.(17)
Both depend on the current fiber point αj, confirming that the connection is genuinely
non-linear.
5.4 Curvature: linearised and full
Proposition 3(Curvature of the linearised connection).Let ˜A(θ) :=A(θ,α 0)be the fiber-
frozen linearisation of A at a fixed fiber point α0. Its curvature (7), for the centred GLMM,
is
Fj = ∂Aj,σ
∂µ − ∂Aj,µ
∂σ =− 2
σ5G2
FF,j
.(18)
Equivalently,F j is the exterior derivative ofAtaken with the fiber held fixed.
Proof. From (17), noting that GFF,j does not depend on µ (the likelihood term involves αj,
β, and the data, but notµ):
∂Aj,σ
∂µ = −2
σ3GFF,j
.
From (16), noting that∂G FF,j/∂σ=−2/σ 3 (from the prior term 1/σ 2):
∂Aj,µ
∂σ = −2
σ3GFF,j
+ 1
σ2· 2/σ3
G2
FF,j
= −2
σ3GFF,j
+ 2
σ5G2
FF,j
.
Subtracting:F j =−2/(σ 5G2
FF,j ).
This linearised curvature is always negative (Fj < 0), and|Fj| grows as the prior dominates
(small σ, few data). Read naively, this suggests a contractive holonomy of ˜A that worsens as
the prior tightens. But ˜A is not the connection the sampler would have to follow; the true
connection is the fiber-dependent A. By Proposition 1 its full curvature vanishes; for the
GLMM this can be seen explicitly, and the cancellation is instructive.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Proposition 4(Flatness of the GLMM connection, instance of Proposition 1).The full
curvature of the metric-orthogonal Ehresmann connection A of (16)–(17), including the
vertical (fiber-derivative) terms, is identically zero for every groupj:
F full
j = ∂Aj,σ
∂µ − ∂Aj,µ
∂σ| {z }
=−2/(σ 5G2
FF,j )
+Aj,µ
∂Aj,σ
∂αj
−Aj,σ
∂Aj,µ
∂αj
| {z }
= +2/(σ5G2
FF,j )
= 0.(19)
Consequently the horizontal distribution is integrable (Frobenius), and since the base B =
R×R >0 is simply connected, the holonomy of every loop is trivial: a global flat trivialisation
exists.
Proof. The first pair is Proposition 3. For the vertical pair, write Sj =P
ipji(1−pji) so that
GFF,j = 1/σ2 +Sj and∂G FF,j/∂αj =S′
j =P
ipji(1−p ji)(1−2p ji). Then
Aj,µ
∂Aj,σ
∂αj
= 1
σ2GFF,j
"
2
σ3GFF,j
− 2(αj−µ)S′
j
σ3G2
FF,j
#
= 2
σ5G2
FF,j
− 2(αj−µ)S′
j
σ5G3
FF,j
,
Aj,σ
∂Aj,µ
∂αj
= 2(αj−µ)
σ3GFF,j
"
− S′
j
σ2G2
FF,j
#
=− 2(αj−µ)S′
j
σ5G3
FF,j
.
The S′
j terms cancel in the difference, leaving +2 /(σ5G2
FF,j ), which is exactly the negative of
the first pair. HenceF full
j = 0.
Remark 4(Why the linearised curvature is nonzero).The discrepancy between Fj̸= 0
and F full
j = 0is the vertical variation of A along the transported fiber. Freezing the fiber
(equivalently, holding GFF,j at its value at the loop centre) discards the second pair in (19)
and recovers the nonzeroFj. This is precisely what the synthetic-loop validation of Section 5.6
does, so the “holonomy” it reports is the holonomy of the linearised connection, not of
the true one. We confirm the result numerically in data-raw/verify flat connection.R:
integrating the true transport ODE around closed loops returns displacement of order10 −14,
while freezing GFF,j reproduces the linearised holonomy of Figure 4. Both Fj and F full
j are
curvatures of the Ehresmann connection (iii) of Section 3.4; neither is the Riemann curvature
of the Fisher–Rao metric, which is hyperbolic and nonzero and which the flatness of A does
not affect.
Remark 5(The structure group is abelian: no rotational holonomy).Because GFF is
diagonal and the rows of GBF decouple across groups, parallel transport acts on each fiber
coordinate independently: any loop’s transport is a per-group scaling αj7→h jαj withhj∈R >0
(and, by Proposition 4, hj = 1for the true connection). The structure group of this bundle is
abelian, and genuinelyrotationalholonomy (complex transport eigenvalues) is impossible for
this model class. This has a practical consequence for estimation: the diagnostic’s dependence
matrix ˆP is diagonal with real entries, so it should estimate J scalars rather than a full J×J
matrix (Section 4.3).
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
5.5 Prior fraction
The ratio of the prior precision to the total fiber precision
πj = 1/σ2
GFF,j
= 1/σ2
1/σ2 +Pnj
i=1pji(1−p ji) (20)
takes values in (0, 1) and measures how much of the fiber metric at group j is attributable
to the prior. When πj→ 1 the prior dominates (sparse data or large σ); when πj→ 0 the
likelihood dominates. This is exactly thepooling factor ω of Gelman and Pardoe (2006), the
fraction of a group’s posterior precision contributed by the prior: their ω = 1−σ 2
α/(σ2
α +σ2
y)
is (1/σ2
α)/(1/σ2
α +nj/σ2
y), which is Equation (20) for the Gaussian case. It is thus a classical
quantity, not a new one: recoverable by hand from a fitted multilevel model’s variance
components and per-group information, and reported in related (population-level) form as
the intraclass correlation by standard tools. What we add is its geometric derivation as
the residual obstruction once the connection is flat, and its per-coordinate computation;
the package simply returns it. (We use “pooling factor” rather than “shrinkage factor”
deliberately: some authors call the complement 1 −πj the shrinkage factor, a usage Gelman
and Pardoe flag as confusing, since a shrinkage factor of zero then means complete pooling.) It
is also the per-group form of the prior/likelihood balance that Betancourt and Girolami (2015)
tied to the optimal parameterisation. In plain terms, πj is the share of what the posterior
knows about group j that comes from the prior rather than from that group’s own data:
near 1, the data barely constrain the group and a non-centred parameterisation helps; near
0, the group is well identified and centring is fine. What the bundle derivation adds locally
is the observation that πj is determined by priorprecision1 /σ2 rather than priorvariance
— the source of the non-monotone behaviour in σ documented in Section 6. Substituting
into the linearised curvature (18) gives|Fj| = 2π2
j/σ: even the spurious linearised curvature
is controlled by πj, so the diagnostic and the analytic flag agree on where any signal must
concentrate.
Remark 6.The prior fraction πj is computed analytically from a subsample of posterior
draws and serves as a diagnostic in its own right: groups with πj > 0.6are good candidates
for non-centred reparameterisation (Section 7.4). This is the geometric basis for the per-group
parameterisation advice implemented infibr.
5.6 Synthetic loop validation
We check thelinearisedcurvature formula (18) against Stokes’ theorem (8) using synthetic
circular loops in (µ,σ ) space, bypassing any MCMC noise. We stress that this validates the
linearised connection only: the integration below holds the fiber fixed at α0 (equivalently,
freezes GFF ), which is the linearisation whose curvature is nonzero. Integrating thetrue
connection, with GFF updated as the fiber moves, returns zero displacement to integrator
precision, consistent with Proposition 4.
For a circle of radiusrcentred at the posterior mean (µ 0,σ 0,α 0,β 0):
1. Numerically integrate the ODE (6) around the circle (discretised into ns = 400 steps)
to obtain ∆α num
j .
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
2. Compute the first-order Stokes prediction ∆α Stokes
j =F j(µ0,σ 0,α 0)·πr 2.
Figure 4 shows the comparison for radii r∈ [0.02, 0.30] (approximately 0.02–0.30 posterior
standard deviations), displayed separately for each of the J = 8 groups. The numerically
integrated linearised transport and its first-order Stokes prediction agree closely for r≤ 0.20
across all groups, and diverge for larger radii where the quadratic Stokes term becomes
relevant. The divergence is not uniform: groups with higher |Fj| depart from the linear Stokes
prediction at smaller r, while groups with near-flat linearised curvature remain in agreement
throughout the range. This agreement validates the internal consistency of the connection
(16)–(17) and the linearised curvature (18). It isnotevidence of geometric holonomy: by
Proposition 4 the true holonomy is zero, and Figure 4 reports the linearised object that the
freezing ofα 0 creates.
6 Simulation Study
6.1 Design
We ran a 4× 4 factorial simulation study varying observations per group nj∈{ 3, 10, 30, 100}
and true hierarchical standard deviation σtrue∈{ 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0}, with J = 8 groups and
10 replicates per cell (160 Stan fits in total). For each replicate: data were simulated from
model (10)–(12) withβtrue = (0.8,− 0.5), µtrue = 0; the centred Stan model was fitted with 4
chains× 2,000 post-warmup iterations; the dependence diagnostic (diagonal estimator) was
evaluated at each gap in the grid g∈{ 3, 10, 25, 50}, alongside the estimated IACT of the
base and fiber chains; and the analytic prior fraction was computed from 200 subsampled
draws viacompute connection().
The primary scalar is the mean dependence coefficient ¯ρ=J−1P
j ˆρj at each gap. As
established in Section 4, this is near 0 when loop endpoints are independent (well-mixed at
the loop time-scale) and grows toward 1 with loop-conditional persistence. The gap profile
separates the two contributors that flatness leaves: ordinary autocorrelation, which decays
onceg exceeds the IACT, and residualisation leakage, which is gap-independent (Section 4.7).
With flatness established analytically, the simulation is not a search for a geometric signal
but a check of two things: that the conditional dependence πj predicts is detectable and
correctly localised in finite chains, and that it is geometrically separable from the funnel.
6.2 Results
The headline of the study is the geometric separation of the two pathologies (the non-monotone
σ behaviour below); the theory–empirical agreement confirms that the predicted dependence
is detectable in finite chains, but it is the weaker, expected half of the picture.
Heatmap.Figure 5 shows the median ¯ρover 10 replicates. The signal is strongest in the
upper-left corner (nj = 3, σtrue = 0.5–1.0) and decreases monotonically with nj at every σtrue
value.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
The σ-direction is non-monotone and illuminating.Within the nj = 3 row, ¯ρis
highest at σtrue = 0.5–1.0 (0.040 and 0.036 at the headline gap g = 50) and drops sharply
for σtrue∈{ 2.0, 3.0} (0.013, 0.015). This is not a failure of the diagnostic but a genuine
distinction: the prior fraction πj = (1/σ2)/GFF,j is determined by the ratio of priorprecision
to total precision. Increasing σ reduces 1/σ2, whichreducesthe prior fraction (Table 1) even
as it worsens the funnel. The funnel pathology (large σ, slow mixing in σ) and the coupling
pathology (large πj, strong base-conditional fiber dependence) are related but distinct: the
former is a problem of base-space geometry; the latter is a problem of the base–fiber coupling.
Standard diagnostics (divergences, low ESS) detect the former; the per-group ˆρj and analytic
πj from fibr localise the coupling pathology to specific groups, its chain-level signature being
structured conditional autocorrelation, per Section 4.7.
Theory vs. empirical.Figure 6 plots the mean prior fraction ¯π(analytic) against ¯ρ
(diagnostic), faceted by gap, for all 640 cell-replicate–gap combinations. The LOESS trend is
positive, consistent with the analytic prior fraction being a leading predictor of the empirical
signal. Given flatness, we read this straightforwardly: prior dominance slows mixing, so
πj predicts the strength of the conditional autocorrelation that the diagnostic measures,
with no geometric component to disentangle. The attribution test of Section 4.7 yielded the
corresponding null result; this figure establishes that the analytic quantity and the empirical
diagnostic move together across the design. Scatter around the trend reflects simulation
variability in the data and chain.
Table 1: Simulation study cell-level summary (median over 10 replicates, at headline gap
g = 50). ¯ρ: mean dependence coefficient; ρmax: largest per-group coefficient; ¯π: mean prior
fraction (analytic); % Div: percentage of runs with at least one divergence.
nj σtrue ¯ρ ρ max ¯π% Div
3 0.5 0.040 0.090 0.784 100
3 1.0 0.036 0.070 0.802 100
3 2.0 0.013 0.028 0.537 100
3 3.0 0.015 0.033 0.533 100
10 0.5 0.034 0.057 0.635 100
10 1.0 0.023 0.044 0.444 100
10 2.0 0.011 0.026 0.276 90
10 3.0 0.005 0.016 0.250 40
30 0.5 0.032 0.062 0.474 100
30 1.0 0.010 0.022 0.166 50
30 2.0 0.002 0.016 0.113 0
30 3.0 0.002 0.015 0.094 0
100 0.5 0.011 0.034 0.172 50
100 1.0 0.001 0.010 0.051 10
100 2.0 0.001 0.013 0.029 0
100 3.0 0.001 0.013 0.037 0
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
7 What to Do About It: Guidance for Practitioners
The diagnostic identifieswhichgroups suffer a geometric obstruction andwhy; this section
addresses what a practitioner should do next. The good news is that the indicated remedies
are well-established methods that require no new sampler: the geometric analysis tells us
whenandwhereto apply them.
7.1 Per-group (partial) non-centering, guided by the prior fraction
The prior fraction πj (20) is precisely the quantity that determines the optimal parameterisa-
tion of group j (Papaspiliopoulos et al., 2003, 2007). Groups with πj near 1 (prior-dominated)
should be non-centred; groups with πj near 0 (data-dominated) should remain centred;
intermediate groups benefit frompartialnon-centering,
αj =µ+σ wj ˜α
(wj)
j , w j∈[0,1],
which interpolates between the centred ( wj = 0) and non-centred ( wj = 1) coordinates.
For the Gaussian case the optimal partial non-centring weight is classical and closed-form
(Papaspiliopoulos et al., 2003); for non-Gaussian models Gorinova et al. (2020) instead learn
wj by stochastic variational optimisation (the VIP algorithm). The geometric analysis of
Section 5 supplies the GLMM analogue in closed form: wj≈π j evaluated at the posterior
mean, recovering the variational weight from a pilot run rather than an optimisation. This is
the primary practical payoff of the framework: a cheap, analytic, per-group parameterisation
rule with a clear justification. We tested this rule directly on a mixed design. Table 2
reports median min-ESS (over all parameters, J = 8 groups, 10 replicates) for the centred,
half (wj = 0.5), non-centred, and wj =πj parameterisations, across uniform-sparse, mixed,
and uniform-dense designs at σ∈{ 1, 2}. Two findings emerge, both consistent with the
two-pathologies view (Section 9).
(i)On min-ESS the non-centred parameterisation wins in every cell. The minimum
is taken over all parameters and is dominated by σ, whose centred geometry retains a
funnel that non-centering removes regardless of group size; in the range tested ( σ∈{ 1, 2},
nj∈{ 3, 50}) non-centering is never harmful enough elsewhere to forfeit this advantage. The
πj-adaptive rule interpolates in the right direction: atσ= 1 sparse,π j≈0.8, so its weights
are near-non-centred and it reaches min-ESS 2381, far above centred (187) and half (1071),
but it does not match full non-centring (3327), because the residual centering left by wj < 1
leaves some σ-funnel. We therefore do not claim wj =πj beatsboth uniform choices: in this
regime it is a safe interpolator that improves on the worse uniform choice and moves toward
the better asπ j rises, not a uniform winner.
(ii)The prior fraction nonetheless does its job at the level it speaks to, the per-group fiber.
On per-group αj ESS (Figure 8), wj =πj sits at or near the best method for every group:
it non-centres exactly the prior-dominated groups whose centred αj ESS would otherwise
lag, and leaves data-dominated groups alone. The min-ESS bottleneck is the σ-funnel, a
base-space pathology that no per-group fiber reparameterisation can touch; the gap between
per-group success and min-ESS is the two-pathologies distinction made concrete. A practical
aside visible in the same data: in the mixed design the data-rich groups stabilise σ and lift αj
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
ESS forallmethods, so a few well-identified groups can make centring tolerable for the sparse
ones. The value of wj =πj over a single uniform choice is thus robustness across regimes
(a uniform choice is optimal only within its own regime, and very large nj or σ→ 0 would
reverse non-centring’s advantage, cases not covered here) together with its role as an analytic
per-group diagnostic from a single pilot run. This is the typical situation in unbalanced
multilevel and panel data, where groups carry very different numbers of observations; there a
per-group choice can matter, whereas balanced designs are usually well served by a single
uniform parameterisation.
Table 2: Controlled comparison: median min-ESS (over all parameters) by parameterisation
and design. J = 8 groups, 10 replicates, 4 × 2000 post-warmup draws. wj = πj is the
proposed prior-fraction adaptive rule. Non-centred wins on min-ESS throughout because the
bottleneck is theσ-funnel;w j =π j interpolates toward it.
Methodσ= 1.0σ= 2.0
Sparse Mixed Dense Sparse Mixed Dense
Centred (wj = 0) 187 1988 1559 609 1993 1395
Half (wj = 0.5) 1071 2143 1768 1457 2173 1510
Non-centred (wj = 1) 3327 2626 1858 2349 2467 1628
wj =π j (adaptive) 2381 2119 1621 1432 2082 1389
7.2 Interweaving (ASIS)
When no single parameterisation works for all groups, or when the practitioner prefers not to
commit, the ancillarity–sufficiency interweaving strategy of Yu and Meng (2011) alternates
centred and non-centred updates within each iteration. ASIS is provably robust exactly in the
regime the diagnostic flags: where no single parameterisation suits every group simultaneously,
because the prior fractions πj are spread across the unit interval. By combining the sufficient
(centred) and ancillary (non-centred) augmentations it is efficient whenever at least one
is, group by group. For Stan users, the per-group rule of Section 7.1 is usually simpler to
implement; ASIS is the method of choice for Gibbs-style samplers where both conditionals
are tractable.
7.3 Marginalising the fiber
The coupling pathology lives in the base–fiber dependence; it can be removed entirely by
integrating the fiber out. For the logistic GLMM the conditional posterior of each αj given
(µ,σ,β ) is log-concave, so a Laplace or adaptive quadrature approximation to the marginal
likelihood of (µ,σ,β ) is accurate and cheap (as in INLA; Rue et al., 2009). Sampling the
low-dimensional marginal and drawing α|µ,σ,β,y afterwards eliminates the connection
rather than correcting for it, at the cost of an approximation whose error must be checked.
Where it applies, this is the most direct remedy; the diagnostic identifies when the extra
machinery is warranted.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
7.4 The connection as a fixed linear reparameterisation
The connection can also be turned into a reparameterisation directly. Evaluating the
coefficients{Aj,µ,Aj,σ} at the posterior mean (µ0,σ 0) and introducing horizontally-corrected
fiber coordinates
˜αj =α j−Aj,µ (µ−µ 0)−A j,σ (σ−σ 0) (21)
removes thelinearcontribution of the base to the fiber, weakening the base-conditional
dependence that πj measures. This isnotthe exact flat coordinate: by Proposition 1 that
is the conditional score ∂αℓ, the precision-weighted residual ( αj−µ )/σ2 for the GLMM,
which is nonlinear in the base. Equation (21) is itslinearisation, with A frozen at the
posterior mean and kept to first order in ( µ−µ 0,σ−σ 0). It is implemented in Stan as
glmm hconnected.stan and needs only the connection coefficients as data. Table 3 compares
effective sample size for the centred, non-centred, and horizontally-corrected models on the
sparse GLMM benchmark (J= 8,n j = 3,σ true = 3).
Table 3: ESS bulk (percentage of nominal 8,000) for key parameters under three parameteri-
sations on the sparse GLMM. H-corrected uses the posterior-mean connection coefficients as
in (21).
Parameter Centred H-corrected Non-centred
µ39.6% 90.6% 41.7%
σ7.7% 12.3% 29.3%
α[1] 66.5% 100.8% 100.2%
β[1] 60.8% 70.6% 86.4%
The H-corrected parameterisation dominates on µ (90.6% vs. 39.6% centred and 41.7%
non-centred) and matches non-centred on α[1]: the linear correction removes the µ–fiber
coupling well, even though it is only the linearisation of the exact trivialisation. It is weaker
on σ (12.3%) than non-centering (29.3%), but for a reason distinct from linearisation error:
σ is the funnel, abase-spacepathology, andnofiber reparameterisation (the exact score
map included) can touch it. Since σ is the bottleneck here, plain non-centering wins on
minimum ESS; the H-correction’s gains are on µ and the fiber. We therefore present it as a
diagnostic-driven illustration that the connection is directly actionable, not as a replacement
for non-centering, the per-group rule of Section 7.1 is the tool we recommend. The per-group
rule is already used in the smoothbp change-point package (Bindoff, 2026b), where πj guides
the parameterisation of each subject’s change-points; a worked example is in the package’s
reproduction materials, with a fuller treatment in a companion paper.
7.5 Connection-corrected proposals (proof of concept)
Finally, the connectionA =−G−1
FFGBF is itself directly actionable: it prescribes how the fiber
should co-move when the base moves to remain on the horizontal slice. The fibr package
provides horizontal mcmc(), a block Metropolis-within-Gibbs sampler in which each base-
block proposal ( µ,σ ) → (µ′,σ′) pre-displaces the fiber by ∆ α = A(µ,σ,α ) (∆µ, ∆σ)⊤
before the joint accept/reject step. We include this as a proof of concept that the analytic
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
connection is actionable at negligible cost, not as a recommended production sampler; for
applied work the methods of Sections 7.1–7.3 are mature, available in standard tooling, and
should be preferred. Two cautions are warranted. First, naively applying the connection as
a deterministic pre-displacement without the corresponding Jacobian correction is biased:
a simulation-based calibration check of that variant fails decisively, whereas the exactly-
invertible Laplace transport and a reparameterised HMC in the Laplace-standardised fiber
both pass calibration. This is consistent with flatness: the correct “connection-aware” move
is a reparameterisation, not a transport. Second, on the sparse benchmark the calibrated
variants are correct but do not outperform non-centred NUTS in effective sample size per
gradient evaluation; they are a demonstration, not a faster sampler. A full treatment of
connection-aware sampling (horizontal leapfrog HMC with A recomputed at every leapfrog
step, ergodicity analysis, and multi-model benchmarking) is developed in a companion paper.
7.6 Reading the prior fraction: influence and sensitivity
Beyond the centring decision,πj is an inferential quantity: it is the share of groupj’s posterior
precision supplied by the prior, so it localiseswhere prior choices can move conclusions. High-
πj groups are prior-dominated and are the ones to interrogate; low- πj groups are prior-robust
by construction. Two questions follow. Is σ well identified, or is πj inheriting the hyperprior?
Since πj = 1/(1 +Ijσ2), with Ij =GFF,j− 1/σ2 the group’s own likelihood information, and
σ is identified by thenumberof groups rather than the data per group, a refit under an
alternativeσ-prior shows whether the high-πj groups move (a hyperprior artefact) or hold (a
data statement). And for those groups, is the population-level prior they are shrunk toward
one you would defend for a group with little data of its own? A fuller treatment for applied
users is left to a separate paper.
Remark 7(A frequentist reading).The shrinkage is not itself Bayesian: the REML/BLUP
predictor of αj shrinks by the same factor, and the flat-prior limit σ→∞ sends πj→ 0,
recovering the per-group maximum-likelihood (no-pooling) estimate. That limit is also where
the sparse group becomes awkward — with small Ij the no-pooling estimate has variance
∼ 1/Ij and is barely admissible, and such groups are routinely discarded. A proper hierarchical
prior retains them with a coherent posterior, and πj states how much of the estimate rests on
that prior rather than on the likelihood, making the evidence explicit instead of excluding the
case.
8 ThefibrR Package
The fibr package (Bindoff, 2026a) centres on the prior fraction, the quantity this paper
concludes is the operative one; it is the maintained, user-facing tool and is distributed
on CRAN. The geometric and sampler methods used to produce the figures (the analytic
connection, the loop-conditional dependence diagnostic, the transport integrator, and the
connection-corrected sampler) accompany the paper as reproduction code under paper/ in
the source repository: with the connection flat for this model class, they are demonstration
apparatus rather than routine diagnostics, and they load by sourcing paper/setup.R. Table 4
lists the package’s exported functions.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
Table 4: Exported functions in the fibr R package. The connection, dependence,
and sampler methods of Sections 4–7 ( compute connection(), holonomy diagnostic(),
integrate transport(), synthetic holonomy loop(), horizontal mcmc()) are reproduc-
tion code in the repository, not package exports.
Function Description
prior fraction() Read-only per-coordinate prior fraction πj (shrinkage / pooling
factor) for a fitted hierarchical model, with an adapter forbrms fits
and a manual path for other Stan models. Reports which group-
level coordinates are prior-dominated, without reparameterising
or refitting.
smoothbp advisor() Fisher information decomposition for changepoint random effects
in smoothbp fits; returns per-group prior fractions and parame-
terisation recommendations.
The package itself depends only on posterior (B¨ urkner et al., 2022) for chain handling
and ggplot2 for visualisation; the reproduction code under paper/ additionally uses FNN
for k-nearest-neighbour search, Matrix, deSolve, and a Stan backend ( cmdstanr, Gabry
et al., 2024). While the connection and dependence machinery target the two-level logistic
GLMM, the prior fraction is model-agnostic: prior fraction() computes it per coordinate
for any fitted hierarchical model, with an adapter for brms fits, as a read-only report of
which group-level estimates are prior-dominated (mostly shrinkage) rather than data-driven.
Because the per-coordinate computation needs only the fitted variance components and the
per-observation working weights, it extends without special-casing to nested, crossed, and
multi-level designs and to non-Gaussian families. This is the regime in which the intraclass
correlation requires case-specific conventions (a latent-scale residual for generalised models, a
covariate value for random slopes, separate adjusted and unadjusted forms at each level), and
the package’s tests verify the per-coordinate values against an independent recomputation for
nested, crossed, and three-level Gaussian and Bernoulli fits. Because it neither reparameterises
nor refits, it carries none of the calibration burden of a reparameterisation and serves as a
lightweight prior-influence diagnostic alongside ˆR and effective sample size. The package is
available athttps://github.com/ABindoff/fibr.
9 Discussion
9.1 Coupling vs. the funnel: two distinct pathologies
The simulation study (Section 6) reveals two related but distinct pathologies, neither of
which is geometric holonomy of A. The funnel is a base-space pathology, and itisgenuinely
geometric: it reflects the intrinsic curvature of the base, whose Fisher–Rao metric is hyperbolic
(connection (i) of Section 3.4). When σ is large, the posterior of σ is concentrated at small
values (shrinkage) and the conditional distribution p(α|µ,σ ) is narrow, creating a highly
non-isotropic target. HMC struggles because leapfrog steps that work in the wide region
overshoot in the neck. The flatness of A says nothing about this curvature and does not
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
remove it.
The second is a base–fibercouplingpathology: when σ issmall(tight prior, high prior
precision), the connection Aj,µ = 1/(σ2GFF,j ) is large, so the conditional posterior of αj
tracks µ tightly and the centred chain explores it slowly. It is tempting to read this as
holonomy, a sampler that does not know the connection cannot make horizontally-corrected
proposals, but Proposition 4 shows the connection is flat, so there is no holonomy to follow,
and the key empirical finding (Section 4.7) confirms it: NUTS does nottransportthe fiber,
and chain displacements αend−α start do not track any parallel-transport prediction. What
remains is purely statistical:excess conditional autocorrelation. Prior-dominated groups ( πj
large) retain loop-conditional fiber dependence that likelihood-dominated groups do not, and
a negative-control experiment confirms this signal is tied to base-closure conditioning rather
than to lag autocorrelation alone. The two pathologies can co-occur (sparse data and a wide
prior create both a funnel and, at intermediate σ, strong coupling), but they are separable:
the funnel is a base-space curvature problem, while the coupling is captured entirely by the
per-group prior fractionπ j.
9.2 The connection is flat; curvature lives in the working metric
Proposition 1 settles a question an earlier draft of this paper left open. The metric-orthogonal
connection is flat foranysmooth hierarchical posterior, of any fiber dimension, with any
prior — not because of conjugacy but because the fiber score is a first integral. In particular,
correlated random effects, spatial or temporal fiber dependence, and vector-valued group
effects with a non-diagonal prior covariance all giveflatconnections; they donot, contrary
to what one might expect, produce rotational holonomy of the true connection. The only
ways the metric-orthogonal connection fails to be flat are (i) where GFF is singular (the
fiber-degeneracy regime discussed below, where the foliation by score level sets breaks down
and obstruction can genuinely re-enter) and (ii) when the connection is built from a metric
other than the true Hessian. Case (ii) is not a defect but an opportunity: it is where genuine
curvature lives.
WriteAM =−M−1
FFGBF for the distribution orthogonal with respect to aworkingmetric
M: a fixed mass matrix, an empirical covariance, or the prior-only metric. The score argument
no longer applies, since MFF ̸=−∂2
αℓ, and AM is generically curved. We verify this in a
two-fiber example: a bivariate group effect α∈R 2 with base-dependent prior correlation
Λ(θ) =R(θ2)diag(eθ1,e−θ1)R(θ2)⊤ and a logistic likelihood (so the posterior is non-Gaussian
and GFF is fiber-dependent). The metric blocks are computed in closed form and validated
against automatic differentiation to machine precision (∼ 10−16), and the holonomy operator
HM is obtained by integrating parallel transport with an adaptive high-order solver ( DOP853,
tolerance 10−12); the true Fisher connection returns to the identity at the integrator floor
(∥HM−I∥ F∼ 10−13) at every loop size, confirming Proposition 1 numerically. Taking MFF
to be the identity instead yields a holonomy operator withcomplexeigenvalues 0 .986±0.167i;
an anisotropic fixed metric diag(1, 3) gives 0.998± 0.071i. Crucially,∥HM−I∥ F grows as
thefirstpower of the enclosed base area (fitted log-log slopes 1 .08 and 0.99, Figure 9), the
hallmark of genuine curvature (leading-order holonomy = curvature × area) rather than
numerical noise. This is exactly the rotational holonomy that the true connection never
produces (Remark 5), and for which the full-matrix estimator (structure = "full" ) and the
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
complex eigenspectrum become the right tools; its magnitude measures how far the working
metric is from horizontal. (Reproduced with exact derivatives in data-raw/ad holonomy.py.)
This matters because every practical sampler uses afixedmetric. NUTS adapts a mass
matrix once during warmup and then holds it; a blocked sampler uses whatever conditional
scale it is handed. Such a sampler does not transport along the flat true connection but along
the curvedAM of its own working metric, so it can experience a genuinealgorithmicholonomy
(a systematic, orientation- and area-dependent fiber drift after the hyperparameters traverse
a loop) even though the underlying geometry is flat. This reframes the empirical signal of
Section 4: the loop-conditional dependence ˆρj is an algorithmic, not geometric, footprint,
and the attribution test (Section 4.7) asks precisely whether it carries the orientation and
area structure that holonomy would imply. For NUTS on the GLMM it does not, which
is consistent with NUTS adapting a metric close enough to horizontal that AM has little
curvature in the explored region. A deliberately mis-scaled sampler should instead show
algorithmic holonomy tracking the curvature of its working metric — a concrete, testable
prediction. This is the subject of a companion paper: a horizontal leapfrog HMC sampler
that recomputes A at every leapfrog step so that trajectories follow horizontal lifts, keeping
the working metric aligned with−∂2
αℓ so that AM stays flat. That paper develops the full
treatment: ergodicity arguments, the Metropolis–Hastings correction, a compiled backend,
and multi-model benchmarks against NUTS on coupling-dominated targets.
This closes the loop with the hypothesis we set out to test. For the geometric program
in MCMC, the Riemannian and connection-aware samplers that would naturally pursue a
curvature account of centring, the flat result is a redirection rather than a dead end: there is
no base–fiber holonomy to transport along in a hierarchical posterior, so the effort is better
spent keeping a sampler’s working metric aligned with the true Hessian, which is where the
exploitable curvature lives.
9.3 Limitations and future work
Model-specific derivations.The flatness itself is not model-specific (Proposition 1); only
theclosed-formconnection, curvature, and prior fraction of Section 5 are particular to the
logistic GLMM. For other models the same quantities follow from GFF and GBF , which
can be obtained by reverse-mode automatic differentiation of the log-posterior gradient;
supplying them is the natural next step for a compiled backend, and the prior fraction
πj = (∂2
αjprior)/GFF,j generalises directly.
Simulation study.The simulation study uses a single model family and does not include a
power analysis for the dependence diagnostic. Characterising the minimum detectable signal
as a function of chain length and number of groups is an important practical question left for
future work.
Fiber degeneracy.A second failure mode, distinct from residualisation leakage, arises
when the fiber itself has collapsed under the funnel pathology. The diagnostic estimates
per-group dependence coefficients from residual fiber variation around detected loops; if the
fiber has contracted to near a point, as happens when an unidentified group-level parameter
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
is pinned close to its prior mean under a tight prior and near-absent likelihood, there is
no variance to autocorrelate and ˆρj→ 0 regardless of pathology severity. The diagnostic
is therefore blindest in the most severe cases: a collapsed fiber and a well-mixed fiber are
observationally equivalent in ˆρj. This was observed in a spike-and-slab changepoint model
where some subjects’ second changepoint parameter was completely unidentified; those
subjects produced ˆρj≈ 0 despite sitting in a Neal funnel, while the analytic prior fraction πj
correctly flagged the group. The two failure modes — residualisation leakage (Section 4.7),
which inflates ˆρj at short gaps, and fiber degeneracy, which suppresses it in collapsed groups
— act in opposite directions and should both be considered when interpreting a low ˆρj. The
analytic πj, which depends only on the model structure and pilot draws rather than on chain
variation, is the more robust per-group flag and should be treated as the primary output.
Prior dependence of πj.We compute πj at a point estimate of σ, so it inherits the
σ-hyperprior when σ is weakly identified (few groups). Reporting πj per posterior draw, its
distribution rather than a plug-in value, propagates this uncertainty, and a wide posterior
for πj is itself the signal that a group’s reading is hyperprior-sensitive. This refinement is
natural future work.
Variational inference.The same geometric structure applies to variational families:
the fibration of the space of variational parameters over the mean-field components has
a connection whose curvature determines the holonomy of the variational update. This
connection to variational Bayes geometry is speculative but worth pursuing.
9.4 Note on methods of discovery
This work was developed through an extended, iterative collaboration with Claude Sonnet
(Anthropic). The fiber bundle framing, the mathematical derivations, the R package ar-
chitecture, and the exposition were developed jointly through dialogue rather than by the
author alone. The mathematical results were checked both analytically and numerically
(the package test suite and data-raw/verify flat connection.R); the flatness result in
particular emerged from a critical re-examination of an earlier draft that had reported only
the linearised curvature. The scientific framing, experimental decisions, and responsibility for
errors are the author’s. The author views this as an example of AI-collaborative mathematical
research, distinct from using AI as a writing assistant or code generator, and reports it ex-
plicitly rather than subsuming it into generic tool-use language, in the hope that transparent
description contributes to evolving community norms around human–AI co-production of
scientific knowledge.
Acknowledgements
Computations were performed using Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017) via cmdstanr (Gabry et al.,
2024), and the posterior package (B¨ urkner et al., 2022).
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
References
Shun-ichi Amari and Hiroshi Nagaoka.Methods of Information Geometry, volume 191 of
Translations of Mathematical Monographs. American Mathematical Society, 2000.
Michael Betancourt. A General Metric for Riemannian Manifold Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.4693, 2013.
Michael Betancourt. A Conceptual Introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.02434, 2017.
Michael Betancourt. Incomplete reparameterizations and equivalent metrics.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.09407, 2019. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09407.
Michael Betancourt and Mark Girolami. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for Hierarchical Models.
In S.K. Upadhyay, U. Singh, D.K. Dey, and A. Loganathan, editors,Current Trends in
Bayesian Methodology with Applications, pages 79–101. CRC Press, 2015.
Aidan D. Bindoff. fibr: Prior-Fraction Diagnostics for Hierarchical Models, 2026a. URL
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20724550. R package version 0.1.1.
Aidan D. Bindoff.smoothbp: Hierarchical Piecewise Regression with Smoothed Change-Points,
2026b. URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=smoothbp. R package version 0.2.3.
Paul-Christian B¨ urkner, Jonah Gabry, Matthew Kay, and Aki Vehtari.posterior: Tools for
Working with Posterior Distributions, 2022. URL https://mc-stan.org/posterior/. R
package version 1.4.0.
Bob Carpenter, Andrew Gelman, Matthew D. Hoffman, Daniel Lee, Ben Goodrich, Michael
Betancourt, Marcus Brubaker, Jiqiang Guo, Peter Li, and Allen Riddell. Stan: A Prob-
abilistic Programming Language.Journal of Statistical Software, 76(1):1–32, 2017. doi:
10.18637/jss.v076.i01.
Jonah Gabry, Rok ˇCeˇ snovar, Andrew Johnson, and Steve Bronder.cmdstanr: R Interface to
CmdStan, 2024. URLhttps://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr.
Andrew Gelman and Iain Pardoe. Bayesian measures of explained variance and pooling
in multilevel (hierarchical) models.Technometrics, 48(2):241–251, 2006. doi: 10.1198/
004017005000000517.
Andrew Gelman and Donald B. Rubin. Inference from Iterative Simulation Using Multiple
Sequences.Statistical Science, 7(4):457–472, 1992.
Mark Girolami and Ben Calderhead. Riemann Manifold Langevin and Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo Methods.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 73(2):123–214, 2011.
Maria I. Gorinova, Dave Moore, and Matthew D. Hoffman. Automatic reparameterisation of
probabilistic programs. InProceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, volume 119 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3648–3657, 2020.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
Tore Selland Kleppe. Log-Density Gradient Covariance and Automatic Metric Tensors for
Riemannian Manifold Monte Carlo Methods.Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 51(3):
1206–1229, 2024. doi: 10.1111/sjos.12705.
Shoshichi Kobayashi and Katsumi Nomizu.Foundations of Differential Geometry, Volume I.
Wiley Interscience, 1963.
Samuel Livingstone, Michael Betancourt, Simon Byrne, and Mark Girolami. On the Geometric
Ergodicity of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.Bernoulli, 25(4A):3109–3138, 2019.
Mikio Nakahara.Geometry, Topology and Physics. CRC Press, 2nd edition, 2003.
Omiros Papaspiliopoulos, Gareth O. Roberts, and Martin Sk¨ old. Non-Centered Parameteri-
sations for Hierarchical Models and Data Augmentation. In J.M. Bernardo, M.J. Bayarri,
J.O. Berger, A.P. Dawid, D. Heckerman, A.F.M. Smith, and M. West, editors,Bayesian
Statistics 7, pages 307–326. Oxford University Press, 2003.
Omiros Papaspiliopoulos, Gareth O. Roberts, and Martin Sk¨ old. A General Framework for
the Parametrization of Hierarchical Models.Statistical Science, 22(1):59–73, 2007.
H˚ avard Rue, Sara Martino, and Nicolas Chopin. Approximate Bayesian inference for latent
Gaussian models by using integrated nested Laplace approximations.Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B, 71(2):319–392, 2009. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9868.2008.00700.x.
Aki Vehtari, Andrew Gelman, Daniel Simpson, Bob Carpenter, and Paul-Christian B¨ urkner.
Rank-Normalization, Folding, and Localization: An Improved bR for Assessing Convergence
of MCMC.Bayesian Analysis, 16(2):667–718, 2021.
Yaming Yu and Xiao-Li Meng. To center or not to center: That is not the question—an
ancillarity–sufficiency interweaving strategy (ASIS) for boosting MCMC efficiency.Journal
of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 20(3):531–570, 2011. doi: 10.1198/jcgs.2011.
203main.
Yichuan Zhang and Charles Sutton. Semi-Separable Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for Inference
in Bayesian Hierarchical Models.arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.3843, 2014.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
Figure 2: Negative-control experiment: true-loop ˆρj vs. matched-gap control pairs, per group
(colour) across the gap grid.Coloured lines and points: per-group ˆρj from true loops (small
base distance, base-closure conditioning active).Grey band: full range of ˆρj from matched-gap
control pairs withlargebase distance; dashed line is the control mean. Panels are ordered
from high πj (top left) to low πj (bottom right). In the high- πj cell (nj = 3, σ = 0.5) the
true-loop ˆρj values are consistently above the control band across all gaps, confirming that
base-closure conditioning carries signal beyond lag autocorrelation and residualisation leakage
in exactly the cell where πj predicts it. In the moderate- and low- πj cells both arms are
indistinguishable from zero.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
Figure 3: Per-group dependence coefficients ˆρj with bootstrap 90% intervals for the centred
(left) and non-centred (right) parameterisations of the sparse logistic GLMM ( J = 8, nj = 3,
σtrue = 3), shown across the gap grid g∈{ 3, 10, 25, 50}. The centred chain has additional
short-gap signal that decays with lag ( ¯ρ≈0.044 at g = 3 falling to≈ 0.005 at g = 50). The
non-centred chain shows a flat, gap-stable baseline ( ¯ρ≈0.022–0.023 at all gaps), consistent
with residualisation leakage rather than geometric signal (Section 4.7).
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
Figure 4:Linearisedholonomy Hj vs. loop radius r for the centred GLMM, shown per group
(j = 1,..., 8, colour).Top: lines are the first-order Stokes prediction Hj = 1 +Fj·πr 2/α0j;
points are numerical integration of the transport ODE with the fiber held fixed at α0 (i.e.
GFF frozen). Both objects are thelinearisedholonomy: with GFF updated along the fiber
the displacement is zero (Proposition 4).Bottom: residuals (numerical − Stokes) reveal the
structure of the agreement. Residuals are near zero for r≤ 0.20 across all groups, confirming
internal consistency of the linearised curvature formula; the negative departure at larger r is
the quadratic Stokes correction term, sharpest for groups with high |Fj|. The vertical dashed
line marksr= 0.20.
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
Figure 5: Simulation study: median mean dependence coefficient ¯ρover 10 replicates, by
gap g. Tile labels show median [Q25, Q75]. The signal (dark tiles) is concentrated in
the prior-dominated upper-left corner ( nj small, σtrue small to moderate). The σ-axis is
non-monotone: the coupling signal is driven by priorprecision1/σ 2, not byσitself.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
Figure 6: Analytic prior fraction ¯π(x-axis) against empirical mean dependence coefficient ¯ρ
(y-axis), faceted by loop gap g. Each panel contains all 160 cell-replicates at that gap. Colour
encodes σtrue; shape encodes nj. The positive LOESS trend (grey band: 95% pointwise CI)
is consistent with the prediction that a larger prior fraction implies stronger conditional
dependence. The trend persists at all gaps but attenuates as g increases, reflecting the decay
of the autocorrelation contribution.
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
Figure 7: Per-group dependence coefficients ρj as a function of the minimum loop gap g∈
{3, 10, 25, 50} for four corner cells (replicate 1). Shaded bands show 90% bootstrap intervals.
In the prior-dominated cell (nj = 3, σtrue = 0.5, bottom left), ρj decays monotonically from
gap 3 to gap 50, consistent with an autocorrelation-dominated signal. In data-dominated cells
(nj = 100, top row), the coefficients are near zero for σtrue≥ 1.0; one group in the nj = 100,
σtrue = 0.5 panel shows a gap-independent ρj≈ 0.06, a candidate for residualisation leakage
(OLS removes only the linear base-to-fiber dependence; nonlinear coupling at loop endpoints
sharing the same base point can persist). The negative-control experiment of Section 4.7
separates leakage from base-closure signal. The bottom-right cell ( nj = 3, σtrue = 3.0) also
shows near-zero factors: even with sparse data, a wide prior reduces 1 /σ2 and hence πj,
suppressing the signal. This illustrates that the coupling signal is driven by priorprecision,
not by priorvariance.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
Figure 8: Per-group αj ESS against the prior fraction πj, by design (columns) and σ (rows),
median over 10 replicates. The πj-adaptive rule (green) tracks the best method across the
whole πj range: it lifts the αj ESS of prior-dominated groups (high πj), where centred (dark
blue) lags, without harming data-dominated groups (low πj). This per-group success coexists
with non-centred winning onmin-ESS (Table 2), because the min-ESS bottleneck is the
σ-funnel, not the fiber.
Figure 9: Working-metric connections are genuinely curved.Left: Frobenius holonomy
∥HM−I∥ F against enclosed base area πr2, log-log. The true (Fisher) connection sits at the
integrator floor (∼ 10−13, flat, Proposition 1); the identity and diag(1, 3) working metrics lie
on slope-1 lines, so their holonomy scales linearly with area — the signature of a genuine
curvature, not noise.Right: holonomy eigenvalues at r = 0.20; the working-metric spectra
sit off the real axis (rotation), while the true connection gives λ = 1. Derivatives are
validated against automatic differentiation to∼ 10−16; transport uses DOP853 at tolerance
10−12 (data-raw/ad holonomy.py).
39
