===== PAGE 1 =====
arXiv:2012.06484v2  [gr-qc]  22 Dec 2020
MICROSCOPE mission: Data analysis principle
Joel Berg´ e1, Quentin Baghi 1,2‡, Emilie Hardy 1, Gilles M´ etris2,
Alain Robert 3, Manuel Rodrigues 1, Pierre Touboul 1, Ratana
Chhun1, Pierre-Yves Guidotti 3§, Sandrine Pires 4, Serge
Reynaud5, Laura Serron 2, Jean-Michel Travert 6
1 DPHY, ONERA, Universit´ e Paris Saclay, F-92322 Chˆ atillon, France
2 Universit´ e Cˆ ote d’Azur, Observatoire de la Cˆ ote d’Azur, CNRS, IRD, G´ eoazur, 250
avenue Albert Einstein, F-06560 Valbonne, France
3 CNES Toulouse, 18 avenue Edouard Belin - 31401 Toulouse Cedex 9, F rance
4 Laboratoire AIM, CEA/DSM–CNRS, Universit´ e Paris Diderot, IRFU/SAp, CEA
Saclay, Orme des Merisiers, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
5 Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, UPMC-Sorbonne Universit´ e, CNRS, ENS-PSL
University, Coll` ege de France, 75252 Paris, France
6 Altran technologies, 17 Avenue Didier Daurat, 31700 Blagnac, Fran ce
E-mail: joel.berge@onera.fr
December 2020
Abstract. After performing highly sensitive acceleration measurements durin g two
years of drag-free ﬂight around the Earth, MICROSCOPE provide d the best constraint
on the Weak Equivalence Principle (WEP) to date. Beside being a techn ological
challenge, this experiment required a specialised data analysis pipeline to look for
a potential small signal burried in the noise, possibly plagued by instr umental defects,
missing data and glitches. This paper describes the frequency-dom ain iterative least-
square technique that we developed for MICROSCOPE. In particula r, using numerical
simulations, we prove that our estimator is unbiased and provides co rrect error bars.
This paper therefore justiﬁes the robustness of the WEP measur ements given by
MICROSCOPE.
Keywords: Experimental Gravitation, Data Analysis
Submitted to: Class. Quantum Grav.
1. Introduction
MICROSCOPE’s test of the Weak Equivalence Principle (WEP) is based o n the
comparison of the acceleration of two concentric cylindrical test m asses of diﬀerent
composition as they orbit the Earth [1–3]. Thus, the gravity that p ulls the test masses
‡ Current address: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA
§ Current address: Airbus Defence and Space, 31 rue des Cosmona utes, 31402 Toulouse, France

===== PAGE 2 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 2
being sourced by the Earth, any Equivalence Principle violation (EPV) signal will be
proportional to the Earth gravity acceleration. More precisely, a s it is measured along
the main axis of the cylindrical masses, the signal we look for can be e xpected to
be proportional to the Earth’s gravity acceleration modulated by t he motion and the
attitude of the satellite around the Earth, resulting in a periodic sign al with a well-known
frequency (noted fEP in this paper).
The main MICROSCOPE data consists in time series of accelerations me asured by
two concentric accelerometers [4]. To look for an EPV, it is then enou gh to look for a
non-zero signal at the fEP frequency in the diﬀerence of those two time series. Obviously,
this process is impacted by instrumental noise and systematics (eit her instrumental or
environmental). Thus, it consists in correcting the measured time s eries from –calibrated
and/or modelled– instrumental and environmental systematics, b efore seeking a possible
periodic signal amounting to a violation of the WEP in coloured-noise-d ominated data.
As described in Ref. [5], the MICROSCOPE mission is divided in diﬀerent
measurement sessions. Sessions represent a time span during whic h the satellite and
the instrument keep the same conﬁguration (spin, drag-free con trol law...). Some of
these sessions are directly devoted to the WEP test (called “EP ses sions” in this paper)
while others (“calibration sessions”) are used to calibrate or chara cterise the instrument.
EP sessions are the longest, most of them lasting 120 orbital period s (about 8 days),
while calibration sessions typically last a few orbits.
In this paper, we present MICROSCOPE’s data analysis pipeline. Afte r recalling
the measurement equation in Sect. 2, we present our frequency- domain iterative
ordinary least squares (OLS) algorithm and its mathematical backg round in Sect. 3.
We then use “worst-case” simulations from a hybrid software-har dware MICROSCOPE
simulator to discuss the optimal way to correct for gaps in MICROSC OPE data, in
Sect. 4. Finally, in Sect. 5, we show with well-controlled numerical simu lations
that our pipeline provides unbiased estimates and reliable error bars in the presence of
instrumental systematics. Combined with previous works where we showed how we can
successfully deal with missing data, those results prove that our d ata analysis pipeline
allows us to reliably measure an EPV, if any. We conclude in Sect. 6. A de tailed
appendix discusses uncertainty propagation. Note that this pape r is only about the
MICROSCOPE data analysis methodology, and does not present rea l data. For the real
data analysis (using the methods described in this paper), see Refs [3, 6–8].
The terminology and notations used in this paper, as well as all obser vables, are
deﬁned in Ref. [4]. In particular, we deﬁne the common-mode (resp. diﬀerential-
mode) of a given observable or parameter as the half-sum (resp. h alf-diﬀerence) of
this observable/parameter for both test masses, o(c,d) = ( o(1) ± o(2))/2, and we use the
convention o to denote a vector and [ o] to denote a second-order tensor, respectively.
We note the time derivative of observable o as .o.

===== PAGE 3 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 3
2. Measurement principle
2.1. Measurement equation
MICROSCOPE looks for an EPV by monitoring the diﬀerence in accelera tions
potentially undergone by the two test masses of a diﬀerential acce lerometer [1–4]. In
an ideal case, the measurement equation is then straightforward to establish, since the
diﬀerence of acceleration of the two test masses is expected to be proportional to Earth
gravity ﬁeld g, Γ (d) ≡ Γ (1) − Γ (2) = δg, where δ is the (approximate) E¨ otv¨ os parameter
that we wish to estimate. However, the instrument is not perfect: for instance, scale
factors are not exactly unit and test masses are imperfectly cent ered and aligned with
respect to each other and to the satellite’s frame of reference, s uch that the common-
mode and diﬀerential-mode sensitivity matrices [ ac] and [ ad] are not the identity and
null matrices, respectively. Furthermore, since the satellite rota tes it imparts a Coriolis
acceleration on the test masses.
The measurement equation is therefore much more complicated tha n in the ideal
case. Ref. [4] establishes it in full generality, introducing and taking into account all
instrumental defects and their notation. We measure the diﬀeren tial acceleration along
the test masses’ sensitive axis ( x-coordinate in the instrument’s frame, see Fig. 1 of
Ref. [9]), such that
Γ (d)
x = 2˜b(d)
x + ac11δgx + ac12δgy + ac13δgz + ∆′
xSxx + ∆′
ySxy + ∆′
zSxz
+
(
ac13∆′
y + ac12∆′
z
)
Syz + ac12∆′
ySyy + ac13∆′
zSzz
+
(
−ac13∆′
y + ac12∆′
z + 2cd11
).Ωx − (∆′
z − 2ac13∆′
x − 2cd12) .Ωy
+
(
∆′
y − 2ac12∆′
x + 2cd13
).Ωz + 2
(
ad11 ˜Γ (c)
x + ad12 ˜Γ (c)
y + ad13 ˜Γ (c)
z
)
+ 2 .∆′
xΩx − 2 .∆′
zΩy + 2 .∆′
yΩz − ac11
. .∆x − ac12
. .∆y − ac13
. .∆z
+ ˜K (1)
2xx
(
˜Γ (1)
x
)2
− ˜K (2)
2xx
(
˜Γ (2)
x
)2
+ 2n(d)
x , (1)
where [ T] the Earth gravity gradient tensor (GGT) in the instrument’s fram e, [ In] =[ .Ω
]
+ [Ω] [Ω] the gradient of inertia tensor, [ S] the symmetric part of the [ T] − [In]
matrix, [ Ω] the angular velocity tensor of the satellite, and ∆ the vector between the
center of the two test masses (called “oﬀcentering vector” here after).
In Eq. (1), ˜Γ (c) = Γ (c) − n(c) is the noise-free common-mode measured acceleration,
[ac11, ac12, ac13] is the ﬁrst row of the common-mode sensitivity matrix, [ ad11, ad12, ad13]
is the ﬁrst row of the diﬀerential-mode sensitivity matrix, [ cd11, cd12, cd13] is the ﬁrst
row of the diﬀerential-mode sensitivity matrix to the angular acceler ation, ˜b(d)
x =
bd
0x +ac11b(d)
1x +ac12b(d)
1y +ac13b(d)
1z (with b0
(d) the diﬀerential electrostatic bias and b1
(d) the
diﬀerence of mechanical perturbations acting on the two test mas ses). For convenience,
in the remainder of this paper, we denote δx ≡ ac11δ, δy ≡ ac12δ, δz ≡ ac13δ, but we
warn the reader that δi should not be confused with the component of a tensor.
We should stress that the measurement is not directly sensitive to t he actual

===== PAGE 4 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 4
oﬀcenterings ∆, but to the following combinations of instrumental parameters:
∆′
x ≈ ac11∆x − ac12∆y − ac13∆z (2)
∆′
y ≈ ac11∆y + 2ac12∆x − ac23∆z (3)
∆′
z ≈ ac11∆z + 2ac13∆x + ac23∆y. (4)
Only those “derived” oﬀcenterings ∆ x,y,z can be estimated. Finally, note that the
quadratic factors K (j)
2xx were neglected in Ref. [4] since they are estimated to be negligible
in the real MICROSCOPE data. In this paper, we aim to be as general as possible, so
that we take them into account, and set them to non-negligible value s in the simulations
below. Similarly, Ref. [4] ignored the motion of the test masses (thus , setting the time
derivatives of ∆ to 0); here, we consider it since it should be taken into account in som e
calibration sessions.
2.2. Modelled, estimated and ignored (combinations of ) par ameters
Each term of Eq. (1) is the product of a time-varying signal by para meters related to the
experiment (called “instrumental parameters” in the remainder of this paper). Their
eﬀects are clear from Eq. (1): the diﬀerential bias shifts the meas ured acceleration from
the true acceleration; the common-mode sensitivity matrix mixes co mponents from all
axes; the diﬀerential-mode sensitivity matrix projects common-mo de acceleration into
the measured diﬀerential acceleration; the coupling with the angula r acceleration makes
the measurement depend on the satellite’s motion; and n(d) adds stochastic instrumental
noise to the measurement.
The varying signals are either directly measured or are derived by an alyzing tracking
data, as described below and shown in Refs. [6, 10]: several satellit e manoeuvres
(summarised in Appendix A) allow us to discriminate between instrumen tal defects
and estimate them separately.
Those terms come in four distinct categories and can be either corr ected for, or
ignored in the measurement equation (1):
(i) Terms computed through models and/or on-ground restitution s:
• The position of the satellite as determined in the celestial reference frame
J2000 [11] is expressed in the Earth’s reference frame using the ap propriate
rotations [12]. From this position, the components of the gravity ac celeration
g and of the GGT [ T] are computed in the Earth’s reference frame [13];
afterwards they are transformed to the J2000 celestial frame a nd then to the
instrument frame using the attitude of the satellite [11].
• Like the attitude, the angular velocity Ω and acceleration .Ω result from an
on-ground restitution [11].
• ˜Γ (c)
x , ˜Γ (c)
y and ˜Γ (c)
z are directly approximated by the measured quantities Γ (c)
x ,
Γ (c)
y and Γ (c)
z .
(ii) Terms corrected using results from calibration sessions (∆ ′
y, ad1j):

===== PAGE 5 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 5
• ∆′
y
(
Sxy + ˙Ωz
)
• 2
(
ad11 ˜Γ (c)
x + ad12 ˜Γ (c)
y + ad13 ˜Γ (c)
z
)
(iii) Terms dependent on parameters estimated with the current se ssion:
• 2˜b(d)
x : in principle ˜b(d)
x is a readily measurable constant, although it can drift in
time (section 3.3).
• δxgx + δzgz: we take advantage from the fact that gx and gz vary at the
same frequency fEP but in quadrature to estimate both δx and δz almost
without correlation. Since ac11 ≃ 1 and ac13 ≪ 1, δx ≈ δ (estimating δ being
MICROSCOPE’s main objective). Given the upper bound on δ from previous
experiments [14], δz = ac13δ is in principle not observable but a statistic over
its value estimated in diﬀerent sessions could give interesting indicatio ns on
the quality of the experiment.
• ∆′
xSxx+∆′
zSxz: the components ∆ ′
x and ∆′
z of the oﬀcentering can be estimated
very accurately thanks to the strong variations of Sxx and Sxz at 2 fEP
(iv) Terms neglected due to their very small magnitude [6]:
• δygy
•
(
ac13∆′
y + ac12∆′
z
)
Syz + ac12∆′
ySyy + ac13∆′
zSzz
•
(
−ac13∆′
y + ac12∆′
z + 2cd11
)˙Ωx + (2ac13∆′
x + 2cd12) ˙Ωy + (−2ac12∆′
x + 2cd13) ˙Ωz
2.3. Sessions dedicated to the test of the EP
The measurement equation (1) is valid for all scientiﬁc sessions (calib ration and EP
sessions). However, it can be simpliﬁed for EP sessions where test m asses are kept
motionless, so that the velocities .∆x, .∆y, .∆z and the accelerations . .∆x, . .∆y, . .∆z vanish.
Further applying the corrections described in Sect. 2.2, Eq. (1) th en simpliﬁes to
Γ (d)
x,corr = 2˜b
′(d)
x + δxgx + δzgz + ∆′
xSxx + ∆′
zSxz + 2n(d)
x , (5)
which is the core model ﬁtted to the data after applying the calibrat ion parameters: in
addition to the E¨ otv¨ os parameterδx we also estimate δz which quantiﬁes the amplitude
of a signal proportional to gz (varying also at the fEP frequency but in quadrature with
gx) and the components ∆ ′
x and ∆ ′
z of the apparent oﬀcentering.
The next section provides more conceptual and mathematical bac kground on the
(instrumental and E¨ otv¨ os) parameters used in the MICROSCOPE data analysis.
3. Parameters estimation
3.1. Iterative weighted least square ﬁt
Each in-ﬂight calibration session is dedicated to estimating one (or tw o) parameters and
designed so that the signals sourced by those parameters have a f avourable signal-to-
noise ratio. Although it is theoretically possible to cumulate all calibrat ion sessions and

===== PAGE 6 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 6
estimate all parameters simultaneously from Eq. (1), we use the fa ct that they are almost
independent from each other to simplify and better control the es timation process via an
alternative method. We thus devised a technique to estimate each p arameter iteratively,
reﬁning and updating the estimation of a given parameter using the e stimation of the
other parameters until some convergence criterium is reached.
The measurement equation Eq. (1) is of the form Γ (d)
x = f (pk, t)+ n(d)
x , where pk are
parameters and the time dependence is linked to measured or modele d signals si(t). For
each session, the data provides us with Γ (d)
x and all si(t). It is then possible to perform
a least-square (or similar) ﬁt to estimate the parameters pk from a given model.
Moreover, for a given calibration session, we have a priori values pk,0 for the
parameters pk, as some of them have been measured on ground, or as others may
have been estimated during an earlier in-ﬂight calibration session (Se ct. 2.2). It is then
possible to correct the measurement for the corresponding signa ls, and use an updated
version of the measurement equation,
Γ (d)
x,corr(t) = Γ (d)
x (t) − f (pk,0, t). (6)
This equation can ﬁnally be used to reﬁne the estimation of some para meters pke, with
a least-square method using the model
Γ (d)
x,corr(t) = Σ ke
∂f (pk, t)
∂pke
(pke − pke,0) . (7)
The actual estimation of a parameter depends on the technique us ed to deal with
missing data (see Sect. 4 for the introduction of the techniques we use to deal with them
–KARMA [15], M-ECM [16] and inpainting [17, 18]). M-ECM estimates the parameters
and the noise and deals with missing data all at once; however, inpainting only ﬁlls in
missing data, and must be augmented by a least square estimate.
We use iteratively the Adam (Accelerometric Data Analysis for MICROSCOPE)
Fortran code to estimate parameters in the frequency domain. On ce this iterative
process has converged (typically in two to three iterations), we us e Eq. (5) to measure
the E¨ otv¨ os parameterδx on calibrated data. The procedure is summarised in Algorithm
1. The data analysis processes underlying Adam are described below.
Algorithm 1 Iterative least-squares estimation of N instrumental parameters from M
independent calibration sessions.
Initial prior: Π = {π0(p1), . . . , π0(pi), . . . π0(pN )}
while not converged do
for i = 1 to M do
Correct measurement from ith session with priors Π i−1 (Eq. 6)
Estimate ith parameter (Eq. 7): estimator ˆ pi
end for
Update prior: Π = {ˆp1, . . . , ˆpi, . . . ˆpN }
end while
Estimate the E¨ otv¨ os parameterδx on calibrated data (Eq. 5)

===== PAGE 7 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 7
3.2. Frequency domain least square analysis: Adam
To allow for a least-squares analysis [19], the corrected measureme nt equation (7) can
be formally written
Y = [A]θ + n, (8)
where Y is the vector of N measurements, θ is a vector of q unknown parameters to
estimate (e.g. E¨ otv¨ os parameter or test masses’ oﬀcentering), [ A] is the design matrix
and n is the noise vector. Since the models (given by Eq. 1 in the most gener al case
and by Eq. 5 for EP sessions) are linear with respect to the estimate d parameters, the
columns of [ A] simply correspond to the signal associated to each parameter, s ampled
at the epochs of the measured acceleration. The N measurements are assumed to
be regularly sampled at a frequency fe over a duration T . In case of missing data
the analysis takes place after reconstruction of these data using inpainting or M-ECM
algorithms (Sect. 4).
3.2.1. Transformation of the problem from the time domain to the frequency domain In
order to solve the problem in the Fourier domain, we take the Fourier transform of Eq.
(8). To this aim, we make use of the Discrete Fourier Transform Ope rator [F]. The DFT
operator being unitary, the signal energy content is preserved b y the transformation.
The new system can be simply written
ˆY =
[
ˆA
]
θ + ˆn. (9)
The original quantities being real, the new system can be reduced to N useful real
equations. These new equations can be grouped by pair (related to real and imaginary
parts of the DFT), corresponding to frequencies fk = k
T , k = 1 · · · ⌊N −1
2 ⌋.
Moreover, the discrete Fourier transform drastically decreases the correlations
between the measurements projected in the frequency space (F ig. 1): the covariance
matrix associated to [ F] n is diagonal dominant. This is beneﬁcial as a diagonal weight
matrix leads to a quasi-optimal solution.
3.2.2. Weighting in the frequency domain Since each measurement projected in the
Fourier domain can be associated to a discrete frequency, the cor responding weight is
w(fk) = 1√
γ(fk)
, (10)
where γ(fk) is the Power Spectral Density (PSD) of the noise at the frequenc y fk.
In practice, the PSD is estimated by smoothing the residual noise in t he frequency
domain resulting from a ﬁrst estimation and removal of the signal. Th e estimation–
correction–smoothing–weighting process can be iterated until co nvergence; in practice,
two iterations are suﬃcient.

===== PAGE 8 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 8
Figure 1. Covariance matrix of the measured diﬀerential acceleration of an E P session.
Working in the frequency domain allows us to deal with a diagonal cova riance matrix.
3.2.3. Restriction to the frequency bands containing the do minant signals As shown
in Ref. [4], the MICROSCOPE mission was designed to concentrate use ful signal on
speciﬁc frequencies (i.e., a potential EPV signal peaks at fEP, the GGT signal at 2 fEP
and calibration signals at fcal). This is so true in the real data that a very simple analysis
such as synchronous detection could lead to reasonable results. H owever, we use a more
ﬂexible method: we limit our least square inversion to the bands of fre quency containing
the relevant signals. In practice, this is equivalent to extracting a s ubsystem of Eq. (9)
by selecting the relevant equations to get the truncated system
[
ˆAr
]
θ + ˆn = ˆYr. (11)
This trade-oﬀ between synchronous detection and the inversion o f the full system brings
several advantages:
• it is more robust than synchronous detection in case of small ﬂuctu ation of the
frequencies of the signals; it is not even necessary to know precise ly the value of
these frequencies;
• the choice of large enough bands containing also a substantial samp le of noise allows
us to compute consistent values of the goodness of ﬁt;
• contrary to the inversion of the full system (9) the solution of the truncated system
(11) is immune to possible unmodelled perturbations in frequency ban ds containing
no useful information (especially high frequency bands). Taking th ese bands into
account would not change the parameter estimations (because eq uations at diﬀerent
Fourier frequencies are uncorrelated) but could decrease the glo bal goodness of the
ﬁt;
• the number of observation equations is neatly decreased and the a nalyses are faster.
A ﬁnal clariﬁcation is in order: the very low frequency part of the sig nal, which
contains in particular the zero frequency component, is not used in the analysis. Indeed,
not only does the zero frequency contain well-known signal such as some components

===== PAGE 9 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 9
Figure 2. Time evolution of the diﬀerential acceleration. Left: evidence for a
polynomial-like tendency. Right: after correcting for a polynomial o f degree 3.
of the gravity gradient but it also contains unknown signals such as t he bias of the
accelerometers. All these contributions are not separable, so th at the zero frequency is
diﬃcult to exploit.
3.3. Bias drift
Strictly speaking, the bias # »b0(d) included in Eq. (1) should be constant. But in practice
a very low frequency evolution can appear, in particular because of thermal variations
in the instrument (left panel of Fig. 2). This evolution can be eﬃcient ly corrected by
ﬁtting and subtracting a polynomial (right panel of Fig. 2). As illustr ated by Fig. 3,
the polynomial aﬀects all frequencies in a wide low frequency band; c onsequently, the
correlation with the EPV signal (which is concentrated at the fEP frequency) is very
low. But to be sure that ﬁtting a polynomial does not aﬀect the signa l around fEP,
we take advantage of our estimation in the Fourier space to remove the contribution of
these frequencies in the estimation of the polynomial. More precisely :
(i) we ﬁrst estimate simultaneously (i) the E¨ otv¨ os parameter using a narrow frequency
band around fEP, (ii) the components ∆ ′
x and ∆ ′
z of the oﬀcentring using a narrow
frequency band around 2 fEP, and (iii) the coeﬃcients of the polynomial using a
wide band from 0 to 1 Hz but excluding the fEP and 2 fEP bands.
(ii) we then use the ﬁrst estimations of all these parameters to cor rect the measurements
according to Eq. (6); since this correction is performed in the time d omain, we
implicitly correct all the frequencies and in particular the polynomial is also applied
to the fEP and 2 fEP bands.
(iii) ﬁnally, we use the corrected acceleration to re-estimate the sa me parameters in the
same way as in step (i).
Another option is to correct low frequency variations with a model o f temperature
sensitivity. Ref. [8] shows that the substraction of a model linear w ith respect to the
temperatures produces results similar to those obtained with a poly nomial ﬁt.

===== PAGE 10 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 10
Figure 3. Same as Fig. 2 but in the frequency domain. As expected, the subtr action
of the polynomial (blue) clearly reduces the low frequency contribu tion.
3.4. Combining sessions
In order to decrease the stochastic error in the estimation of (ins trumental and E¨ otv¨ os)
parameters, it is interesting to combine measurements from sever al sessions with the
same conﬁguration. This combination can be done either in the time or in the frequency
domain, as shown below.
3.4.1. Time domain Suppose that session k leads to the following linear system of Nk
equations (of the form of Eq. 8):
[Ak]θ + nk = Yk (12)
To carry on with a classical inversion in the time domain, one can just g ather the above
matrices and vectors:
[A] =


[A1]
[A2]
...
[Am]

 , n =


n1
n2
...
nm

 , Y =


Y1
Y2
...
Ym

 (13)
where m is the number of sessions considered. Then an appropriately weight ed least-
squares technique could be used to solve for the concatenated sy stem. Given the
advantages with doing an analysis in the frequency domain as outlined above, we have
not used this time domain analysis.

===== PAGE 11 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 11
3.4.2. Fourier domain First, DFT are applied separately to the systems corresponding
to each session k, as described in Sect. 3.2.1, to get equivalent systems in the freque ncy
domain: [
ˆAk
]
θ + ˆnk = ˆYk. (14)
We use a weighting based on the PSD, as described in Sect. 3.2.2. Finally , all considered
weighted systems are gathered as shown above for the time domain case.
Like in the case of a unique session, we can use a Generalised Least-S quares
regression to solve either the whole system or, more eﬃciently, a se lected subset of
equations corresponding to the desired bands of frequency. Nev ertheless, the estimation
process is ﬂexible enough to allow us to take into account the drift of some parameters
(e.g. oﬀcenterings, which vary with respect to temperature).
3.5. Error propagation
Uncertainties in estimated parameters (or in the a priori knowledge of parameters
that cannot be ﬁnely estimated) propagate when correcting for t hem in the measured
diﬀerential acceleration, which involves three eﬀects when estimat ing the EPV signal:
(1) residual systematic errors coming from the bias of each param eter estimate; (2)
statistical errors coming from the variance of each parameter es timate and (3) statistical
errors coming from the fact that we use noisy signals to calibrate th e measurement,
whose noise is coupled with the parameters. The ﬁrst type of error s is assessed by
upper bounds given by a detailed performance analysis [6, 20]. The se cond and third
type of errors are discussed in this section: they can be assessed through Monte Carlo
simulations or directly included in the least-square covariance matrix .
Using an iterative estimation technique involves propagating the unc ertainties of
the ith iteration estimates to the ( i + 1)th iteration. Consequently, as can be seen from
Eq. (6), the variance of the calibrated diﬀerential acceleration is n ot only that of the raw
measured diﬀerential acceleration, but also involves a contribution from the (imperfect)
knowledge of the corrected instrumental parameters.
Error propagation is derived rigorously in Appendix B. Eq. (B.6) gives the expected
value of the calibrated diﬀerential acceleration used to estimate th e E¨ otv¨ os parameter
when assuming that the estimates of all instrumental parameters are unbiased. Its
variance is given by Eq. (B.9). Those equations can easily be generalis ed to the case
where a given instrumental parameter is estimated given some othe rs.
Two eﬀects coming from uncertainties in the iterative correction of instrumental
parameters (through errors in the estimated amplitudes of the sig nals that it contains)
can be noted: (i) statistical errors in the calibrated diﬀerential ac celeration, because of
the imprecise estimation of corrected parameters (during previou s iterations), and (ii)
uncertainty on the calibrated diﬀerential acceleration residuals (d ue to the fact that we
subtract noisy quantities multiplied by estimated parameters). The refore, we can expect
that the least-square estimator of a parameter measured from t he calibrated diﬀerential
acceleration will be aﬀected by statistical errors from instrument al parameters, as well

===== PAGE 12 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 12
as by statistical errors coming from the measurement noise, and e rrors on statistical
errors coming from the uncertainties on the noise.
In practice, in order to rigorously propagate uncertainties in our it erative least-
square estimates, Eq. (B.9) can be used as the input variance, for each parameter,
at each iteration. Another possibility is to run Monte Carlo simulations that use
the variance as measured from the noise of several calibrated diﬀe rential accelerations
created from drawings of instrumental parameters (that can be assumed normally
distributed, with mean and variance deﬁned by the previous estimat ions). Although
more CPU- and time-consuming, this technique is more sound than us ing Eq. (B.9),
since it does not involve “educated guesses” on some parameters ( note that some terms
appearing in Eq. (B.9) are the “true” values and not their estimates ).
We show below that given the smallness of the uncertainty on the est imated
instrumental parameters, we can actually safely ignore propagat ing errors on the
estimation of instrumental parameters.
4. Glitches and missing data
4.1. (Masked) glitches and missing data (in practice)
Data “gaps” come in two ﬂavours: (i) glitches, where data is available but contaminated
by physical (e.g. impact with a micrometeorite or a satellite crack) or measurement (e.g.
an internal saturation in the instrument’s servo-loop command) pr ocesses uncorrelated
with testing the WEP, and (ii) telemetry losses, where data is missing d uring some time
intervals. Glitches may bias the measurement or introduce spurious signals at speciﬁc
frequencies, or within some frequency range [7]. Similar events are p resent e.g. in
LIGO/Virgo data, where they hamper the detection and characte risation of candidate
gravitational waves signals [21], and several techniques have been developed to correct
for them (see e.g. Refs [22–26]).
To counteract the direct eﬀect of glitches on MICROSCOPE’s WEP me asurement,
we can model and subtract them as discussed in Ref. [27]; here, we c hoose to remove
glitches, hence giving them the same status as telemetry losses (“m issing” data). Missing
data break the even sampling of data in time, thereby preventing us from using standard
OLS in the frequency domain and, most critically creating an importan t spectral leakage
due to noise colour, potentially burying the EPV signal in MICROSCOPE data [15,17].
We have developed and adapted methods to cope with such missing da ta, that
allow us to reach the required accuracy on the EPV measurement:
• KARMA [15]: the Kalman Auto-Regressive Model Analysis is a generalize d least-
square technique based on an autoregressive model of the (unkn own) instrumental
noise, whitened with a Kalman ﬁlter.
• M-ECM [16]: the Modiﬁed-Expectation-Conditional-Maximization tech nique
allows us to maximize the likelihood of available data through the estimat ion of

===== PAGE 13 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 13
Figure 4. Example of a transient and its correction. The black curve shows th e raw
measurement. The gray zone is the region discarded by the masking procedure. The
red curve is the acceleration corrected by inpainting.
missing data by their conditional expectation, based on the circulan t approximation
of the complete data covariance.
• inpainting [17, 18]: originally developed for 2D observational cosmology [28] and
1D asteroseismology [29], the inpainting technique uses a sparsity prior to estimate
the most probable value of missing data, therefore allowing us to use an ordinary
least-square ﬁt ( Adam –see below).
Those techniques have already been tested on numerical simulation s with the simplifying
assumptions that instrumental defects were perfectly known an d corrected for [15–18].
Note that Eq. (5) is equivalent to the form used by Refs. [15,16]; wh en further correcting
for oﬀcenterings, it gives the measurement equation used by Refs . [17, 18]. Ref. [1] used
Adam with no correction of transients nor missing data (taking advantag e of quiet and
clean measurement sessions). Ref. [2] uses Adam on data corrected for missing data
with inpainting.
To search for glitches, we use a standard recursive σ-clipping technique, in which
we ﬂag as outliers every point that deviates from the moving averag e of the data
by more than a speciﬁc number of times (4 when deﬁning masks on the diﬀerential-
mode acceleration, or 5 when masks are deﬁned on the common-mod e acceleration)
the standard deviation of the data [7]. We then mask a speciﬁc time in terval after
each detected outlier to make sure that the transient regime is alwa ys removed. The
gray area in Fig. 4 shows such a mask after an outlier to remove the c orresponding
glitch, visible in black, in SUSON-simulated data (see below). Additional data points
are ﬂagged by the instrument’s electronics, if an internal saturat ion has been detected
by the accelerometer digital electronics (and eventually smoothed out, thereby invisible

===== PAGE 14 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 14
in the acceleration data [9]): we decide to reject those points. The r ed curve in Fig. 4
shows the inpainting correction to the masked glitch (black).
We discuss below (Sect. 4.3) how missing data couple with MICROSCOPE
instrumental parameters. This allows us to deﬁne an optimal way to deal with missing
data within the iterative process described in Sect. 3, by considerin g at which level of the
data processing the correction for missing data should appear. Th is discussion is based
on numerical simulations created by a hybrid software-hardware s imulator developed
by CNES (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales) to validate MICROSCO PE’s ground
segment operations before ﬂight. Those simulations correspond t o worst-case scenarios,
with exaggerated number of glitches and maximum allowed values for in strumental
parameters. Although those simulations consider instrumental de fects higher than the
in-ﬂight MICROSCOPE data, they are valuable to amplify the eﬀect of instrumental
parameters and of missing data, and allow for a pedagogical discuss ion hereafter (all
ﬁgures in this section were produced using those simulations).
4.2. Hybrid simulations: SUSON
The mock data used in this section were produced by the BVSS (Banc de Validation
Syst` eme et SCAO –Drag Free and Attitude Control System Validation Bench), a CNES
real time test bench which serves diﬀerent purposes in project de velopment plans. By
simulating very accurately the spacecraft behavior, it aims at valida ting all the onboard
functional chains, in particular the attitude and acceleration cont rol. It also aims at
performing all the technical and operational system tests while co nnected to the ground
entities (operational and scientiﬁc centers).
The MICROSCOPE test bench relies on the other CNES microsatellite s imulation
tools, and shares many hardware and software commonalities, whic h gives good
conﬁdence in the product. Three benches were developed to enab le the various
and intensive tests performed by the project. Each bench is cons tructed as follows.
A Sun Microsystems station, running at 64Hz, includes various mode ls of the
spacecraft environment (Earth gravitational potential, Earth a tmosphere and albedo,
Sun illumination) and of its dynamics. It also includes physical models of all
the embarked equipment (actuators and sensors), with major ev olutions for the
MICROSCOPE peculiarities (see below). Those equipment models are c oupled with a
rack of interface electronic boards, emulating the real hardware communication protocol
for each equipment. A harness then connects the interface boar ds to a real onboard
computer, on which the onboard software is running. Finally, electr ical ground support
equipment simulates the ground stations and the radiofrequency lin k between stations
and spacecraft, so that the users receive the telemetry data ou tput by the onboard
computer as in the real life.
A peculiarity of the MICROSCOPE bench is the T-SAGE ‖ simulation. A very
‖ T-SAGE (Twin Space Accelerometers for Gravitation Experiments) is MICROSCOPE’s instrument
core [9]

===== PAGE 15 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 15
Figure 5. Spectra of the simulated diﬀerential acceleration for two diﬀerent
measurement sessions, simulated with SUSON. Left: inertial WEP-m easurement
session (shown are spectra with glitches present (gray) and mask ed then replaced by
inpainted signal (black)). Right: ∆ y calibration session.
representative model was developed by CNES, called SUSON. It is co mposed of a real
Interface Control Unit (payload computer), running at 1027Hz a nd interfaced on one side
with the main onboard computer and on the other side with a speciﬁc b oard simulating
both the Front End Electronic Unit and the Sensing Unit [9]. The latter is fed with
64Hz data coming from the dynamics models of the spacecraft, so a s to inject outside
acceleration and gravity as sensed by the test masses. Within SUSO N, the 1027Hz
control loop of two tests masses is simulated with the real T-SAGE c omputer and
software in the loop, down to the electrode level. Many parameters enable to tune the
characteristic of the measurements: mass misalignments, mass ce ntering, scale factor,
quadratic scale factor, stiﬀness, and biases. A theoretical spec trum of T-SAGE noise is
also injected.
Another interesting aspect of this test bench is the simulation of mic ro-
perturbations. A complementary model was developed to inject ra ndom impacts within
the dynamics model, with the possibility to tune the time, direction, an d momentum
random distributions. The lack of ﬂight data at the time of the ﬁrst s imulations
campaign imposed a conservative parametrization ¶.
Finally, we should emphasize that it was the ﬁrst time a BVSS test benc h was
pushed so far in the simulation process. Among its notable characte ristics is the
wide range of timecales used: 1027Hz for the payload frequency, 6 4Hz for dynamics
simulation, 4Hz for the onboard activation of the SCAA (Attitude an d Orbit Control
System) tasks, the whole process running during 10 days to obtain the ﬁnal simulation
outputs. Such a long run time is required to simulate 120-orbit sessio ns during which the
hardware elements of the simulator ensure a very realistic simulation of the spacecraft
and the possibility to validate in depth the functional chains.
¶ When compared to ﬂight data (MICROSCOPE was not launch at the tim e the simulations were
created, but at the time of writing, we now have in-orbit estimates o f the amount of crackles), it shows
that the real level of micro-perturbation is far below hypothesis.

===== PAGE 16 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 16
Fig. 5 shows the spectra of the simulated diﬀerential acceleration f or two diﬀerent
measurement sessions, simulated with SUSON. The left panel shows the noise and
spectral leakage induced by glitches and missing data (gray) and th eir correction with
inpainting (black) in the frequency domain. The right panel shows the diﬀeren tial
acceleration during a simulated ∆ y calibration session. The bump between 0.01 Hz and
0.1 Hz is not caused by transients but is due to worst-case inaccura cies simulated in the
attitude control coming from the star sensor [30], and is linked to th e angular velocity
of the satellite. This bump is not prejudicial since it occurs at freque ncies diﬀerent than
those of the excitations and estimated signals. Furthermore, it ca n be corrected for
when estimating parameters in the iterative way presented in Sect. 3.
4.3. Eﬀect of the data level on glitches masking and missing d ata correction
As presented in Ref. [5], we use diﬀerent data levels during data pro cessing and analysis.
Those relevant for our current discussion are:
• N1a data: raw science data sorted by inertial sensor
• N2a data: raw science diﬀerential- and common-mode accelerations
• N2b data: derived from N2a data after correcting for instrument al parameters.
They are used to estimate the EPV signal.
We can wonder at which stage we should deﬁne the mask and correct for glitches
and missing data. We show here that the answer depends on what ta sk we aim to
accomplish.
4.3.1. Instrumental parameters estimation We deal with calibration at the N2a level;
thus, two routes can be taken to deﬁne masks: either we mask N1a accelerations, then
logically add those masks when creating N2a data, or we ignore maskin g N1a data
and directly mask at the N2a level. One could naively think that when cr eating the
diﬀerential acceleration, glitches would cancel out (both sensors see them in the same
way, since they come from external perturbations); then, the m ask needed at the N2a
level should be less conservative than the logical addition of the N1a masks. However,
sensors are not exactly identical, therefore leaving signiﬁcant (th ough attenuated)
imprints of glitches and other invalid data at N2a level. We ﬁnd that deﬁ ning the
mask either at N1a level or N2a level lead to approximately the same ﬁ nal N2a mask,
although we ﬁnd that it is best to apply inpainting on N2a data level rather than on
the N1a level. When applying inpainting to N1a data, reconstruction errors add up in
the N2a level data, thereby providing a less optimal result. We also ﬁ nd that KARMA
and M-ECM are more stable than inpainting with respect to the mask deﬁnition.
4.3.2. WEP measurement: non-commutativity of inpainting a nd systematics subtraction
We look for an EPV at the N2b level. Once instrumental parameters a re estimated,
subtracting their contribution from Eq. (1) can a priori be done on data still plagued by

===== PAGE 17 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 17
missing or invalid data, to which simple subtractions should be immune. W e then have
once again two routes to choose between in order to go from N2a to N2b data: either
correct for instrumental parameters on already inpainted N2a da ta, or correct for them
on raw N2a data, then apply inpainting, KARMA or M-ECM on those raw N2b data
level. KARMA and M-ECM do not rely on ﬁlling missing data, but only on the mask
deﬁnition. Therefore, their precision does not depend on whether we deﬁne masks at the
N2b level or we create N2b level masks from N2a masks. Hence, the following discussion
pertains only to methods that ﬁll data gaps and we specialise on the inpainting case.
The instrumental parameters are coupled with the measured comm on-mode
acceleration (through the ad parameters) and the square of the acceleration of individual
sensors (through the quadratic factors K2). Their subtraction will then evidently depend
on whether we subtract them (i) before applying inpainting or (ii) after correcting them
for invalid and missing data. In the former case, we create raw N2b d ata from raw N2a
data, that we must eventually mask and inpaint; in the latter case, w e create inpainted
N2b data from inpainted N2a data. The guiding principle to choose between those two
possibilities is to maximise the consistency between N2a data (inpainte d or raw) and
systematic/instrumental eﬀects.
We start by computing the systematic/instrumental parameters that are to be
subtracted from N2a data. Fig. 6 shows the diﬀerent contributor s to systematic eﬀects
when the common-mode and individual accelerations are not inpainte d (left panel) and
are inpainted (right panel). In those ﬁgures, the blue curve shows the main eﬀect of
the Earth gravity gradient combined with the oﬀcentering of the te st masses; the green
curve shows the eﬀect of the common-mode misalignments acij; the purple curve shows
the eﬀect of the test masses’ motion and satellite’s attitude; the o range curve shows the
eﬀect of the projection of the common-mode accelerations; the c yan curve shows the
eﬀect of the angular to linear couplings; the red curve shows the eﬀ ect of the quadratic
factors; the transparent black curve is the total systematics.
The main deterministic systematics come from the coupling between t he test-masses
oﬀcentering and the gravity gradient. The 2 fEP line can be clearly seen, but the fEP
peak is strong enough to mimic an EPV violation of about 10 −14 m/s2 if not corrected
for. Furthermore, the spectral leakage from the mean of the qu adratic factor dominates
at almost all frequencies. It is responsible for the ﬂat spectrum at low frequency, at a
level of 10 −13 m/s2 before inpainting and 10 −15 m/s2 after inpainting. This plateau can
be seen clearly on the N2a diﬀerential acceleration with the gray cur ve of the left panel
of Fig. 5.
The two options to create N2b data corrected for invalid and missing data can be
seen graphically as (i) subtracting the black curve (at the data leve l) of Fig. 6’s left
panel to Fig. 5’s gray curve, then mask the resulting data and apply inpainting to it or
(ii) just subtracting the black curve (at the data level) of Fig. 6’s rig ht panel to Fig.
5’s black curve. The resulting N2b spectra are shown in Fig. 7.
The diﬀerences are striking. On the one hand, subtracting raw sys tematics to raw
N2a diﬀerential accelerations, then mask and inpaint them (left pan el of Fig. 7), provides

===== PAGE 18 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 18
Figure 6. Systematics and instrumental parameters contributions on a SUS ON
simulation. Left panel: with no correction of missing data. Right pane l: after
correction of missing data. See main text for the description of eac h curve.
Figure 7. Left panel: inpainted N2b diﬀerential acceleration created from ra w N2a
diﬀerential acceleration and systematics. Right panel: N2b diﬀeren tial acceleration
created from inpainted N2a diﬀerential acceleration and systemat ics.
a very clean N2b diﬀerential acceleration, with no signiﬁcant determ inistic signals.
On the other hand, subtracting inpainted systematics to inpainted N2a diﬀerential
acceleration provides a poor N2b acceleration (right panel of Fig. 7 ), with a higher
low-frequency noise and still plagued by deterministic signals, with pe aks at fEP and
2fEP and the “attitude” bump about 10 −2Hz (right panel of Fig. 5): although this
bump is not problematic to estimate an EPV signal, the peak at fEP would lead us to
incorrectly conclude for the existence of an EPV.
This can be explained in the following way. Systematics and instrument al
parameters are coupled with the common-mode acceleration and wit h the individual
test mass squared accelerations; those are to be subtracted fr om the (N2a) diﬀerential-
mode acceleration. Although there seems to be four diﬀerent acce lerations involved in
this process, there are actually only two (whose sum and diﬀerence make up the common-
mode and diﬀerential-mode accelerations), and hence all accelerat ions are signiﬁcantly
correlated (up to the diﬀerences of both sensor’s transfer func tion). In particular,

===== PAGE 19 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 19
transients are seen for both test masses (albeit not in exactly the same way due to
their diﬀerent transfer functions). Therefore, when subtract ing raw systematics to raw
N2a diﬀerential acceleration, we consistently remove most of the in valid data, and we
almost get clean N2b data (see the gray spectrum in Fig. 8); masking the remaining
outliers and inpainting them then improves the spectrum (to obtain t he clean N2b data
of the black curve of Fig. 8).
In contrast, when masking and inpainting N2a data and N1a data (ne eded to
subtract the quadratic factors, that couple to the individual acc elerations –see Eq. 1),
inpainting introduces small errors (although not visible on individual spectra) that break
the consistency between the four accelerations involved. In part icular, if some bias (that
can be diﬀerent for the diﬀerential-mode and common-mode acceler ation) is introduced
by inpainting in the inpainted deterministic signals, their subtraction will be imperfe ct,
resulting in an incorrect N2b diﬀerential acceleration. Such biases a re the likely cause
of the remaining peaks in the spectrum of the lower panel of Fig. 7. F urthermore, if
transients are periodic, those inconsistent errors will create a pe riodic pattern at the
N2b diﬀerential acceleration, that can plague the inpainting reconstruction, thereby
introducing an artefact at the frequency of this pattern. Such a n artefact can increase
the appearance of a sub-optimally subtracted deterministic syste matics.
To summarise this discussion: the invalid/missing data correction (us ing inpainting)
and systematics substraction do not commute. Therefore, we ﬁr st create raw N2b-
level diﬀerential accelerations from raw N2a accelerations and raw systematics, before
masking them and ﬁlling their gaps. This allows us to apply inpainting only once (thus
using it in the regime explored in [17, 18] and minimising the bias observe d in [18]),
and to take advantage of the correlations between all the acceler ations involved in the
process.
5. Validating iterative least squares through numerical si mulations
Although the SUSON simulations used above are suﬃcient to investiga te qualitatively
the impact of instrumental parameters and the eﬀect of missing da ta, they are not precise
enough to test our full pipeline down to the precision required for MI CROSCOPE. This
is because they were not designed for such a high-precision task, b ut rather to make sure
that all ground-segment systems worked as expected. Consequ ently, we developed Monte
Carlo numerical simulations dedicated to test the data analysis tech nique presented in
Sect. 3, to show the internal consistency of our iterative least-s quare estimations in
the absence of data gaps. We already showed that KARMA, M-ECM a nd inpainting
allow us to correctly deal with missing data when estimating (in a non-it erative way)
parameters [15–18], thereby allowing us to ignore missing data in the r emainder of the
paper.
We assess the accuracy and precision of (i) ADAM’s least-squares e stimator and of
(ii) the iterative calibration of instrumental parameters. We invest igate the ﬁrst point
on focusing on how well Adam recovers the ∆ ′
x oﬀcentering input in the simulations,

===== PAGE 20 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 20
Figure 8. Spectrum of N2b level diﬀerential acceleration for the inertial ses sion used
to estimate the EPV in SUSON simulations, before (grey) and after ( black) glitches
and missing data correction. This spectrum can be compared with th at shown (in
black) in Fig. 5 before correcting for instrumental parameters.
when all other parameters are either ignored or perfectly correc ted for. The second point
is investigated by simulating 200 sets of calibration sessions and runn ing our iterative
least-square on them. In particular, such Monte Carlo simulations a llow us to easily
look into error propagation. All the simulations use the same instrum ental parameters
and noise characteristics, each of them with its own noise realisation (simulated from
the power-law noise power spectral density discussed in Ref. [31]) , so that the dispersion
of Adam’s outputs are solely statistical and representative of the data an alysis process.
5.1. Simulations
We use Simula, a numerical fortran simulation code developed speciﬁcally for
MICROSCOPE, to simulate the acceleration measured by both test m asses. The
simulator takes into account instrumental parameters (Eq. 1) th e satellite’s orbit and
attitude (either measured from real data or simulated by any exte rnal orbit simulator
–e.g. GINS [32] for the orbit) and computes the Earth GGT in the inst rument’s
frame. Finally, the motion of each test mass is simulated individually alon g its orbit
(see Ref. [4, 10] for the acceleration of individual test masses). M easurement errors
and further systematic eﬀects (such as, but not limited to, attitu de errors, datation
errors, drifts, periodic perturbations, missing data, scale facto r stability, stability of
coupling between axes) can be taken into account, but the electro nic servo-loop used
to control the test masses cannot easily be simulated, and is there fore ignored in this
paper. Although we simulate the eﬀect of instrumental parameter s (misalignments,
scale factors, couplings. . . ), we ignore systematic eﬀects not link ed to the instrument

===== PAGE 21 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 21
Figure 9. Distribution of ˆ∆′
x estimated with adam, from 2000 simulations. The red
dotted vertical line is the value to be recovered. The black dot and e rror bar show
the mean and rms of the distribution. Left: without correcting for other parameters.
Right: with perfect prior knowledge of other parameters
itself (e.g. drag-free residual or attitude control imperfections ) as well as transients
and missing data. However, we take care to deﬁne all calibration ses sions as they are
performed in reality (i.e. with the same duration and manoeuvres cha racteristics, see
Ref. [6]). Using those simpliﬁed simulations allows us to check that the le ast-squares
estimator is unbiased.
The values of the parameters that can be estimated are the same a s in the SUSON
simulations of Sect. 4, and are listed in the second column of Table 1. W e use
exaggerated values, so that the instrumental defects’ eﬀect is most easily visible. Besides
instrumental parameters, we simulate an EPV δ = 10 −14. Our goal is thus to recover
all instrumental parameters, and estimate the EPV with a 7 × 10−15 precision (given
the length and noise level of the corresponding simulated session) a fter correcting them
from the simulated diﬀerential acceleration.
5.2. Results
5.2.1. Adam estimates’ bias and variance We ﬁrst check that the Adam least-square
estimates are not intrinsically biased. To this aim, we measure the ∆ ′
x oﬀcentering, ﬁrst
with no prior on other instrumental parameters, i.e. without corre cting for them (which
is equivalent to the ﬁrst iteration of the iterative calibration). The le ft panel of Fig. 9
shows the distribution of the ˆ∆′
x estimator, based on 2000 simulations; the black dot and
associated error bar show the mean and rms of the distribution; th e input oﬀcentering
(as should be recovered by Adam) is shown by the red dotted vertical line on the right
hand side of the ﬁgure. This estimation is clearly biased; although the bias is small ( ≈
1%), it is highly signiﬁcant.
The observed bias is due to other uncorrected instrumental para meters aﬀecting
the measurement, which justiﬁes the use of an iterative technique .
To make sure of this assertion, we now consider the estimation of ∆ ′
x when other

===== PAGE 22 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 22
Figure 10. Distribution of Var( ˆ∆′
x) estimated with adam. The red dotted vertical
line is the “true” variance as computed from the distribution of the e stimator (Fig.
9). The black dot and error bar show the mean and rms of the estima ted variance
distribution.
instrumental parameters are perfectly known, and can therefo re be corrected for in the
measured diﬀerential acceleration before estimating ∆ ′
x. The right panel of Fig. 9 shows
the distribution of the ˆ∆′
x estimators in this case: adam’s estimate is now unbiased,
proving that the bias observed above was only due to ignoring the eﬀ ect of other
parameters. We can therefore claim that it is essential to iterate a cross instrumental
parameters when measuring them and that the iterative Adam’s estimation is unbiased.
Nevertheless, we will show below that the E¨ otv¨ os parameter est imation is insensitive
to small biases on instrumental parameters, and therefore does not require an iterative
process.
We show the distribution of the estimators’ variance in Fig. 10. We ca n ﬁrst
notice that adam’s estimated variance is distributed as a χ2-distribution, as expected
for a least-square estimator’s variance. In this ﬁgure, the red do tted vertical line is the
“true” variance, as computed from the estimator’s distribution (F ig. 9). The black dot
and associated error bars give the mean and rms of the variance of Adam’s individual
estimator. Since the “true” variance is within those error bars, we can conclude that
the variance provided by Adam for each estimation is reliable. This is particularly
important in the MICROSCOPE landscape, and we can safely conclude that the upper
bounds statistical errors on the E¨ otv¨ os parameter provided inRefs. [1, 2] are correct.
We can then safely conclude that adam is intrinsically unbiased and provides
correct error bars. We checked that our conclusions about ∆ ′
x still hold for diﬀerent
values of ∆ ′
x, as well as for other instrumental parameters.

===== PAGE 23 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 23
T able 1. Results of the Monte Carlo simulations: measured value of instrumen tal
parameter at each iteration. For each parameter, the ﬁrst line pr ovides the results
when propagating errors from one iteration to the next; the resu lts listed in the second
line ignore the error propagation. The second column gives the input values with the
precision required to meet MICROSCOPE’s objective in brackets.
Expected Iter 1 Iter 2 Iter 3 Iter 4 Iter 5
∆′
x [µm] 33.275 33.172 ± 0.025 33 .303 ± 0.023 33 .266 ± 0.023 33 .264 ± 0.024 33 .269 ± 0.028
(0.1) 33.171 ± 0.025 33 .301 ± 0.026 33 .269 ± 0.026 33 .267 ± 0.028 33 .271 ± 0.029
∆′
y [µm] -16.900 −17.552 ± 0.010 −17.268 ± 0.012 −17.368 ± 0.011 −17.368 ± 0.013 −17.367 ± 0.013
(2) −17.550 ± 0.011 −17.265 ± 0.011 −17.368 ± 0.012 −17.367 ± 0.013 −17.367 ± 0.012
∆′
z [µm] -26.559 −26.561 ± 0.026 −26.559 ± 0.027 −26.559 ± 0.027 −26.557 ± 0.023 −26.554 ± 0.023
(0.1) −26.557 ± 0.021 −26.557 ± 0.026 −26.556 ± 0.025 −26.556 ± 0.024 −26.557 ± 0.027
a′
d11 9.877 9.8866 ± 0.0004 9 .8865 ± 0.0004 9 .8865 ± 0.0003 9 .8865 ± 0.0004 9 .8866 ± 0.0004
[×10−3] (0.15) 9.8866 ± 0.0004 9 .8865 ± 0.0004 9 .8865 ± 0.0003 9 .8865 ± 0.0003 9 .8865 ± 0.0004
ad12 1.5983 1.5941 ± 0.0004 1 .5940 ± 0.0004 1 .5941 ± 0.0004 1 .5940 ± 0.0003 1 .5941 ± 0.0003
[×10−3] (0.05) 1.5940 ± 0.0004 1 .5940 ± 0.0004 1 .5941 ± 0.0004 1 .5940 ± 0.0004 1 .5940 ± 0.0003
ad13 -1.4026 −1.4067 ± 0.0004 −1.4068 ± 0.0003 −1.4068 ± 0.0003 −1.4067 ± 0.0003 −1.4068 ± 0.0004
[×10−3] (0.05) −1.4068 ± 0.0003 −1.4068 ± 0.0004 −1.4068 ± 0.0004 −1.4068 ± 0.0004 −1.4068 ± 0.0004
ac12 2.99 4.39 ± 0.05 2 .84 ± 0.05 2 .83 ± 0.05 2 .83 ± 0.04 2 .83 ± 0.05
[×10−3] (0.9) 4.39 ± 0.04 2 .83 ± 0.04 2 .82 ± 0.05 2 .83 ± 0.04 2 .84 ± 0.04
ac13 -3.75 −4.95 ± 0.04 −3.55 ± 0.05 −3.55 ± 0.05 −3.56 ± 0.05 −3.56 ± 0.04
[×10−3] (0.9) −4.94 ± 0.05 −3.55 ± 0.05 −3.54 ± 0.05 −3.56 ± 0.04 −3.56 ± 0.05
K2d [s2/m] 5612.6 5746.6 ± 1.2 5746 .7 ± 1.2 5746 .7 ± 1.2 5746 .6 ± 1.1 5746 .7 ± 1.2
(250) 5746.7 ± 1.2 5746 .7 ± 1.1 5746 .7 ± 1.2 5746 .9 ± 1.1 5746 .8 ± 1.2
δ [×10−15] 10 7.95 ± 7.39 10 .31 ± 8.07 11 .63 ± 7.97 11 .29 ± 6.58 9 .52 ± 6.68
(7) 8.45 ± 7.48 9 .58 ± 7.00 10 .81 ± 7.80 9 .50 ± 7.34 8 .94 ± 7.30
5.2.2. Full iterative calibration After focusing on the ∆ ′
x estimation above, we now
consider all parameters to mimic a real in-ﬂight iterative calibration. We estimate
the parameters listed in the ﬁrst column of Table 1, with input values lis ted in the
second column; the required combined accuracy and precision of th e estimation of each
parameter is given in Table A1. The remaining columns list the values mea sured for
each parameter at each iteration of the process. For each param eter, the ﬁrst line gives
the value estimated when considering error propagation from one it eration to the other;
in the second line, we ignore error propagation and use for the ith iteration the best ﬁt
of each parameter obtained at the ( i − 1)th iteration. The best ﬁt and uncertainty for
each parameter are computed as the mean and rms of the distribut ion of 100 estimates
from 100 simulations for each parameter and iteration. For the est imation of a given
parameter, all simulations share the same deterministic signals but h ave a diﬀerent
realisation of the instrumental noise. Note however that because of computational
limitations, we could not use the same set of simulations in both cases. This led to
diﬀerent best ﬁts when propagating uncertainties or not (nevert heless, the diﬀerences
are well within the error bars).
It is clear that after the ﬁrst iteration where the estimation of som e parameters
is somewhat biased (most notably ∆ ′
x, ac12 and ac13), the iterative correction of
instrumental parameters allows us to recover the input values, we ll within the required
accuracy. In practice, based on these results, we iterate on inst rumental parameters

===== PAGE 24 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 24
while estimates from one iteration to the next do not vary signiﬁcant ly, with a maximum
number of iterations set to ﬁve [6]. Note also that the ac12 and ac13 parameters, though
correctly estimated here, are not measured in real data [6,8] sin ce they are close to their
required value from construction, and the noise (higher than in the se simulations) does
not allow for a precise measurement.
The discussions in Sect. 3.5 and Appendix B show that error propaga tion is not
trivial in our iterative calibration. The comparison of each instrumen tal parameter’s
lines in Table 1 (the ﬁrst one corresponding to the case where we pro pagate errors, the
second one to the case where we ignore error propagation) shows that we can ignore
error propagation when estimating instrumental parameters.
The last line of Table 1 gives the measurement of the E¨ otv¨ os param eter after
correction of the estimated instrumental parameters. It is clear that we are able to
accurately recover the input EPV signal with the expected precisio n. Just like in the case
of instrumental parameters, the uncertainty on the E¨ otv¨ os parameter is not impacted
by the uncertainty propagation from one iteration to the next. We can therefore reliably
ignore the error propagation in our iterative estimations.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we summarised MICROSCOPE’s data analysis process. Building on
the measurement equation, we showed how we can either estimate, model or ignore
instrumental parameters. The estimation of those that cannot b e ignored nor modelled
is performed through an iterative weighted least square ﬁt in the fr equency domain.
We provided an extensive characterisation of inpainting, a gap-ﬁlling technique that
we adapted to MICROSCOPE. This exercice, based on worst-case s cenario numerical
simulations, shows the behavior of the algorithm in a complex data-pr ocessing pipeline,
and can be useful to other experimental data analyses.
Using well-controlled numerical simulations, we then showed that our iterative least-
square method is robust to estimate instrumental parameters an d correct for them in
order to reliably measure the E¨ otv¨ os ratio. In particular, we showed that our main least-
square estimator is intrinsically unbiased. Combined with our previous works [15–18],
those results prove that our data analysis pipeline allows us to reliably measure an EPV
even in the presence of missing data and instrumental imperfection s.
Finally, we discussed the non-trivial, but important, problem of unce rtainties
propagation in our pipeline. Like in any precision experiment, the prob lem of
uncertainty estimation is central to the MICROSCOPE data analysis . We showed that
not only does our iterative least-square technique provide correc t error bars, but we can
also safely ignore the problem of uncertainty propagation through out iterations. This
paper therefore justiﬁes the results provided in Refs. [1–3, 8].

===== PAGE 25 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 25
T able A1. Parameters that can be calibrated in orbit, method to perform the ir
calibration, and precision required to satisfy MICROSCOPE’s object ive. Oscillations
are given along or about axes in the instrument frame. fEP is the frequency of the
test, where we may expect to detect a WEP violation. The fourth co lumn gives the
maximal allowed value by design. See Ref. [6, 10] for details.
Parameter Calibration technique Aimed precision Max. allowed value
∆′
x No satellite maneuver; take advantage of Earth’s GGT signal at 2 fEP 0.1µm 20 µm
∆′
y Angular oscillation of the satellite about the z-axis 2µm 20 µm
∆′
z No satellite maneuver; take advantage of Earth’s GGT signal at 2 fEP 0.1µm 20 µm
ac12 Angular oscillation of the satellite about the x-axis and linear oscillation 9 × 10−4rad 2.6 × 10−3rad
of the test mass along the z-axis
ac13 Angular oscillation of the satellite about the x-axis and linear oscillation 9 × 10−4rad 2.6 × 10−3rad
of the test mass along the y-axis
a′
d11 Linear oscillation of the satellite along the x-axis 1.5 × 10−4 0.01
ad12 Linear oscillation of the satellite along the y-axis 5 × 10−5rad 1.5 × 10−3rad
ad13 Linear oscillation of the satellite along the z-axis 5 × 10−5rad 1.5 × 10−3rad
K (d)
2xx/
(
K (c)
1x
)2
Linear oscillation of the satellite along the x-axis 250 s 2/m 14000 s 2/m
Acknowledgments
This work makes use of technical data from the CNES-ESA-ONERA- CNRS-OCA
MICROSCOPE mission, and has received ﬁnancial support from ONER A and CNES.
We thank Bruno Christophe, Bernard Foulon and Isabelle Petitbon, as well as the
members of the MICROSCOPE Science Working Group for useful disc ussions. Special
thanks go to Pierre Fayet and Pieter Visser for detailed comments o n the manuscript.
JB and SP acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the UnivEarthS Lab ex program at
Sorbonne Paris Cit´ e (ANR-10-LABX-0023 and ANR-11-IDEX-0005-02).
Appendix A. In-ﬂight instrumental parameters estimation
Table A1 lists the parameters that we can calibrate, and summarizes the techniques
used to perform their estimation. The third column of the table lists t he precision
and accuracy required on the estimation of each parameter to sat isfy the overall
MICROSCOPE goal to reach the 10 −15 level for the E¨ otv¨ os parameter; the fourth
column shows the maximum value allowed by design of the instrument; t hose numbers
were obtained with a performance analysis, whose description is bey ond the scope of
this paper. See Ref. [6] for a complete description of which paramet ers can be estimated
in ﬂight.
Appendix B. Error propagation through least-square estima tion
This appendix presents a pedagogical derivation of error propaga tion when correcting
the measured diﬀerential acceleration from estimated instrument al parameters. We
show two diﬀerent approaches: the ﬁrst one is a traditional variat ional approach, while

===== PAGE 26 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 26
the second one computes the full variance of the calibrated diﬀere ntial acceleration.
We show that the latter provides a more complete view of the eﬀects of propagating
uncertainties when correcting for (estimated) instrumental par ameter.
Appendix B.1. Uncorrected diﬀerential acceleration and es timated parameters
The uncorrected diﬀerential acceleration (Eq. 1) can be re-writt en as:
Γ d(t) = 2Γ δ(t) +
3∑
j,k=1
(Tjk(t) − In jk(t))ac1j∆k(t)
+ 2
3∑
k=1
(−1)k
[
ac1i ˙∆j(t) − ac1j ˙∆i(t)
]
i<j,i,j⁄=k
Ωk
−
3∑
k=1
ac1k ¨∆k(t) + 2
3∑
k=1
ad1k ˜Γ c
k(t)
+ K21
(
˜Γ (1)(t)
)2
− K22
(
˜Γ (2)(t)
)2
+ 2nd(t), (B.1)
where Γ δ(t) gathers terms depending on the E¨ otv¨ os ratioδ, and where the indices i, j, k
are either in (1,2) or ( x,y,z) depending on the variable they index. In Eq. (B.1), we
ignore angular-to-linear couplings. In this equation, the common-m ode and individual
accelerations, marked by a tilde, are noise-corrected (e.g. ˜Γ c
k(t) = Γ c
k(t) − nc(t)).
The common-mode and diﬀerential-mode noises are assumed normally distributed
with variance σ2
d = σ2
1 + σ2
2 and σ2
c = ( σ2
1 + σ2
2)/4, where σ2
k is the variance for the kth
(k = 1, 2) sensor’s noise.
The parameters estimated before correction are the following: ac1k, ad1k, ∆ k, K2k.
In the following, we assume that their estimators ˆ ac1k, ˆad1k, ˆ∆k, ˆK2k are unbiased and
of variance σac1k, etc.
Note that although ac11 cannot be estimated, it is possible to consider it as an
unknown parameter, and assume it is a random variable of mean 1 and variance given
by its speciﬁcations (or an educated guess). For the sake of clarit y, we shall not pursue
this possibility here.
Appendix B.2. Synthetic uncorrected and calibrated accele rations
In order to simplify the computation of the calibrated diﬀerential ac celeration, of its
expectation value and of its variance after propagating the error s on the estimation of
instrumental parameters, we deﬁne a synthetic (uncorrected) diﬀerential acceleration
as:
Γ d(t) = Γ δ(t) + κaaY (t) + κbcbcZ(t) + κkk ˜Γ c(t) + l1
(
˜Γ (1)
)2
− l2
(
˜Γ (2)
)2
+ nd(t), (B.2)

===== PAGE 27 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 27
where a, b, c, k, l1 and l2 are estimated, κi are numerical (constant) factors, Y (t) and Z(t)
are deterministic signals that can be measured or modeled, and we ke pt the common-
mode and individual accelerations unchanged. Although b and c may be degenerate, we
will assume that they are not correlated. This equation encompass es all types of terms
found in Eq. (B.1).
The calibrated synthetic acceleration can then be shown to be:
Γ d
cal(t) = Γ δ(t) + κa(a − ˆa)Y (t) + κbc(bc − ˆbˆc)Z(t) + κk(k − ˆk)˜Γ c(t)
+ (l1 − ˆl1)
[
˜Γ (1)(t)
] 2
− 2 ˆl1˜Γ (1)(t)n1(t) − (l2 − ˆl2)
[
˜Γ (2)(t)
] 2
+ 2 ˆl2˜Γ (2)(t)n2(t)
+ 1
2
[
(n1(t) − n2(t)) − κkˆk(n1(t) + n2(t))
]
− ˆl1n2
1(t) + ˆl2n2
2(t) (B.3)
In what follows, we assume that we wish to estimate the E¨ otv¨ os ra tio δ (hence,
the assumption that the estimates of the instrumental paramete rs are unbiased). The
discussion can readily be generalized to the estimation of any instrum ental parameter
given priors on the others.
Appendix B.3. Error propagation. Method 1: variational app roach
We ﬁrst use a variational approach to compute the variance of the calibrated diﬀerential
acceleration (see e.g. [33]).
Appendix B.4. Expectation value of calibrated diﬀerential acceleration
Under the assumption that all estimates are unbiased, the expect ation value of Eq.
(B.3) is
E[Γ d
cal(t)] = Γ δ(t) − ˆl1σ2
1 + ˆl2σ2
2. (B.4)
It should be noted that the calibration entails a constant non-zero bias. However,
the same bias is applied at all times t, and therefore does not aﬀect the estimation of
the amplitude of the WEP violation signal.
Appendix B.4.1. Error propagation Taking the sum of partial derivatives of Eq. (B.3)
and assuming that |Γ (1)| ≪ 1 and |Γ (2)| ≪ 1, we get:
σ2
Γ cal = κ2
aY 2(t)σ2
a + κbcZ 2(t)ˆb2ˆc2
(σ2
b
ˆb
+ σ2
c
ˆc2
)
+ κ2
k [Γ c(t)]2 σ2
k
+
[
1 − κkˆk
2 − 2 ˆl1Γ (1)(t)
] 2
σ2
1 +
[
2 ˆl2Γ (2)(t) − 1 + κkˆk
2
] 2
σ2
2 (B.5)
Note that in Eq. (B.5), the common-mode and individual acceleration s that appear are
the eﬀectively measured (hence, noisy) ones, contrary to those which appeared in the
uncorrected acceleration.

===== PAGE 28 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 28
Appendix B.4.2. Actual calibrated acceleration: Expectat ion value and variance
Returning to the actual MICROSCOPE accelerations, Eqs. (B.4) an d (B.5) give:
E[Γ d
cal(t)] = Γ δ(t) − 1
2 ( ˆK21σ2
1 + ˆK22σ2
2) (B.6)
and
σ2
Γ cal(t) = 1
4
3∑
j,k=1
[Tjk (t) − In jk (t)]2 ˆa2
c1j ˆ∆2
k
(
σ2
∆k
ˆ∆2
k
+ σ2
ac1j
ˆac1j 2
)
+
3∑
k=1
[
˙∆j(t)2σ2
ac1i + ˙∆i(t)2σ2
ac1j
]
i,j⁄=k,i<j
Ωk(t)2
+ 1
4
3∑
k=1
¨∆k(t)2σ2
ac1k +
3∑
k=1
[Γ c(t)]2 σ2
ad1k
+
[
1 −∑ 3
k=1 ˆad1k
2 − 2 ˆK21Γ (1)(t)
] 2
σ2
1
+
[
2 ˆK22Γ (2)(t) − 1 +∑ 3
k=1 ˆad1k
2
] 2
σ2
2. (B.7)
Note that the uncertainties on the quadratic factors σ2
K2i do not appear in this
equation. This is because we assumed that |Γ (i)| ≪ 1.
Eq. (B.7) shows that the instrumental parameters themselves an d the uncertainties
on their estimation bring up two diﬀerent eﬀects on the variance of t he calibrated
diﬀerential acceleration:
• extra-contributors to total variance: uncertainties on the est imated instrumental
parameters add up to the noise, therefore increasing the calibrat ed diﬀerential
acceleration’s variance, and increasing the uncertainty on the E¨ o tv¨ os parameter
estimated with a least-square ﬁt of the calibrated diﬀerential acce leration. Those
extra contributions can be taken into account simply by adding them in the data
covariance passed to the least-square ﬁt. Another method (mor e computationally
expensive) is to use Monte Carlo simulations where we vary the corre ction terms
within their allowed bounds.
• modiﬁcation of the noise: the calibrated diﬀerential acceleration no ise variance is
not simply σ2
d = σ2
1 + σ2
2 as that of the uncorrected diﬀerential acceleration noise.
Instead, it is modiﬁed by the presence of non-zero diﬀerential par ameters ( ad1k)
that couple to the common-mode acceleration and of non-zero qua dratic factors that
couple to the individual accelerations. The knowledge of the best es timates for those
instrumental parameters allows us to quantify the modiﬁcation of t he noise (which,
given the values of the involved parameters, remains negligible). How ever, Eq.
(B.7) is valid only for a given set of instrumental parameters’ estima tors, and does
not tell us anything about the distribution of the corrected diﬀere ntial acceleration

===== PAGE 29 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 29
noise, and hence on the uncertainty on the calibrated diﬀerential a cceleration noise.
A more general approach is necessary (see below).
Appendix B.5. Error propagation. Method 2: general varianc e analysis of the
calibrated diﬀerential acceleration
For this analysis, we ﬁrst go back to our synthetic model (B.3), who se variance we
directly compute.
Appendix B.5.1. Synthetic model Under the same assumptions as for Eq. (B.5), we
ﬁnd (with a straightforward but tedious algebra):
Var[Γcal(t)] = κ2
aY 2(t)σ2
a +κ2
bcZ 2(t)ˆb2ˆc2
[ σ2
b σ2
c
ˆb2ˆc2
+ σ2
b
ˆb2
+ σ2
c
ˆc2
]
+κ2
k
[
˜Γ c(t)
] 2
σ2
k +l2
1σ4
1 +l2σ4
2
+ 1
4
[
1 + κk(κkσ2
k − 2k + k2) + 16(σ2
l1 + l2
1)
[
˜Γ (1)(t)
] 2
− 2(1 − κkk)l1 ˜Γ (1)(t)
]
σ2
1
+ 1
4
[
1 + κk(κkσ2
k + 2k + k2) + 16(σ2
l2 + l2
2)
[
˜Γ (2)(t)
] 2
− 2(1 − κkk)l2˜Γ (2)(t)
]
σ2
2. (B.8)
Note that although we assume σ1,2 ≪ 1, we do not ignore the σ4
1,2 terms since the
l1,2 terms may be signiﬁcant (they encode the quadratic factors).
We can observe that the contributors from the error propagatio n (those which do
not contribute to the noise) are the same as in Eq. (B.5), except fo r the σ2
b σ2
c /ˆb2ˆc2 term,
that pops-up here since we did not assume that b and c were independent. However,
for MICROSCOPE, we always have σ2
b,c ≪ (b, c)2, so we will ignore this term in the
following, so that the contribution to the uncertainty on the E¨ otv ¨ os parameter from
error propagation is the same in our two analyses (Eqs. (B.5) and (B .8)).
However, the noise term is much more complex in Eq. (B.8) than in Eq. ( B.5). This
is because it encompasses the uncertainty on the estimated instru mental parameters.
In that sense, whereas Eq. (B.5) tells us how the noise is modiﬁed whe n we correct
the diﬀerential acceleration for a given set of instrumental param eters, Eq. (B.8) tells
us how the modiﬁed noise is distributed. It provides a more conserva tive uncertainty
propagation, and should be favored when analyzing data.

===== PAGE 30 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 30
Appendix B.5.2. Actual calibrated diﬀerential accelerati on Ignoring the σ2
b σ2
c /ˆb2ˆc2 term
from Eq. (B.8), the total variance for the actual MICROSCOPE ac celeration is
Var[Γcal(t)] = 1
4
3∑
j,k=1
[Tjk (t) − In jk (t)]2 ˆa2
c1j ˆ∆2
k
(
σ2
∆k
ˆ∆2
k
+ σ2
ac1j
ˆa2
c1j
)
+
3∑
k=1
[
˙∆j(t)2σ2
ac1i + ˙∆i(t)2σ2
ac1j
]
i,j⁄=k,i<j
Ωk(t)2
+ 1
4
3∑
k=1
¨∆k(t)2σ2
ac1k +
3∑
k=1
[Γ c(t)]2 σ2
ad1k
+ 1
4
{
1 +
3∑
k=1
σ2
ad1k − 2
3∑
k=1
ad1k +
3∑
k=1
a2
d1k + 16
(
σ2
K21 + K 2
21
)[
˜Γ (1)
] 2
−2
(
1 −
3∑
k=1
ad1k
)
K21 ˜Γ (1)
}
σ2
1
+ 1
4
{
1 +
3∑
k=1
σ2
ad1k + 2
3∑
k=1
ad1k +
3∑
k=1
a2
d1k + 16
(
σ2
K22 + K 2
22
)[
˜Γ (2)
] 2
−2
(
1 +
3∑
k=1
ad1k
)
K22 ˜Γ (2)
}
σ2
2
+ K 2
21σ4
1 + K 2
22σ4
2 (B.9)
The noise term in Eq. (B.9) makes it clear that the ad1k parameters and quadratic
factors, as well as the uncertainty on their estimation, modify the measured noise.
Although in practice the uncertainty on those parameters can be s een as bringing
an uncertainty on the noise (the noise is corrected by some uncert ain estimates of the
parameters), Eq. (B.9) combines those uncertainties to provide a n upper bound of the
measured noise. That is, it provides the most conservative varianc e of the calibrated
diﬀerential acceleration. Therefore, it should be used to complete ly take into account
the errors in the estimate of instrumental parameters, and shou ld be included in the
least-square ﬁt.
Note that in this equation, the values of ad1k and K2i are not their estimates, but
their “real” value. In practice, assuming that our estimates are un biased, or at least give
a correct order of magnitude of the real value, we can replace the m by their estimated
values.
References
[1] Touboul P, M´ etris G, Rodrigues M, Andr´ e Y, Baghi Q, Berg´ e J, Boulanger D, Bremer S, Carle P,
Chhun R, Christophe B, Cipolla V, Damour T, Danto P, Dittus H, Fayet P, Foulon B, Gageant
C, Guidotti P Y, Hagedorn D, Hardy E, Huynh P A, Inchauspe H, Kay ser P, Lala S, L¨ ammerzahl
C, Lebat V, Leseur P, Liorzou F, List M, L¨ oﬄer F, Panet I, Pouilloux B, Prieur P, Rebray A,

===== PAGE 31 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 31
Reynaud S, Rievers B, Robert A, Selig H, Serron L, Sumner T, Tangu y N and Visser P 2017
Physical Review Letters 119 231101 ( Preprint 1712.01176)
[2] Touboul P, M´ etris G, Rodrigues M, Andr´ e Y, Baghi Q, Berg´ e J, Boulanger D, Bremer S, Chhun
R, Christophe B, Cipolla V, Damour T, Danto P, Dittus H, Fayet P, Fou lon B, Guidotti P Y,
Hardy E, Huynh P A, L¨ ammerzahl C, Lebat V, Liorzou F, List M, Pan et I, Pires S, Pouilloux
B, Prieur P, Reynaud S, Rievers B, Robert A, Selig H, Serron L, Sumn er T and Visser P 2019
Classical and Quantum Gravity 36 225006
[3] Touboul P and Microscope team in prep Class. Quant. Grav.
[4] Touboul P, Rodrigues M, M´ etris G, Chhun R, Robert A, Baghi Q, Hardy E, Berg´ e J, Boulanger
D, Christophe B, Cipolla V, Foulon B, Guidotti P Y, Huynh P A, Lebat V, Liorzou F, Pouilloux
B, Prieur P and Reynaud S 2020 arXiv e-prints arXiv:2012.06472 ( Preprint 2012.06472)
[5] Touboul P, M´ etris G, Rodrigues M, Bedouet J, Berg´ e J, Boulan ger D, Chhun R, Christophe B,
Cipolla V, Damour T, Dittus H, Fayet P, Foulon B, Guidotti P Y, Hardy E , Huynh P A,
L¨ ammerzahl C, Lebat V, Liorzou F, List M, Pouilloux B, Prieur P, Rey naud S, Rievers B,
Robert A, Serron L, Sumner T and Visser P in prep Class. Quant. Grav.
[6] Hardy E and Microscope team in prep Class. Quant. Grav.
[7] Berg´ e J, Baghi Q, Robert A, Rodrigues M, Foulon B, Hardy E, M´ etris G, Pires S and Touboul P
2020 arXiv e-prints arXiv:2012.06485 ( Preprint 2012.06485)
[8] M´ etris G and Microscope team in prep Class. Quant. Grav.
[9] Liorzou F, Touboul P, Rodrigues M, M´ etris G, Andr´ e Y, Berg´ eJ, Boulanger D, Bremer S, Chhun
R, Christophe B, Danto P, Foulon B, Hagedorn D, Hardy E, Huynh P A , L¨ ammerzahl C, Lebat
V, List M, L¨ oﬄer F, Rievers B, Robert A and Selig H 2020 arXiv e-prints arXiv:2012.11232
(Preprint 2012.11232)
[10] Hardy E, Levy A, M´ etris G, Rodrigues M and Touboul P 2013 Sapce Science Reviews 180 177–191
(Preprint 1707.08024)
[11] Robert A, Cipolla V, Prieur P, Touboul P, M´ etris G, Rodrigues M, Andr´ e Y, Berg´ e J, Boulanger
D, Chhun R, Christophe B, Guidotti P Y, Hardy E, Lebat V, Lienart T , Liorzou F and Pouilloux
B 2020 arXiv e-prints arXiv:2012.06479 ( Preprint 2012.06479)
[12] Petit G and Luzum B (eds) 2010 IERS Conventions (2010) International Earth Rotation and
Reference Systems Service (IERS) (Verlag des Bundesamts f¨ ur Kartographie und Geod¨ asie)
[13] M´ etris G, Xu J and Wytrzyszczak I 1998 Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 71 137–
151
[14] Will C M 2014 Living Reviews in Relativity 17 4 ( Preprint 1403.7377)
[15] Baghi Q, M´ etris G, Berg´ e J, Christophe B, Touboul P and Rod rigues M 2015 Phys. Rev. D 91
062003 ( Preprint 1503.01470)
[16] Baghi Q, M´ etris G, Berg´ e J, Christophe B, Touboul P and Rod rigues M 2016 Phys. Rev. D 93
122007 ( Preprint 1608.08530)
[17] Berg´ e J, Pires S, Baghi Q, Touboul P and M´ etris G 2015 Phys. Rev. D 92 112006 ( Preprint
1512.00492)
[18] Pires S, Berg´ e J, Baghi Q, Touboul P and M´ etris G 2016 Phys. Rev. D 94 123015 ( Preprint
1612.05452)
[19] Lupton R 1993 Statistics in theory and practice (Princeton University Press) ISBN 9780691074290
[20] Hardy E, Levy A, Rodrigues M, Touboul P and M´ etris G 2013 Advances in Space Research 52
1634–1646 ( Preprint 1707.07630)
[21] Abbott B P et al. (LIGO Scientiﬁc, Virgo) 2020 Class. Quant. Grav. 37 055002 ( Preprint
1908.11170)
[22] Cornish N J and Littenberg T B 2015 Classical and Quantum Gravity 32 135012 ( Preprint
1410.3835)
[23] Zackay B, Venumadhav T, Roulet J, Dai L and Zaldarriaga M 2019 (Preprint 1908.05644)
[24] Venumadhav T, Zackay B, Roulet J, Dai L and Zaldarriaga M 2019 Phys. Rev. D 100 023011
(Preprint 1902.10341)

===== PAGE 32 =====
MICROSCOPE data analysis 32
[25] Wei W and Huerta E 2020 Phys. Lett. B 800 135081 ( Preprint 1901.00869)
[26] Torres-Forn´ e A, Cuoco E, Font J A and Marquina A 2020 Phys. Rev. D 102 023011 ( Preprint
2002.11668)
[27] Berg´ e J, Massey R, Baghi Q and Touboul P 2019 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 486 544–559 ( Preprint 1903.05837)
[28] Pires S, Starck J L, Amara A, Teyssier R, R´ efr´ egier A and Fad ili J 2009 Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society 395 1265–1279 ( Preprint 0804.4068)
[29] Pires S, Mathur S, Garc ´ ıa R A, Ballot J, Stello D and Sato K 2015 Astronomy and Astrophysics
574 A18 ( Preprint 1410.6088)
[30] Prieur P, Lienart T, Rodrigues M, Touboul P, Denver T, Jorgen sen J L, Bang A M and Metris
G 2017 Microscope mission: on-orbit assessment of the drag-free and attitude control system
ISTS-2017-d-038/ISSFD-2017-038 1-10, 26th Int Symp Space Flight Dynamics
[31] Touboul P 2009 Space Science Reviews 148 455–474
[32] Bourda G, Charlot P and Biancale R 2008 ArXiv e-prints (Preprint 0803.1432)
[33] Ku H H 1966 Journal of research of the National Bureau of Standards 70 4
