===== PAGE 1 =====
Isolating the natural edges of bilayer graphene in gate-defined mesoscopic devices
Francesco Blanda1, Grazia Raciti1, Thilo Glatzel1, Aurin Strathmann1, Fabrizio Volante1, Kenji
Watanabe2, Takashi Taniguchi2, Ilaria Zardo1, Thomas Ihn3, Klaus Ensslin3, and Andrea Hofmann1,∗
1 University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
2 Advanced Materials Laboratory, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 3050044, Japan
3 Solid State Physics Laboratory, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland
4 Swiss Nanoscience Institute, Klingelbergstrasse 82, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
* Corresponding author. Email: andrea.hofmann@unibas.ch
We introduce a graphite-gated architecture for bilayer graphene devices in which the active device
is completely isolated from the natural graphene edges. Using a single patterned graphite-gate
layer, we realize a fully electrostatically defined Hall-bar. Longitudinal and Hall measurements
reveal mesoscopic transport features, including Hall-effect quenching and magnetoresistance peaks
associated with boundary scattering. The dependence of the mesoscopic features on the carrier-
density shows that the effective channel width increases with the Fermi level and the electrostatic
confinementatthegate-definedboundaries, andindicatesthatthecarriersscatterattheelectrostatic
boundary. Raman spectroscopy and Kelvin probe force microscopy suggest that this boundary is
disordered due to the used fabrication methods. Comparably, the quantum mobility in a field-
effect transistor fabricated with the same architecture is not limited by boundary scattering and the
visibility of quantum oscillations down to4 mTsuggests a record value of2.5×106 cm2/Vs.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the field of Van-der Waals materials, device repro-
ducibility and yield impose major limitations to the ex-
ploration of the underlying physics and to their techno-
logical relevance. The complex assembly and fabrication
schemes give rise to an immense number of parameters
that have to be controlled at the same time. In bilayer
graphene (BLG) devices, the mastery of this parameter
space is, to some extent, reflected by the opening of a uni-
form band-gap under the application of an electric field
perpendicular to the BLG sheet. This gap is theoreti-
cally expected [1] and routinely achieved in experiments
[2, 3], but its cleanliness as measured by the in-gap resis-
tance is of varying quality and strongly depends on the
fabrication details [4]. In the presence of a clean band-
gap, the resistance increases beyond the Teraohm regime
when the Fermi energy is tuned into the gap. In a de-
vice, conducting regions and insulating regions can be
separated with patterned gate electrodes which tune the
Fermi level into the band or the band gap, respectively.
This allows to electrostatically define nanostructured de-
vices. These structures have replaced etch-defined BLG
architectures [5], where the device was defined by etching
away the surrounding material and allowed for measure-
ments of clean quantum point contacts [6] and quantum
dots [7, 8]. However, even in these devices, the natu-
ral flake edge may still provide conducting paths, giving
rise to a large measured conduction that is independent
of the nanostructured device. Furthermore, the effect of
the electrostatic edges on the transport properties has
remained largely unexplored.
We have conceived a new architecture of dual-gated
BLG devices facilitating the design of a large variety
of them. The devices are fully surrounded by electro-
static edges, preventing any transport connection be-
tween ohmic contacts and natural flake edges, thus forc-
ing the current to pass the device under study. Further,
the active device area remains unaffected by exposure to
polymers or high-voltage electron beams used in typical
lithography processes. Taking into consideration the con-
cerns about Cr and Ti sticking layers [9] and following
recent trends in the field [10, 11], we move away from
metal as top-gate electrode, but instead rely on graphite
layers.
After introducing the design architecture, we first
demonstrate the cleanliness of the achieved band-gaps
and the high mobility of the BLG charge carriers by
performing magnetotransport measurements on a simple
field-effect transistor (FET) device geometry. We then
introduce a gate-defined Hall-bar, with which we charac-
terize in more detail the remaining effects of the electro-
static edges in gate-defined devices.
II. DEVICE ARCHITECTURE
Our device design relies on the band-gap that opens in
BLG upon application of a perpendicular displacement
field. In contrast to the successful demonstrations of
gate-defined quantum point contacts and quantum dots
in BLG [6–8, 12], we don’t rely on the band gap only
in close vicinity of the active area. Instead, we tune the
whole area of the BLG flake outside our active device
into the resistive regime provided by the band-gap. Our
device architecture is shown in Fig. 1(b,c) in the form
of a FET and a Hall-bar device. The BLG flake is en-
capsulated between two hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)
flakes and, in an additional step, a few-layer graphite
flake is stacked onto the top h-BN flake. The device
arXiv:2608.18384v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  18 Aug 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
FIG. 1. Measured devices. a) Optical microscope image of the finished devices and schematics of the setup. b) Atomic force
micrograph of the Hall-bar after the patterning of the graphite top gate, in yellow the position of the ohmic contacts, in blue
the contacts to the Hall-bar gate, and in light blue the cut in the BLG to facilitate equilibration. The Hall-bar gate is separated
from the FET gate by a90 nm-wide gap. c) Atomic force micrograph of the800 nm-wide FET, in yellow the position of the
ohmic contacts.
geometry is then carved out of this graphite flake, sep-
arating the stack into the active device region and a re-
gion outside, which will be tuned into the band-gap us-
ing electrostatic gating. The latter effectively creates an
electrostatic mesa. One more h-BN flake finally covers
the graphite flake, allowing to contact all the graphite
regions individually via small etched holes and a metal
fan-out. Details on the stacking and device fabrication
are described in section VII and S1. The whole stack is
visible in Fig. 1(a).
The described architecture brings the advantage that
conduction only occurs within the electrostatically de-
fined mesa and, in particular, does not rely on the elec-
trostatic opening of a clean band-gap along the flake
edges. In contrast to previous BLG quantum dot designs
[7, 8], this prevents potential parallel conduction paths
created by imperfect edges. For example, due to the way
such edges are created by exfoliation, they are not nec-
essarily uniform, and may partially consist of monolayer
graphene, where no band-gap opens with a displacement
field. Here, no conduction path connects our ohmic con-
tacttothenaturalflakeedges, thusovercomingthisprob-
lem and increasing the device yield.
III. FIELD-EFFECT TRANSISTOR
We first characterize our new architecture using a sim-
ple device design, namely a FET as shown in Fig. 1(c),
which still allows us to study the magnetotransport prop-
erties of the BLG [13, 14]. In our case, the FET con-
sists of two ohmic contacts separated by a graphite re-
gion which covers the whole surrounding. This excludes
potential current paths along natural flake edges when-
ever the gated region is tuned into the band-gap, yielding
the configurations of large resistance shown in Fig. 2(a).
There, the back-gate voltageVBG and the graphite top-
gate voltageV FET are swept while a constant voltage
VSD = 750µVis applied between the source and drain
contacts. The resistance is large at the back-gate volt-
ageV BG,0 and the top-gate voltageVTG,0 where the BLG
is charge-neutral. The resistance reaches theTΩregime
along the diagonal line, where the Fermi level lies in the
band-gap opened by the perpendicular displacement field
D=C t/2ϵ0(VTG−V TG,0)−C b/2ϵ0(VBG−V BG,0). Here,
Ci =ϵ 0ϵi/di, withdi andϵ i the h-BN thickness and rel-
ative dielectric constant of the top (i=t) or bottom
(i=b) flake andϵ 0 the vacuum dielectric constant, re-
spectively.
To test the uniformity and homogeneity of the band
gap, we extract the resistance at constant displacement
field, while tuning the Fermi energy through the band-
gap by changing the densityn=C t/e(V TG−V TG,0) +
Cb/e(V BG−V BG,0)from positive (hole charge carriers)
to negative (electron charge carriers). Meanwhile, we
stepV SD in order to measure the size of the band-gap
[4], as shown in Fig. 2(b). The uniform diamond with
its sharp transition from a high in-gap resistance to

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
FIG. 2. Band-gap measurements of the FET. a) Two-terminal resistance as a function ofVFET andV BG. The diagonal, highly
insulating line appears when the Fermi level lies in the gap opened by the displacement field. Inset: measured current as a
function ofV BG at a fixed top gate voltage as indicated by the red line. b) Finite bias spectroscopy at fixed displacement field
as indicated by the dotted line in a).
low-resistive conduction outside the gap suggests a com-
plete suppression of transport channels in the insulat-
ing regime. These results demonstrate the absence of
common fabrication-related issues named above, which
typically lead to impurities and defects in the measured
region of the flake.
We now characterize the magnetotransport of the FET
in the conducting regime, when the Fermi level lies in
the valence or conduction band. In the following mea-
surements, we either work at constant displacement field
or constant density around operation pointsV BG∗ and
VTG∗. For this, the top-gate and back-gate have to be
moved simultaneously following the relations
VTG−V ∗
TG =− Cb
Ct
(VBG−V ∗
BG)(forn=const) (1)
VTG−V ∗
TG = Cb
Ct
(VBG−V ∗
BG)(forD=const) (2)
, with the capacitance ratio extracted from the measure-
ments in Fig. 2(a). We again apply a constant voltage
VSD = 125µVand measure the current flowing between
the contact pair in a two-terminal setup. With the cho-
sen FET design, as soon as the states in the gated regime
are quantized into Landau levels, edge channels form and
surround the holes in the graphite layer defining the con-
tact area. Thus, at constant filling factor, the device
becomes insulating. However, current flows when the
Fermi energy in the gated region is close to a Landau
level, within its broadening. The measured resistance is
equivalent to the longitudinal resistance expected in a
Corbino geometry. The etched regions without top-gate,
which directly surround the contacts, remain conductive
at all magnetic field values, as etch inhomogeneities S2
prevent Landau quantization. This effect is important
in our measurements, as it allows us to probe the Lan-
dau levels in the gated region. We set the displacement
field toD= 0and measure a Landau fan as shown in
Fig.3. Thebreakingofthefourfoldsymmetryduetospin
and valley is clearly seen up to filling factorν= 12at
magnetic fieldsB≤0.5 T. This indicates long quantum
lifetimesτ q causing the broadeningΓ LL∼ℏ/τ q of Lan-
dau levels to be much lower than their separation even at
these relatively low fields. The separation of orbital lev-
els is determined by the cyclotron frequency toℏωc, while
the Zeeman energygiµBBsets the separation of spin- or
valley-split levels, withgi the spin- or valley g-factor, re-
spectively. The spin-splitting between the first and sec-
ond Landau level is visible down toB= 200 mT, and
we resolve Shubnikov–de Haas (SdH) oscillations down
toB= 4 mTfor filling factorν=−8, already identified
as the most robust filling factor at low magnetic fields
in previous studies [15]. Following these observations, we
estimate a quantum lifetime ofτq∼47 psand a quantum
mobility ofµ q∼2 500 000 cm2/Vs.
IV. HALL-BAR
We make use of the flexibility in device design provided
by our new architecture to produce a fully gate-defined
Hall-bar, visible in Fig. 1(b). The displacement field and
the density in the Hall-bar are tuned by the voltageVHall
applied to the central graphite gate. The outside region
of the Hall-bar is the same graphite region as the FET

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
FIG. 3. Magnetotransport measurement of the FET atD= 0 V/nm. a) Landau fan from0 Tto2 T, with the visible filling
factors labeled in black. b) Zoom-in of the low field and low density region.
gate, hence it is tuned byVFET. Using the results of the
FET measurements, we keep the Fermi energy in that
outside region in the band gap. In this setting, we sweep
VBG versusV Hall in order to determine the capacitance of
the Hall-bar gate on the BLG underneath. We measure
resistances in theGΩregime, again indicating a high
device quality with a clean band-gap, and also implying
that no transport occurs underneath the ungated90 nm
gap between the Hall-bar gate and the FET-gate.
We apply a magnetic field perpendicular to the BLG
flake to measure the transverse and longitudinal resis-
tancesR xy andR xx shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), respec-
tively. ThetypicalsignaturesoftheintegerquantumHall
effect and SdH oscillations are visible at magnetic fields
above about0.5 T. The low-field data shown in Fig 4(c)
and (d) displays an increase ofρxx with magnetic field
up to a peak, followed by a decreases, whileRxy exhibits
a decreased slope around zero field. The flattening of
the transverse resistance occurs due to the quenching of
the Hall effect in the ballistic regime, when the Lorentz
force does not bend the trajectories of the injected car-
riers enough for them to be collected by the neighboring
voltage probes [16, 17].
We associate the increase in the longitudinal resistance
to the narrow channel compared to the mean free path
as estimated further below. In this mesoscopic regime,
specular edge scattering in combination with cyclotronic
motion deflect the charge carriers back to the source con-
tact [17, 18]. Only at larger fields, when the cyclotron
orbit becomes smaller than the width of the Hall-bar, the
carriers are forward scattered and the magnetoresistance
decreases again. The thin metal theory [18–20] yields the
value of the magnetic fieldBmax at which the longitudi-
nal resistance peaks as
Bmax = 0.55 ℏkF
eW (3)
whereℏis the reduced Planck constant,eis the electron
charge,Wis the channel width, andk F =
q
4
gπnis the
Fermi wave vector. In BLG, the fourfold spin- and valley
degeneracy leads tok F =√πn. From this equation, we
determine the effective widthWeff of our Hall-bar chan-
nel as a function of density and displacement field, as
shown in Fig. 5(a). The data follows a power-law rela-
tion,W eff ∝n β, consistent with a near-parabolic con-
finement potential, withβbeing weakly dependent on
the displacement field (see Supplementary Information).
The low-field behavior of the longitudinal resistivityρxx,
which we now extract fromRxx using the effective width,
is dominated by edge scattering. In particular, the mean
ofρ xx measured in our devices at low fields deviates from
its zero-field value, a behavior that differs from the char-
acteristic response observed in large devices. This allows
us to further analyze the edge scattering. We extract
ρ0,avg from the mean of the signal measured at fields
above0.5 Tbut below Landau quantization and com-
pare it with the measured valueρ0,meas measured at zero
field. The measured deviation (see Supplementary Infor-
mation, S6) can be parametrized by a scattering param-
eterp[17, 18] via
ρeff =ρ 0 +ρ 0l0
(1−p)
W =ρ 0 + ℏkF
ne2
(1−p)
W (4)
⇔p= 1− e2
ℏ√π
(ρ0,meas−ρ 0,avg)W 2
eff
√n
L (5)
Here,ρ eff is the effective resistivity of the channel,ρ0l0 =
ℏkF/ne2,Lis the distance between the Hall voltage
probes, and in the last line, we replaced the sample
widthWwith the density-dependent widthW eff. The
scattering parameter takes values between0, indicating
completely diffusive scattering, and1denoting exclusive
specular scattering. The data in Fig. 5(b) shows a trend

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
FIG. 4. Magnetotransport measuremenet of the Hall-bar atD= 0.1 V/nm. a) Landau fan inR xx. b) Landau fan inRxy. c)
Low-field trace ofRxx taken atn Hall = 1.23×10 12 cm−2, showing the mesoscopic magnetoresistance peaks. d) Low-field trace
ofR xy taken atn Hall = 1.23×10 12 cm−2, showing the quenching of the Hall resistance.
from predominant specular scattering at low densities to
slightly increased diffusive scattering at high density. To
gain some insight, let us first comment on the mesoscopic
regime we are working in. Even though the Hall-bar
width is of the same order of magnitude as the Fermi
wavelength, we do not observe quantization effects typi-
cal for a quantum point contacts. We suspect that only
a few modes are occupied, which are mixed by scattering
and thus cannot be resolved individually. Nevertheless,
we rationalize the observed evolution ofpby means of
the wave-functions expected in a one-dimensional near-
parabolic confinement potential, as shown in Fig. 6 . Us-
ing this model, we note that the probability amplitude
of the wavefunctions at the lithographic edge of the Hall-
bar is close to zero for the ground and first excited states,
consistent with the extractedpclose to1at low densi-
ties. With increasing mode number, the wavefunction
amplitudes start to be finite at the lithographic Hall-bar
edge, in agreement withpstarting to decrease at higher
density. This suggests that the mixing of the subbands is
caused predominantly at the edges, while the bulk sup-
ports long mean free paths in accordance with the FET
measurements.
Using the insights obtained so far, we now estimate the
carrier mobility using the resistivityρ0,avg. The Hall mo-
bility extracted at densities above2×1011 cm−2 amounts
to200 000 cm 2/Vs, comparable with state-of-the-art de-
vices [4, 12, 21]. The corresponding mean free path of
about1µmto3µmexceeds the Hall-bar length, suggest-
ing that the diffusive model used to extract transport
mobilitiesisnotsuitablefordescribingourdevice. Never-
theless, the temperature-dependent SdH oscillations (see
Supplementary Information, S7) allow us to extract a
value for the quantum mobility of roughly30 000 cm2/Vs,
much lower than the one found for the FET, indicating
that the edges in the Hall-bar induce small-angle scatter-
ing.
V. ORIGIN OF THE DISORDER
The FET measurements revealed record high values of
the quantum mobility, indicating exceptional cleanliness
of our flakes. Compared to that, the Hall-bar showed sig-
nificant edge scattering, demonstrating the importance of
understanding the electrostatic edges of gated device de-
signs. In our device, the edges are defined by the small
gap etched into the graphite top gate, separating the
Hall-bar gate from the FET-gate. We, therefore, set out
to analyze in more detail the effect of the applied etching
process. We test the transport properties of the BLG in
regions where the top graphite gate has been etched (see
Supplementary Information). Magnetotransport mea-
surements show that resistance peaks corresponding to
Landau level gaps are minimally pronounced, indicating
the presence of disorder in these regions.
Further, we perform Raman and Kelvin probe force
microscopy (KPFM) measurements to analyze the crys-

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
FIG. 5. Hall-bar analysis. a) Effective widthWeff (n)extracted as a function of density and plotted for different displacement
fields. b) Scattering parameterpi(n)calculated for each density and plotted for different displacement fields.
tal quality and the local surface potential of h-BN and
graphite flakes treated with plasma etching. For this, h-
BN and graphite flakes are exfoliated onSiO2 substrates
and treated with a plasma process essentially equal to
the one used for our device fabrication. It consists of two
(instead of four used in the device) cycles of20 sofN 2
plasma at100 Wand40 sofO 2 plasma at60 Wwith a
10 s CHF3/O2 plasma step at60 W.
The Raman measurements performed on the graphite
sample are shown in Fig. 7(a). The orange solid line
represents the Raman spectrum of the graphite flake be-
fore being exposed to the plasma treatment. The mea-
sured intensity exhibits only one narrow peak at around
1582 cm−1 attributed to the G-band that arises from
in-plane motion of the carbon atoms in bulk graphite.
All the spectra are normalized to the intensity mea-
sured at the respective G-peak. After the plasma treat-
ment, two more peaks appear in the Raman spectrum, as
seen in the pink solid line in Fig. 7(a): the D-band and
D’-band, around1350 cm −1 and1620 cm −1 respectively.
Both peaks are attributed to defects in the graphite [22],
and their intensity relative to the G-band is commonly
used to evaluate the defect density in graphitic materials
[23, 24]. In our case, we attribute their appearance to
defects, edge disorder, and contaminants introduced by
the plasma treatment.
We employ an annealing treatment,5 h 350 ◦Cin a
N2/H2 atmosphere under a pressure of60 mTorr, to to
test whether the observed changes are reversible. The
solid purple line in Fig. 7(a) shows the Raman spectrum
acquired after the annealing procedure. To facilitate the
comparison of the D and D’ peaks before and after an-
nealing, we plot their intensity relative to the G-peak in
Fig. 7(b). Clearly, the relative intensity of both peaks de-
creasesafterannealing, indicatingapartialremovalofthe
plasma-induced disorder localized at the sample surface.
The reduction in disorder is also inferred from the evo-
lution of the G-band linewidth, which increases after the
plasma exposure and subsequently decreases after the an-
nealing treatment, as qualitatively seen in Fig. 7(a) and
quantitatively analyzed in Fig. S15(b) of the Supplemen-
tary Information. However, even after annealing, the D
and D’ peaks persist and the G-band’s linewidth remains
somewhat larger, suggesting that the plasma treatment
also introduces permanent structural defects that remain
after the used annealing treatment. In addition, the ra-
tio of the D versus D’ peak gives insights into the defect
type [24]. The measured ratio of around3before and
after annealing points to boundary-like defects, such as,
for example, grain boundaries [23].
Also the h-BN flake was first measured as exfoliated
and then after the plasma treatment, with Raman spec-
tra shown in Fig. 7(c). The observed peak around
1366 cm−1 is characteristic for h-BN and corresponds to
theE 2g phonon mode [25, 26]. After the plasma treat-
ment, theE 2g peak exhibits a red shift, as shown in
Fig.7(d), whichcanbeattributedtoamodificationofthe
h-BN lattice [27, 28]. In our case, the plasma treatment
might introduce strain, defects, and a reduction of the h-
BN thickness. The reduction of thickness is further sup-

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
FIG. 6. Transverse confinement potential and quantized
modes. The vertical dashed lines indicate the geometric bar-
rier edges while the horizontal dotted line marks the bar-
rier heightV bar. The calculated transverse eigenenergies
En are shown as horizontal levels for each mode number
n= 0,4,8,12,16. The corresponding probability density
|ψn(y)|2, scaled for visualization, is plotted with a vertical
offset set by its eigenenergyEn, with a local probability scale
shown alongside each mode (orange). The dash-dotted hori-
zontal line indicates the Fermi energyEF. Modes approach-
ing the barrier energy exhibit an increasingly extended trans-
verse probability distribution and enhanced penetration into
the classically forbidden region.
ported by the change in the optical contrast of the flake,
as shown in Fig. S16(b) of the Supplementary Informa-
tion. In addition to the red shift, theE2g peak becomes
wider, as shown in Fig. 7(e). This indicates a reduction
of the phonon lifetime due to additional scattering chan-
nels arising, for example, from the defects. Also here,
we attempt at reversing plasma-induced defects with an
annealing treatment. However, the observed signatures
point towards increased contamination, possibly due to
redistributingresiduesfromtheexfoliationtape(seeSup-
plementary Information).
To get insights into whether the induced disorder arises
from the oxygen and fluorinated plasmas [27–31], we per-
form similar measurements using a different etching pro-
cess. Namely, we replace the finalCHF3/O2 step with a
10 s N2 plasma treatment at100 W, which should leave
a clean and inert surface of the h-BN flake [32]. The Ra-
man measurements did not show significant differences,
as presented in Fig. S19 of the Supplementary Informa-
tion.
In addition to the Raman measurements, KPFM mea-
surements provide insight into the work function differ-
ences of the substrates under study. We compare two
samples with h-BN flakes exfoliated onSiO2 chips, one of
them exposed to theCHF3/O2 plasma process, and one
to theN 2 process. In the former, we observe a broader
and stronger surface-potential perturbation around the
flakes, indicating larger work function differences be-
tween the exposed h-BN andSiO 2. Comparably, the
second recipe results in a more homogeneous potential
landscape. These observations are in agreement with lit-
erature [27, 30, 31]. The measurements do not allow to
differentiate whether the two recipes attack the h-BN
flake in distinct ways, or whether the observed differ-
ences are confined to the boundaries of the flake, which
are known to be affected by plasma processes in general
[28, 29].
In view of the above findings and considering that the
patterned graphite is completely removed, as well as a
few layers of the h-BN, there are two different but poten-
tially coexisting explanations for the disorder observed
in the transport measurements. Possibly, the h-BN gets
disordered and structurally damaged by the etching pro-
cess, inducing a disordered potential landscape in the
BLG. Alternatively, the disorder in the potential land-
scape originates from the contaminated and potentially
functionalized edges of the etched graphite gates.
VI. CONCLUSION
We introduce a new architecture for graphite-gated
BLG devices that enables the definition of active regions
completely isolated from any natural flake edge. This ar-
chitecture yields a highly resistive and clean band gap,
together with a large quantum mobility. It also enables
new device geometries, and we demonstrate the straight-
forward realization of a gate-defined Hall-bar, a geometry
that has so far received limited attention in graphite-
gate-defined BLG devices.
In contrast to a FET, the Hall-bar geometry allows for
the measurement of both the longitudinal and transverse
resistances, yielding complementary information. In our
device, the Hall-bar operates in the mesoscopic regime,
with the mean free path comparable to the device dimen-
sions. We are therefore sensitive to transport phenomena
such as Hall-effect quenching and boundary scattering.
This allows us to investigate the role of electrostatically
defined edges, an aspect of gate-defined devices which
has not been addressed so far.
We find that the mobility in the Hall-bar measure-
ments is limited by scattering associated with disorder
in the electrostatic potential. Raman spectroscopy and
KPFM measurements indicate that this originates from
defects and disorder introduced by the fabrication pro-
cess. Meanwhile, measurements of the FET demonstrate
the extraordinary quality of the bulk, with a quantum
mobility approaching2.5×10 6 cm2/Vs.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
FIG. 7. Effect of the plasma treatment on a thin graphite and h-BN flake, respectively. a) Raman spectra of as-exfoliated
(orange), plasma-treated (pink) and annealed (purple) graphite flake on top ofSiO2/Si. b) Intensity of the D and D’ peaks
relative to the G-peak,ID/IG andI D′/IG, respectively, used to quantify the disorder after plasma treatment and annealing. c)
Raman spectra of as-exfoliated (orange) and plasma-treated (pink) h-BN flake on top ofSiO2/Si. d) Peak position and e) full
width at half maximum of theE2g mode before and after plasma treatment.
VII. METHODS
Devices fabrication. The devices were fabricated
using a stack comprising a graphite back gate, h-BN, bi-
layer graphene, six-layer graphite, and h-BN. The stack
was assembled with a standard dry transfer technique.
The top-gate patterning involved standard lithographic
techniques followed by an reactive-ion etching (RIE)
step. The etching process consisted of four cycles of
20 s N2 plasma at100 Wand40 s O 2 plasma at10 W,
followed by10sofCHF 3/O2 plasma at60W. Edge
ohmic contacts and Hall-bar gate contacts were realized
in the same fabrication step, in which a lithographic
mask was used to selectively etch the h-BN by RIE with
SF6 plasma at6W, followed by15sofCHF 3/O2 plasma
at60Wto etch the unaffected bilayer graphene and
expose its edges. The RIE step was followed by metal
evaporation of a Cr/Pd/Au stack with thicknesses of
10nm,30nm, and40nm, respectively.
Measurements. All the measurements were per-
formed in a BlueFors dilution cryostat at a base
temperature of10mK. Current-biased measurements
were performed by applying a voltage and placing a
200MΩresistor in series with the device. The current
was measured using a current-to-voltage converter
connected to a lock-in amplifier. Lock-in measurements
were performed using three synchronized Zurich Instru-
ments lock-in amplifiers to measureV xx,V xy and the
current. The voltagesV xx andV xy were amplified using
differential voltage amplifiers before being fed into the
lock-in amplifiers.
Raman spectroscopy. Ramanspectrawereacquired
using a 515 nm COBOLT laser with a power of 1 mW
for the graphite samples and 400µWm for the h-BN
samples. The laser was focused onto the samples us-
ing a 50x objective with a numerical aperture of 0.60.
The Raman spectra were collected with a Horiba T6400
triple monochromator with a spectral resolution of 0.5
cm−1 and equipped with aN2 cooled charge coupled de-
vice (CCD) detector. The Raman spectra of the graphite
samples were collected with an integration time of 60 s
and averaged over 3 scans, whereas the Raman spectra
of the h-BN samples were acquired with an integration
time of 120 s and averaged over 3 scans.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Michael Steinacher for his valuable contri-
butions to the optimization of the measurement setup.
We thank Clara Galante, Jessica Richter, Tijl Degroote,
Max Ruckriegel, Markus Niese, Marta Perego and Artem
Denisov for helpful input and discussions around building
first stacks and exploring bilayer graphene physics.
We acknowledge financial support from the Swiss State
Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation, the
Quantum Transitional Call, and from the Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation through grant number 200021-
231373.

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
DA T A A V AILABILITY
The data that support the findings of this
study are openly available in ZENODO at
https://zenodo.org/doi/xxx.
[1] E. McCann, Physical Review B74, 10.1103/Phys-
RevB.74.161403 (2006).
[2] E. V. Castro, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, N. M. R.
Peres, J.M.B.L.dosSantos, J.Nilsson, F.Guinea, A.K.
Geim, and A. H. C. Neto, Physical Review Letters99,
216802 (2007).
[3] Y. Zhang, T.-T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin,
A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen, and F. Wang,
Nature459, 820 (2009).
[4] E. Icking, L. Banszerus, F. Wörtche, F. Volmer,
P. Schmidt, C. Steiner, S. Engels, J. Hesselmann,
M. Goldsche, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Volk,
B. Beschoten, and C. Stampfer, Advanced Electronic Ma-
terials8, 2200510 (2022).
[5] D. Bischoff, P. Simonet, A. Varlet, H. C. Overweg,
M. Eich, T. Ihn, and K. Ensslin, physica status solidi
(RRL) – Rapid Research Letters10, 68 (2016).
[6] H. Overweg, H. Eggimann, X. Chen, S. Slizovskiy,
M. Eich, R. Pisoni, Y. Lee, P. Rickhaus, K. Watanabe,
T. Taniguchi, V. Fal’ko, T. Ihn, and K. Ensslin, Nano
Letters18, 553 (2018).
[7] M. Eich, R. Pisoni, A. Pally, H. Overweg, A. Kurzmann,
Y. Lee, P. Rickhaus, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. En-
sslin, and T. Ihn, Nano Letters18, 5042 (2018).
[8] L. Banszerus, B. Frohn, A. Epping, D. Neumaier,
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and C. Stampfer, Nano Let-
ters18, 4785 (2018).
[9] W. Zheng, K. Zhu, S. Pazos, Y. Shen, Y. Yuan, O. Al-
harbi, Y. Ping, and M. Lanza, Applied Surface Science
Advances29, 100820 (2025).
[10] A. A. Zibrov, C. Kometter, H. Zhou, E. M. Spanton,
T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, M. P. Zaletel, and A. F.
Young, Nature549, 360 (2017).
[11] Ultrasteep Slope Cryogenic FETs Based on Bilayer
Graphene | Nano Letters.
[12] S. Iwakiri, F. K. de Vries, E. Portolés, G. Zheng,
T. Taniguchi, K.Watanabe, T.Ihn, and K.Ensslin, Nano
Letters22, 6292 (2022).
[13] A. Varlet, D. Bischoff, P. Simonet, K. Watanabe,
T. Taniguchi, T. Ihn, K. Ensslin, M. Mucha-Kruczyński,
and V. I. Fal’ko, Physical Review Letters113, 116602
(2014).
[14] A. Varlet, M. Mucha-Kruczyński, D. Bischoff, P. Si-
monet, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, V. Fal’ko, T. Ihn,
and K. Ensslin, Synthetic Metals Reviews of Current
Advances in Graphene Science and Technology,210, 19
(2015).
[15] A. M. Seiler, N. Jacobsen, M. Statz, N. Fernandez,
F. Falorsi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Z. Dong, L. S.
Levitov, and R. T. Weitz, Nature communications15,
3133 (2024).
[16] M. L. Roukes, A. Scherer, S. J. Allen, H. G. Craighead,
R. M. Ruthen, E. D. Beebe, and J. P. Harbison, Physical
Review Letters59, 3011 (1987).
[17] T. J. Thornton, Superlattices and Microstructures23,
601 (1998).
[18] S. B. Soffer, Journal of Applied Physics38, 1710 (1967).
[19] K. Fuchs, Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society34, 100 (1938).
[20] E. H. Sondheimer, Advances in Physics50, 499 (2001).
[21] R. Kumar, A. Haug, J. Kim, M. Yutushui, K. Khudiakov,
V. Bhardwaj, A. Ilin, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. F.
Mross, and Y. Ronen, Nature communications16, 7255
(2025).
[22] A. Dias, N. Bundaleski, E. Tatarova, F. M. Dias,
M. Abrashev, U. Cvelbar, O. M. N. D. Teodoro, and
J. Henriques, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics49,
055307 (2016).
[23] M. Madito, Vibrational Spectroscopy139, 103814
(2025).
[24] A. Eckmann, A. Felten, A. Mishchenko, L. Britnell,
R. Krupke, K. S. Novoselov, and C. Casiraghi, Nano Let-
ters12, 3925 (2012).
[25] R. J. Nemanich, S. A. Solin, and R. M. Martin, Physical
Review B23, 6348 (1981).
[26] M. De Luca, X. Cartoixà, D. I. Indolese, J. Martín-
Sánchez, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Schönenberger,
R. Trotta, R. Rurali, and I. Zardo, 2D Materials7,
035017 (2020).
[27] S. Radhakrishnan, D. Das, A. Samanta, C. A.
De Los Reyes, L. Deng, L. B. Alemany, T. K.
Weldeghiorghis, V. N. Khabashesku, V. Kochat, Z. Jin,
P. M. Sudeep, A. A. Martí, C.-W. Chu, A. Roy, C. S. Ti-
wary, A. K. Singh, and P. M. Ajayan, Science Advances
3, e1700842 (2017).
[28] Y. S. Na, J. H. Kim, S. Kang, J. H. Jeong, S. Park, D. H.
Kim, K. Ihm, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Y.-K. Kwon,
Y.D.Kim,andG.-H.Lee,2DMaterials8,045041(2021).
[29] R. Sevak Singh, R. Yingjie Tay, W. Leong Chow,
S. Hon Tsang, G. Mallick, and E. H. Tong Teo, Applied
Physics Letters104, 163101 (2014).
[30] A. Meiyazhagan, P. Serles, D. Salpekar, E. F. Oliveira,
L. B. Alemany, R. Fu, G. Gao, T. Arif, R. Vajtai,
V. Swaminathan, D. S. Galvao, V. N. Khabashesku,
T. Filleter, and P. M. Ajayan, Advanced Materials33,
2106084 (2021).
[31] H. Cho, S. Dae Kim, T.-H. Han, I. Song, J.-W. Byun,
Y.-H. Kim, S. Kwon, S.-H. Bae, H. Cheul Choi, J.-H.
Ahn, and T.-W. Lee, 2D Materials2, 014002 (2014).
[32] Z. Ma, C. Prawoto, Z. Ahmed, Y. Xiao, L. Zhang,
C. Zhou, and M. Chan, Journal of Materials Chemistry
C: Materials for Optical and Electronic Devices7, 6273
(2019).

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
Supplementary information
Isolating the natural edges of bilayer graphene in gate-defined mesoscopic devices
Francesco Blanda1, Grazia Raciti1, Thilo Glatzel1, Aurin Strathmann1, Fabrizio Volante1, Kenji
Watanabe2, Takashi Taniguchi2, Ilaria Zardo1, Thomas Ihn3, Klaus Ensslin3, and Andrea Hofmann1,∗
1 University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
2 Advanced Materials Laboratory, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 3050044, Japan
3 Solid State Physics Laboratory, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland
4 Swiss Nanoscience Institute, Klingelbergstrasse 82, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
* Corresponding author. Email: andrea.hofmann@unibas.ch
S1. DEVICE FABRICATION
The devices were fabricated using a stack comprising a graphite back gate, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), bilayer
graphene (BLG), six-layer graphite, and h-BN.
Flake exfoliation and selection
The flakes used for the stack were exfoliated from graphite flakes and h-BN crystals. For exfoliation, Nitto blue
tape ELP BT-130E-SL was used. After several tape-folding steps, the exfoliated flakes were transferred onto Si/SiO2
(285 nm) chips, which were treated differently depending on the exfoliated material. For graphite flakes, the chips
were exposed to oxygen plasma for 2 minutes at 20 W, whereas for h-BN flakes, the chips were heated on a hot plate
for 5 minutes at 100◦C.
Subsequently, the treated silicon chips were flipped and brought into contact with the tape. For h-BN, the tape
was peeled off after a few minutes of contact. For graphite, the chips with the tape on them were heated on a hot
plate for 35 s at 75◦C before peeling.
After exfoliation, the chips were transferred into a glovebox with a nitrogen atmosphere. To identify suitable
candidates for the stack, the chips underwent a screening procedure in which h-BN and graphite flakes were inspected
using a fluorescence microscope and evaluated in three different modes: bright field, dark field, and high-contrast
mode. In this way, the cleanliness of the flakes and the presence of cracks or folds could be assessed. Suitable flakes
were then selected based on their thickness and area. The thickness of h-BN was estimated from the colour, whereas
the contrast of the green component of the reflected light was used to infer the number of graphene layers. This was
done to identify bilayer graphene as the active material and six-layer graphene for the top gate.
Stack assembly
A standard polymer-based stacking procedure was employed. PDMS stamps covered with a polycarbonate (PC)
film were used and operated through a three-axis micromanipulator inside the glovebox. Initially, the first part of
the stack was assembled: the BLG was fully encapsulated between two h-BN flakes, terminating with a graphite
back gate. The assembled stack was then transferred onto a pre-patterned marker chip by increasing the microscope
stage temperature up to 180◦C, above the glass-transition temperature of the PC film. At this stage, the stamp was
detached from the chip, leaving the stack covered with melted PC.
The chip was then cleaned overnight in chloroform and rinsed with isopropanol (IPA). After inspection under the
microscope to ensure that any visible PC had been removed, the chip underwent an annealing step of 5 hours, with a
peak temperature of 365◦C, in an atmosphere of 95% Ar and 5% H2 at a pressure of 60 mbar. After this step, another
overnight cleaning step in chloroform was performed, followed by the transfer of the six-layer graphite flake serving
as the top gate. The same stacking procedure and cleaning steps used for the first stack were also followed after this
flake transfer.
Top-gate patterning
The top-gate patterning involved standard lithographic techniques followed by a reactive-ion etching (RIE) step.

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
2
ThelithographicPMMAmaskwasexposedbyelectron-beamlithographyusingaRAITHEBPG5150anddeveloped
in a solution of IPA and deionized water at 0◦C for 5 minutes. The same procedure was used for all subsequent
lithography steps.
The RIE step involved the alternating use of N2 plasma and O2 plasma at 100 W and 10 W, respectively, followed
by 10 s of CHF3/O2 plasma at 60 W. After this step, the mask was stripped in DMSO at 95◦C for 1 hour, followed by
further cleaning in acetone and IPA. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images confirmed that the six-layer graphene
was fully etched where desired, as evidenced by 7 nm of over-etching into the h-BN layer.
The top gate was etched to pattern the Hall bar and the FET. Circular areas were also etched to host the ohmic
contacts.
The choice of this specific plasma sequence for the etching process resulted from several tests inspired by the work
of [1]. However, unlike the system used in that study, our process employs reactive-ion etching rather than inductively
coupled plasma (ICP). It therefore combines the plasma-chemical effects reported by [1] with the physical effects of
ion bombardment arising from the DC self-bias developed in the RIE system. In addition, we demonstrate that, under
these conditions, not only h-BN but also graphite is etched, most likely because of the enhanced ion-bombardment
contribution. Alternating the O2 and N2 plasma steps may also help remove carbonaceous or nitrogen-containing
by-products, such as graphitic carbon nitride compounds, which could otherwise inhibit the subsequent etching steps.
Subsequently, another h-BN flake was transferred on top of the patterned gate layer. This flake serves as a support
to bridge over the top gate, enclosing the region intended for the ohmic contacts and the Hall bar gate.
FIG. S1. AFM scan of the Hall bar device after the top gate patterning (top left). Profile trace of the etched region across the
graphite top gate and the etched h-BN (top right). 3D view of the AFM scan (bottom left). 3D sketch of the stack (bottom
right).
Ohmic contacts and fan-out lines
Edge ohmic contacts and Hall bar gate contacts were realized in the same fabrication step. A lithographic mask
was used to selectively etch the h-BN by RIE with SF6 plasma at 6 W, followed by 15 s of CHF3/O2 plasma at 60
W to etch the unaffected bilayer graphene and expose its edges. The RIE step was followed by metal evaporation of
a Cr/Pd/Au stack with thicknesses of 10 nm, 30 nm, and 40 nm, respectively.
Subsequently, another PMMA mask followed by an etching step was used to interrupt the circular path around the
ohmic contacts in the Hall bar by etching away the BLG connecting the contact to the top gate.
Finally, a lithographic step followed by Cr/Ti/Au metallization with thicknesses of 2 nm, 3 nm, and 180 nm,
respectively, was used to realize the fan-out lines to the bond pads.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
3
S2. EDGE CHANNELS AND EQUILIBRATION
In the context of the quantum Hall effect, the presence of device regions with different densities—and hence, different
filling factors—would limit the contact equilibration of the transport channel of interest or alter the longitudinal
transport, leading to characteristic checkerboard patterns. However, in our measurements, we do not observe these
features, likely due to the etched top-gate area, which induces a highly disordered potential on the BLG underneath
as a consequence of the damaged superficial h-BN layers exposed to the RIE plasma. To validate this hypothesis, we
performed a Landau fan two-terminal measurement in a region where the graphite top gate was removed.
FIG. S2. Landau fan measured at D=0 V/nm in a two-terminal configuration in the area where the top-graphite gate was fully
etched.
S3. QUANTUM MOBILITY EXTRACTION
From the onset of Shubnikov–de Haas (SdH) oscillation, we can roughly estimate a lower bound for the quantum
mobility following the relationωcτq∼1, whereω c is the cyclotron frequency, andτq the quantum lifetime. Hence,
from the definitionωc = eB
m∗ andµ q = eτq
m∗, whereB,e,m ∗, and,µq, are the magnetic field, the electron charge, the
effective mass and the quantum mobility, respectively, we obtainµqBonset∼ 1. We report our highest obtained value,
for Bonset = 4mT , ofµq≈ 2.5× 106 cm2/Vs for D = 0 V/nm, corresponding to filling factorν =−8. Using the
same approach, we extracted the quantum mobility forD = 0.3 V/nm, where the SdH oscillations are visible down
to Bonset = 50mT, resulting inµq≈ 2× 105 cm2/Vs.

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
4
FIG. S3. Magnetotransport measurement of the FET atD= 0.3V/nm
S4. GATE DEPENDENCIES
To define our structures electrostatically, isolating the BLG edges, we have to operate the device-defining sur-
rounding top gate and the back-gate simultaneously, opening a bandgap and tuning the Fermi level within this gap.
However, the same backgate also participates in the dual-gate operation of the Hall-bar together with the Hall-bar
gate. In this way it is possible to tune the density and displacement field in the Hall bar device. To achieve this
functionality, the surrounding top gate must adapt to changes in the back gate, following the fixed-density line in the
gate-gate space. Therefore, the back gate and the Hall bar gate can tune the displacement field and density in the
Hall bar, while the surrounding gate depends on the chosen working point. As a consequence, the insulating state
under the outer gate is maintained while the displacement field and the induced bandgap are affected. Due to this
working principle, the devices might lack a clear definition in cases of an insufficient displacement field that limits the
formation of a bandgap.
S5. HALL/SdH SINGLE TRANSPORT PATH VALIDATION
To further characterize the Hall bar, and to ensure that no parallel transport was happening under the etched top
gate (as already suggested by the gate-gate map of the back gate and the Hall bar gate, when the surroundings were
insulating), the Hall density was complemented by the SdH extracted density. As a result, the two densities are in
agreement with deviation only in the case of poor hall bar definition.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
5
FIG. S4. SdH density and Hall density comparison for D=0.3 V/nm.
FIG. S5. SdH density (extracted with FFT only and with FFT powered sinusoidal fitting) and Hall density comparison for
D=0.3 V/nm.

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
6
FIG. S6. Realtive discrepancy for SdH density and Hall density for D=0.3 V/nm.
A. Hall density
The Hall density is extracted by taking the anti-symmetrized Hall resistance and calculating the slope, averaging
over different smaller ranges, moving away from the extremes. In fact, due to the presence of the Hall resistance
quenching aroundB = 0 the slope is extracted for100mT≤B≤ 495mT, reducing the window by 5 mT each time,
until a minimal range of 70 mT. However, as a consequence of the high mobility, the onset of the Hall plateau occurs
already at small fields, and for this reason, averaging over different ranges helps mitigate the plateau contributions.
For each Hall fitting window, the uncertainty is estimated using a bootstrap procedure. The antisymmetrized Hall
data points(B,RA
xy), in a given range, are resampled with replacementNboot = 500 times, and each resampled dataset
is fitted with a linear function,
RA
xy(B) =sB +b,
where s =dRA
xy/dB is the Hall slope. Each bootstrap slopesj is converted into a carrier density according to
nH,j = 1
esj
= 1
edRAxy/dB,∀j= 1,...,N boot.
For a given fitting windowi, the uncertainty is taken as the standard deviation of the resulting bootstrap density
distribution,
δnboot
H,i = std
(
{nH,j}Nboot
j=1
)
.
The final Hall density is then obtained by inverse-variance-weighted averaging over all accepted fitting windows,
¯nH =
∑
iwinH,i∑
iwi
, w i = 1
(
δnboot
H,i
)2.
The final error bar is computed by adding in quadrature the statistical uncertainty of the weighted mean¯nH and the
systematic error due to the choice of the window,
δ¯nH =
/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex√
(
1√ ∑
iwi
)2
+


√ ∑
iwi (nH,i−¯nH)2
∑
iwi


2
.

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
7
B. Confinement potential
Thedensitydependenceoftheeffectivechannelwidthwasanalyzedindependentlyforeachdisplacementfieldandfor
electrons and holes. The experimental data were fitted using the power-law dependenceWeff(n) =Aref
(
|n|
nref
)β
where
Aref andβwere treated as free parameters and nref = 1010cm−2 was kept fixed for all datasets. This normalization
improves the numerical conditioning of the nonlinear fit. A reweighted least-squares procedure with Tukey bisquare
weights was used in the fitting routine to account for potential outliers. However, given the small datasets available
for some displacement fields, this analysis points more towards a qualitative than a quantitative result.
FIG. S7. Fit results for electrons at different displacement fields. The left panel shows the fitted data withAref, β, and the
normalized χ2 reported in the legend box. The central panel shows the residual plots and includes the number of data points
that scored a weight below0.5 in the robust fit procedure. The right plot shows the calculated confinement potential based on
the fit results.

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
8
FIG. S8. Fit results for holes at different displacement fields. The left panel shows the fitted data withAref, β, and the
normalized χ2 reported in the legend box. The central panel shows the residual plots and includes the number of data points
that scored a weight below0.5 in the robust fit procedure. The right plot shows the calculated confinement potential based on
the fit results.
The fitted width dependence was subsequently mapped onto an equivalent transverse confinement potential. To
convert carrier density into an energy scale, we assume an isotropic two-dimensional parabolic band described byℏ2k2
2m∗,
whereE edge is the corresponding band edge,k is the magnitude of the in-plane wave vector, andm∗ is the effective
mass. For a circular two-dimensional Fermi surface with total degeneracyg, the carrier density is related to the Fermi
wave vectorkF by gk2
F
4π . Solving for the Fermi wave vector gives
√
4π|n|
g , where|n|is used so that the same expression
applies to both electron- and hole-like carrier densities. The Fermi energy relative to the corresponding band edge
is then obtained by evaluating the parabolic dispersion atkF, E(kF ) = ℏ2k2
F
2m∗ . Substituting the density-dependent
Fermi wave vector yields2πℏ2
gm∗|n|. Therefore, although the Fermi wave vector scales with carrier density askF∝
√
|n|,
the Fermi energy of a two-dimensional parabolic band varies linearly with the carrier-density magnitude,EF (n)−
Eedge ∝ |n|. This linear density-to-energy relation is subsequently used to convert the experimentally extracted
Weff(n)dependence into an equivalent transverse confinement potential. The lateral classical turning point, denoted by
yt, is identified with half of the effective channel width,|yt| = Weff
2 , whereyis the transverse coordinate measured from
thecenterofthechannel. TheexperimentallyfittedeffectivewidthisdescribedbyW eff(n) =A ref
(
|n|
nref
)β
whereA ref =
Weff(nref)is the effective channel width at the reference densitynref, andβ determines the density dependence of the
confinement width. Substituting the fitted width into the turning-point condition gives|yt(n)| = Aref
2
(
|n|
nref
)β
This
relation can be inverted to associate a carrier density with a given transverse positiony,|n(y)| =nref
(
2|y|
Aref
)1/β
At the
classical turning point, the transverse electrostatic potential energy is identified with the Fermi energy corresponding
to that carrier density. Assuming a two-dimensional parabolic dispersion, the Fermi energy isEF (n) = 2πℏ2
gm∗|n|where
m∗ is the effective mass andgis the total spin-valley degeneracy. It is convenient to define the energy corresponding to
the reference density asEref =E F (nref) = 2πℏ2nref
gm∗ . The equivalent transverse confinement potential is then obtained
by substitutingn(y)into the density-energy relation, Veq(y)−Veq(0) = Eref
(
2|y|
Aref
)1/β
. Here,V eq(y)represents
the effective electrostatic potential energy at transverse coordinatey, while Veq(0) is the potential energy at the
center of the channel. The spatial dependence of the reconstructed confinement potential can therefore be written as
Veq(y)−Veq(0)∝|y|p with p = 1
β. Consequently, the experimentally extracted exponentβdirectly determines the
effective shape of the lateral confinement potential within the assumed parabolic-band approximation. In particular,

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
9
β= 1/2corresponds to p = 2. The reconstructedVeq(y) should be interpreted as an effective confinement potential
resulting from the measuredWeff(n) dependence and the assumed parabolic density-to-energy relation. In regimes
where the BLG dispersion or density of states departs substantially from the parabolic approximation, the quantitative
mapping between carrier density and energy must be modified accordingly.
From the fit results we identify some limitations of the model, especially at low densities. From the cases with
more data points, we observe a deviation from the expected near-parabolic confinement. This might be caused by
a different confinement shape at lower densities, where the channel width does not necessarily extrapolate to zero.
Further limitations originate from the effective width approaching the lithographical edges of the device, an eventuality
neglected by our model. In addition, the lithographical width and the confinement turning point might largely vary
depending on the carrier type. Although we found that in the90nm gaps no transport occurs, some residual charge
might still exist, and tuned by the only effect of the back gate, this can result in the presence of a p-n junction at the
edges, another effect that is not included in our model. Yet, further investigation along these lines will require more
experiments and simulations. As already mentioned, the limited dataset does not allow us to precisely quantify the
parameters at play, and in some cases, for example, forD = 0.100V/nm, it is hard to mitigate the effect of outliers
and statistical oscillations, see Fig.S8.
FIG. S9. Calculated wavefunctions (left) and associated probability (right) for modes confined by a potential well withβ= 0.35.
Titles on the figures on the right panel show the probability of tunneling outside the barrier, hence the increased chance of
interaction for the higher modes with the lithographical edges.

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
10
C. IQHE
FIG. S10.R xx andσ xy traces atB⊥ = 6TandD= 0.1V/nmvs carrier density. Red dashed lines indicate integers ofe 2/h.
The Hall conductivity was calculated from the directly measured longitudinal and transverse resistances through
tensor inversion. The longitudinal resistivity was obtained by applying the effective Hall-bar geometry,
ρxx =R xx
Weff
L ,(S1)
The Hall conductivity is therefore
σxy =− ρxy
ρ2xx +ρ 2xy
=− ρxy
(
Rxx
Weff
L
)2
+ρ 2xy
.(S2)
D. SdH density
The SdH density is extracted from the dominant peak in the Fourier spectrum of the oscillatory component ofRxx
as a function of1/B. Since the raw data are acquired with approximately uniform steps inB, they are not uniformly
sampled in 1/B. Therefore, before performing the frequency analysis, the data are first transformed to 1/B and
interpolated onto a uniform1/B grid.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
11
To reduce the risk of assigning the SdH frequency to a spurious FFT peak and to test whether the oscillations are
consistent with a single dominant frequency, rather than with beating or density inhomogeneity, the oscillations are
also fitted directly as a function of1/B using a damped sinusoidal function. The frequency identified from the FFT
is used as the initial guess for the fitting procedure:
∆Rxx(x) =Ae−x/τ sin(2πfx +ϕ) +d, x = 1
B.
The fitted frequencyfis then used as a refined estimate of the SdH frequency. The corresponding SdH density is
obtained from
|nSdH|=g e
hFSdH,
wheregis the degeneracy factor. Since the SdH frequency determines only the magnitude of the carrier density, the
sign ofn SdH is assigned from the Hall density measured at the same gate voltage:
nSdH = sign(nH)|n SdH|.
S6. DRUDE RESISTIVITY AND CYCLOTRON ORBIT EXTRACTION
To extract the scattering parameter p or the Hall mobility, the Drude resistivity, calculated from the resistance at
B= 0 is needed. However, in our measurements,Rxx(B = 0) is affected by the boundary scattering. Hence, a better
estimation is obtained by extracting the baseline of the first visible SdH oscillations. At that point, where the cyclotron
orbit is smaller than the channel width, the real Drude resistivity can be recovered. To minimize extraction errors,
the window used to extract the baseline is dynamically adapted to consider only oscillations around a constant value.
In this way, the extracted value is not affected by the tail of the boundary-scattering-induced magnetoresistance, or
by the onset of fully quantized states.
FIG. S11.R xx(B)trace at fixed carrier density featuring the mesoscopic magnetoresistance and the SdH oscillations are
shown.
From the same curve, by the position of the peak, identified by the maximum of a polynomial fit, the cyclotron
orbit and consequently theWeff, is derived, as discussed in the main text.
S7. EFFECTIVE MASS EXTRACTION AND QUANTUM MOBILITY
To determine the quantum mobility within the Hall bar, we first extracted the cyclotron effective mass from the
temperature dependence of SdH oscillation amplitude. The analysis was performed using the Lifshitz–Kosevich (LK)
thermal damping factor,

===== PAGE 21 =====
21
12
A(T) =A 0
X
sinhX , X= 2π2kBT
ℏωc
= 2π2kBTm∗
ℏeB ,(S3)
whereω c =eB/m∗ is the cyclotron frequency andm∗ is the cyclotron effective mass. By fitting the temperature
dependence of a selected SdH peak at fixed magnetic field to Eq. (S3), we extractedm∗. This value was then used as
a fixed input parameter in the subsequent Dingle analysis.
FIG. S12. Temperature dependence of a selected SdH oscillation amplitude. The red curve shows the LK fit used to extract
the cyclotron effective mass.
Due to the limited number of visible oscillations, resulting from disorder broadening and the early onset of the fully
quantized regime, the extracted effective masses exhibit relatively large uncertainties. Nevertheless, a clear density
dependence of the effective mass is observed, while no pronounced dependence on displacement field is resolved within
the experimental accuracy.
FIG. S13. BLG effective mass extracted for different carrier densities and displacement fields.
The observed density dependence of the effective mass has previously been attributed to electron–electron interac-
tions [2].

===== PAGE 22 =====
22
13
After determiningm ∗ from the LK analysis, the quantum mobility was extracted from a final fit of the SdH
oscillations as a function of inverse magnetic field,x = 1/B. The fit was performed directly on the measuredRxx(x)
trace, with the smooth background included as a polynomial baseline. The fitting function was
Rxx(x) =Pn(x) +A0RT (x) exp
(
− x
τB
)
sin (2πFx +ϕ), x = 1
B,(S4)
whereP n(x)is a low-order polynomial baseline,A0 is the oscillation amplitude prefactor,Fis the SdH frequency,
ϕis a phase offset, andτB is the inverse-field damping scale. The LK thermal damping factor is
RT (x) = X
sinhX , X= 2π2kBTm∗
ℏe x.(S5)
Thus, the SdH frequency, phase, amplitude, polynomial baseline, and Dingle damping scale were determined simul-
taneously from a global nonlinear fit.
The dashed envelope lines shown in the Dingle plots were reconstructed after the fit from the fitted parameters.
The oscillation envelope was defined as
Aenv(x) =A 0RT (x) exp
(
− x
τB
)
,(S6)
and the upper and lower dashed curves were plotted as
R±
env(x) =P n(x)±A env(x).(S7)
The factorexp(−x/τB)in Eq. (S4) corresponds to the Dingle damping factor. By comparing it with the conventional
Dingle form,
exp
(
− x
τB
)
= exp
[
−2π2kBTDm∗
ℏe x
]
,(S8)
the fitted inverse-field damping scale was converted into the Dingle temperature as
TD = ℏe
2π2kBm∗τB
.(S9)
The corresponding quantum lifetime was then obtained from
τq = ℏ
2πkBTD
,(S10)
and the quantum mobility was calculated as
µq = eτq
m∗.(S11)
For the different displacement fields and densities explored, the quantum mobility extracted from the Dingle analysis
was found to be of the order ofµq∼ 30× 103 cm2V−1s−1.

===== PAGE 23 =====
23
14
FIG. S14. SdH oscillations measured atD= 0.3 V /nm and n = 1.1 × 1012 cm−2. The red curve shows the combined LK–
Dingle fit, while the dashed lines indicate the fitted oscillation envelope. The fit yieldsnSdH = (1.102 ± 0.001) × 1012 cm−2,
τq = (7.15 ± 0.70) × 10−13 s, andµq = (30.73 ± 1.68) × 103 cm2V−1s−1.
S8. RAMAN
The Raman spectra of the graphite flakes were fitted with a single Lorentzian function for the as-exfoliated sample
and with three Lorentzian functions for the plasma and annealed samples. An additional broad Lorentzian component
was used to account for the increase in the background observed after plasma and annealing treatment. For each
Raman peak, the intensity, peak position, and FWHM were extracted. The evolution of the peak position and FWHM
at each step is shown in Fig.S15(a) and (b), respectively.
FIG. S15. (a) Evolution of the Raman peak position and (b) FWHM before plasma treatment, after(N2 +O2)2 + CHF3/O2
plasma exposure, and after annealing of the measured graphite flake.
The Raman spectra of the h-BN flake discussed in Sec. V, including the spectrum acquired after annealing, are

===== PAGE 24 =====
24
15
shown in Fig. S16(a). The Raman spectra were fitted with a Lorentzian function, and the corresponding fitted curves
are shown as solid lines on top of the experimental data. For the annealed spectrum, a parabolic baseline was used
for the fitting procedure to account for the luminescence background. The optical images of the measured h-BN flake
before and after the(N2 + O2)2 + CHF3/O2 plasma treatment are shown in Fig.S16(b). The change in the optical
contrast indicates that the plasma etched away some h-BN layers, resulting in a reduction of its thickness.
FIG. S16. a) Raman spectra of as-exfoliated (orange), plasma-treated (pink) and annealed (purple) h-BN flake on top of
SiO2/Si. b) Optical images of the measured h-BN flake before and after the(N2 + O2)2 + CHF3/O2 plasma treatment.
While measuring the h-BN flake after annealing, we noticed that the luminescence background gradually decreased
with continuous laser exposure. To investigate this behavior more in detail, we acquired consecutive Raman spectra
every 60 s until the intensity of the background reached a plateau. We initially used a laser power of 100µW.
Once the background reached a plateau, the laser power was increased, and the acquisition sequence was repeated.
This procedure was repeated for laser power ranging from 100µW to 2.5 mW, as shown in Fig.S17. For every
excitation power, a progressive decrease in luminescence background was observed. This behavior is consistent with
a photobleaching effect, in which the laser irradiation modifies the surface contaminants rather than permanently
changing the h-BN Raman response.

===== PAGE 25 =====
25
16
FIG. S17. Raman spectra of an h-BN flake after plasma treatment with(N2 + O2)2 + CHF3/O2 and subsequent annealing.
The Raman spectra are acquired every 60 s for each laser power. The laser power ranges from 100µW to 2.5 mW.
We investigated the effect of a second plasma etching treatment using(N2 + O2)2 + N2. Fig. S18(a) shows the
Raman spectra of the graphite flake before the plasma treatment, after the plasma treatment, and after the annealing.
Similar to the case ofCHF3/O2 plasma etching, the plasma treatment leads to the appearance of two defect peaks
in graphite: the D and D’ bands. The intensities of both defect peaks decrease after the annealing process. Also,
the peak positions (Fig.S18(b)) and FWHM (Fig.S18(c)) follow the same trend observed for theCHF3/O2 plasma
treatment.

===== PAGE 26 =====
26
17
FIG. S18. a) Raman spectra of as-exfoliated (red), plasma-treated (blue) and annealed (green) graphite flake on top ofSiO2/Si.
b) Evolution of the Raman peak position and (c) FWHM before plasma treatment, after(N2 + O2)2 + N2 plasma exposure,
and after annealing.
Fig. S19(a) shows the Raman spectra of the h-BN flake before the plasma treatment, after the plasma treatment,
and after subsequent annealing. Similar to the case shown in Fig.S16, the annealing results in the appearance of a
broad luminescence background. An increase in the FWHM as well as a small red shift of theE2g mode is observed
after plasma treatment, although it is less pronounced than the one observed in the case ofCHF3/O2 plasma, as shown
in Fig.S19(b). This smaller shift may be related to the lower etching rate of theN2 etching plasma compared with
the CHF3/O2 plasma. Indeed, the optical images in Fig.S19(c) show a smaller change in optical contrast compared
to Fig.S16(b), suggesting a smaller reduction in the h-BN thickness.
FIG. S19. a) Raman spectra of as-exfoliated (red), plasma-treated (blue) and annealed (green) h-BN flake onSiO2/Si.b) Peak
position and FWHM of theE2g mode before and after plasma treatment and subsequent annealing. c) Optical images of the
measured h-BN flake before and after the(N2 + O2)2 + N2 plasma treatment.
S9. KELVIN PROBE FORCE MICROSCOPY OF SURFACE-TREATED h-BN AND GRAPHENE
FLAKES
The quality of the band gap discussed in Sec. III of the main text relies on a homogeneous electrostatic environ-
ment of the BLG sheet. Two contributions are difficult to control during fabrication: charges trapped in the SiO2

===== PAGE 27 =====
27
18
of the substrate, and residues or charges introduced by the reactive-ion etching steps used to define the graphite
gate geometry. In order to assess how the plasma treatments employed in our process affect the local electrostatic
landscape of the constituent flakes, we performed Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) [3, 4] on exfoliated h-BN
and graphene/graphite flakes on SiO2/Si that were subjected to the same treatments as the flakes used for the devices.
A. Experimental details
AllmeasurementswerecarriedoutwithaNanosurfDriveAFMoperatedinsideanitrogenglovebox(H 2O<0.1 ppm,
O2 <0.1 ppm). Working in a dry and oxygen-free atmosphere removes two effects that are known to compromise
surface potential measurements under ambient conditions. An adsorbed water film screens the electrostatic field
between tip and sample and thereby reduces the measured potential contrast, an effect that disappears when imaging
in dry nitrogen [5]. In addition, molecular oxygen acts as an acceptor for graphene on SiO2, with the resulting
hole doping becoming stronger and increasingly irreversible once moisture is present [6]. We used PtIr-coated silicon
cantilevers (PPP-NCLPt, Nanosensors) with a first flexural resonance atf1 = 166.642 kHz. The topography was
recorded in amplitude-modulation mode with a free oscillation amplitude of roughly10 nmand a setpoint of80 %of
the free amplitude.
The cantilever was kept at ground potential, while the sample was connected through a separate coaxial line to
an HF2LI lock-in amplifier (Zurich Instruments), which supplies both the DC and the AC bias. Applying the bias
exclusively to the sample and keeping the tip grounded suppresses the capacitive cross-talk between the excitation line
and the deflection detection down to the noise level of the setup. The surface potential was measured by amplitude-
modulated KPFM (AM-KPFM) [3]: the AC bias was tuned to the second flexural resonance of the cantilever at
f2 = 1034.18 kHz, and the amplitude of the normal-force signal atf2 was demodulated by the lock-in amplifier. After
adjusting the demodulation phase, the in-phase component was nulled by a PID controller acting on the DC voltage
applied to the sample. The compensating DC voltage is the contact potential difference (CPD) reported below. With
the bias applied to the sample, the work function of the sample follows from
Φsample = Φtip +eV CPD, (S12)
with Φtip≈ 4.3 eVfor the PtIr-coated tip. We stress that Eq. (S12) only yields the true work function of the sample
if the measured CPD is exclusively determined by the electronic structure of the surface. This is not the case here:
charges located at the interfaces of the flakes or trapped in the underlying SiO2 generate an additional long-range
electrostatic force. No KPFM detection scheme can separate this contribution from the work-function term, since the
feedback loop compensates the total electrostatic signal, so that the trapped charges enter the measured CPD [4]. All
h-BN measurements were performed with one and the same cantilever, and likewise all graphene measurements with
a single, but different one; within each of the two series major changes of the tip apex were avoided. Nevertheless the
absolute CPD values differ by several volts between the individual measurements of one series. This scatter is in itself
an indication that the signal is governed by trapped charges rather than by the work functions of the surfaces. In the
following we therefore restrict the discussion to the CPDcontrast within a single image and to its spatial homogeneity,
both of which are independent of the global offset.
Three surface conditions were compared for each material: an untreated reference flake, a flake exposed to an
N2+O2 plasma (four cycles consisting of a20s N 2 plasma treatment at 100W and a 40s O 2 plasma treatment at
10W, followed by10s N2 plasma exposure at100W), and a flake that received the same N2+O2 treatment followed
by a short CHF3/O2 reactive-ion etch (two cycles consisting of a20s N 2 plasma treatment at 100W and a 40s O 2
plasma treatment at10W, followed by10s CHF3/O2 plasma exposure at60W), i.e. the etch chemistry used to pattern
the graphite gates and to open the contact vias. Topography and CPD were recorded simultaneously; the slow-scan
direction is indicated by the arrow in the bottom right corner of each topography image.
For each treatment several flakes were investigated, and the images shown are representative of the respective
sample. We did not observe any systematic influence of the surface treatment on the topography channel: the
differences in flake thickness, terracing, step morphology and lateral shape between the individual panels reflect the
properties of the particular exfoliated flake rather than the preparation it received. The discussion below is therefore
based entirely on the CPD channel, with the topography serving only to locate the flake edges within the same frame.
B. h-BN flakes
Figure S20 summarises the measurements on h-BN. For all three treatments the h-BN flakes appear darker than
the surrounding substrate in the CPD channel. In the following we quote the contrast∆VCPD =V flake
CPD−V substrate
CPD ,

===== PAGE 28 =====
28
19
FIG. S20. KPFM of h-BN flakes on SiO2 for three different surface treatments. Top row: untreated flake. Middle row: after4×
N2+O2 plasma. Bottom row: after 2× N2+O2 plasma followed by a10 s CHF3/O2 etch. (a) Topography, (b) simultaneously
recorded CPD, and (c) line profiles of the topography (top) and of the CPD (bottom) extracted along the line marked in (a)
and (b). The arrow in the bottom right corner of (a) denotes the slow-scan direction.
which is negative for all three flakes and lies between−0.4 V and−1.5 V depending on the treatment. Within the
convention of Eq. (S12) this corresponds to a lower apparent work function of the h-BN surface.
For the untreated flake (top row) the main, flat part of the flake shows∆VCPD≈−1.3 V. Two further features are
resolved in the CPD map. First, part of the flake is folded up along its left side, clearly visible as the elevated ridge
in the topography of (a). Over the entire folded region the CPD is higher than over the part of the flake that lies
directly on the SiO2, as is also apparent from the profile in (c). Second, all edges of the flake are outlined by a rim
of increased CPD. This rim lies entirely within the outline of the flake and extends over a considerably wider range
than the topographic edge itself. Its smooth, gradient-like shape is suggestive of a species that has diffused inwards
from the flake edges, for which residual water, intercalated either between the h-BN layers or at the flake/substrate
interface, would be an obvious candidate. We emphasise that our data do not allow us to identify the chemical nature
of this contribution. What can be stated is that the rim is characteristic of the untreated surface: it is absent on both
plasma-treated flakes discussed below.
After the N2+O2 plasma treatment (middle row) the situation changes qualitatively. The CPD map reproduces

===== PAGE 29 =====
29
20
FIG. S21. KPFM of graphene/graphite flakes on SiO2 for three different surface treatments. Top row: untreated flake. Middle
row: after N2+O2 plasma. Bottom row: after N2+O2 plasma followed by a CHF3/O2 etch. (a) Topography, (b) simultaneously
recorded CPD, and (c) line profiles of the topography (top) and of the CPD (bottom) extracted along the line marked in (a)
and (b). The arrow in the bottom right corner of (a) denotes the slow-scan direction. The abrupt, scan-line-aligned steps in
the CPD maps mark charging events caused by intermittent tip–sample contact during scanning.
the outline of the flake with sharp edges, the plateaus on the flake (≈−1.20 V) and on the substrate (≈−0.80 V)
are flat to within the noise of the measurement, and no long-range features are observed on the surrounding oxide.
The reduced contrast of∆VCPD≈−0.4 V together with the absence of an uncorrelated background indicates that the
measured signal is dominated by the material contrast rather than by trapped charges. Repeated scans of the same
area reproduced the CPD map without measurable drift, which makes this treatment the most stable of the three.
The flake that received the additional CHF3/O2 etch (bottom row) shows the opposite behaviour. Its CPD map
is dominated by a broad, smooth depression that extends far beyond the flake and reaches∆VCPD≈−1.5 V . The
transition between substrate and flake in the CPD profile is smeared out over several micrometres, in stark contrast
to the abrupt topographic step at the same position. Such a decoupling of the two channels is the signature of a
charge distribution located below the surface, i.e. in the SiO2, rather than of a work-function contrast at the surface.
We conclude that the fluorine-based etch, even when applied for only10 s, leaves the oxide in a considerably more
charged state.

===== PAGE 30 =====
30
21
FIG. S22. Charged states of the two plasma-treated graphene samples, imaged after the charging events visible in Fig.S21.
Top row: N2+O2-treated flake of the middle row of Fig.S21, recorded directly afterwards along the same line and with the
opposite slow-scan direction. Bottom row: N2+O2+CHF3/O2-treated sample. (a) Topography, (b) CPD, and (c) line profiles
of the topography (top) and of the CPD (bottom). In both cases the flake carries a charge over its full area, but the magnitude
and the spatial confinement differ strongly; note the different scan sizes and colour scales of the two rows.
C. Graphene and graphite flakes
The corresponding measurements on graphene and graphite flakes are shown in Fig.S21. Here an additional effect
is observed for all three treatments: the CPD maps contain regions whose boundaries are aligned with the fast-
scan axis and which are therefore not features of the sample but events that occurred during imaging. They are
caused by a substantial contact between the oscillating tip and the flake, which injects charge into the flake. The
injected charge shifts the compensating voltage of the whole affected area, so that the CPD map changes abruptly
at the scan line at which the event occurred; the boundaries are consequently parallel to the fast-scan axis, and the
affected part of the image is the one that follows the event along the slow-scan direction indicated by the arrow in
(a). Tip-induced charging of graphene on SiO2 has been reported before [7], where the injected charge was found to
decay exponentially with time constants of the order of tens of minutes under ambient humidity. In our glove-box
environment the discharge channel provided by an adsorbed water film is suppressed and the charged state is markedly
more persistent: it survives for at least two hours, i.e. far beyond the duration of a single scan, and we found no
significant change of the CPD maps over the course of a day. The charge state could only be altered deliberately,
either by further tip contacts or by applying a suitable DC voltage to the tip, which allowed us to charge and discharge
the flakes at will.
The untreated flake (top row) shows the most pronounced example: a rectangular region of elevated CPD, reaching
up to≈ 2.7 V, is bounded by two horizontal scan lines, and is surrounded by a halo that decays smoothly over more
than 2 µm into the surrounding oxide. The line profile in (c) illustrates this asymmetry: the CPD rises gradually
towards the charged region but drops in abrupt steps at the scan lines where the charge state changed. Neither the
halo nor the steps correlate with the topographic step at the flake edge. On this sample the injected charge is therefore
not confined to the flake, but ends up in the surrounding oxide as well.
For the N2+O2-treated flake (middle row) the CPD contrast between flake and substrate is∆VCPD≈−80 mV ,
more than an order of magnitude smaller than for the untreated sample, and both plateaus are flat across the entire
field of view. A single charging event is visible as a bright line along the upper flake edge, i.e. in the region scanned

===== PAGE 31 =====
31
22
last, but it does not develop into an extended halo. The consequence of this event is seen in the subsequent scan
of the same area, shown in the top row of Fig. S22: the flake as a whole now carries a charge, and the contrast has
changed sign to∆VCPD≈ 0.22 V, i.e. the potential of the flake has shifted by about0.3 V relative to the substrate.
Two observations are worth emphasising. First, the shift is homogeneous over the entire flake, apart from faint stripes
along the fast-scan direction, and it terminates abruptly at the flake edges without any gradient on the surrounding
oxide, whose CPD level is the same as before the charging event. The injected charge therefore resides on the flake,
where it spreads freely over the conducting graphite and remains confined by the flake boundary — in clear contrast
to the untreated sample of the top row, whose halo extends micrometres into the substrate. Second, the charged state
was reached at the end of one scan and is still fully present in the following one, which illustrates the persistence
discussed above. The small residual contrast in the uncharged state, together with the absence of long-range gradients
in both states, indicates that the density of trapped charges in the oxide is lowest for this treatment.
The sample that received the additional CHF3/O2 etch (bottom row) behaves qualitatively like the N2+O2 sample,
but on a scale that is larger by more than an order of magnitude. The field of view contains several graphene and
graphite flakes, and the CPD is constant over extended areas whose boundaries follow the flake outlines, with levels
that differ by more than1 V between neighbouring flakes: along the line profile the CPD drops from3.4 V to 2.2 V
at the position of a flake edge. The individual flakes are thus in markedly different charge states already before
any interaction with the tip. Up to the lower part of the image the scan proceeds without charging events. There,
however, a major event occurs and the CPD rises steeply by nearly7 Vto about 9 V. Since the slow-scan direction is
downwards for this measurement, this part of the frame is the one recorded last, so that the charged state it reveals
persists until the end of the scan.
The following scan of this sample, shown in the bottom row of Fig.S22, confirms this interpretation and reveals one
further difference. The flake is charged homogeneously over its full area and reaches a CPD of about9 V, i.e. some
8 Vabove the surrounding oxide, which is larger than the shift observed on the N2+O2 sample by more than an order
of magnitude. In addition, the potential does not terminate at the flake edge: it decays smoothly over roughly1 µm
into the substrate, whereas the topographic edge at the same position is sharp. Part of this broadening is expected
on instrumental reasons, since the long-range electrostatic force sensed by the tip cone and the cantilever averages
over an area that grows with the potential difference involved, and the two rows of Fig.S22 are compared at8 Vand
0.3 V, respectively. The observation is nevertheless consistent with the h-BN measurements, where the etched sample
was the only one showing a potential landscape extending far beyond the flake, and suggests that on the fluorinated
oxide the injected charge is not confined to the flake alone.
[1] Z. Ma, C. Prawoto, Z. Ahmed, Y. Xiao, L. Zhang, C. Zhou, and M. Chan, J. Mater. Chem. C7, 6273 (2019).
[2] K. Zou, X. Hong, and J. Zhu,Phys. Rev. B84, 085408 (2011).
[3] S. Sadewasser and T. Glatzel, eds., Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy: Measuring and Compensating Electrostatic Forces ,
Springer Series in Surface Sciences, Vol. 48 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012).
[4] S. Sadewasser and T. Glatzel, eds.,Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy: From Single Charge Detection to Device Characteriza-
tion, Springer Series in Surface Sciences, Vol. 65 (Springer, Cham, 2018).
[5] H. Sugimura, Y. Ishida, K. Hayashi, O. Takai, and N. Nakagiri,Appl. Phys. Lett.80, 1459 (2002).
[6] S. Ryu, L. Liu, S. Berciaud, Y.-J. Yu, H. Liu, P. Kim, G. W. Flynn, and L. E. Brus,Nano Lett.10, 4944 (2010).
[7] A. Verdaguer, M. Cardellach, J. J. Segura, G. M. Sacha, J. Moser, M. Zdrojek, A. Bachtold, and J. Fraxedas,Appl. Phys.
Lett. 94, 233105 (2009).
