===== PAGE 1 =====
1
The Lagrangian Approach to General
Relativity
Nic Ford
1 Introduction
This article is a supplement to another article on general relativity, which I wrote as part of my
series on physics for mathematicians. We’ll be discussing general relativity from the perspective
of Lagrangian mechanics, a point of view I intentionally neglected in the main article.
The Lagrangian perspective is quite a bit more abstract, so I don’t think it’ s the best approach
to take when learning the subject for the first time. But if you have some sense of the shape of
the theory in your head already, I think it can be a great way to clarify some of the conceptual
underpinnings of the subject. In particular, while it’ s not in any way a prerequisite for the
discussion we’re about to have here, if you read and enjoyed “Electromagnetism as a Gauge
Theory” from this series, my hope is that you’ll like this one as well.
As far as prerequisites, it will be helpful to have some exposure to general relativity already
— having read my article should be fine — and to understand how the Lagrangian approach
to physics works in classical mechanics. We will be using the abstract index notation that was
introduced in the main article, so if you don’t know or don’t remember how that works it might
be useful to review it there.
This piece has two main goals. After a quick overview of how to extend the Lagrangian
mechanics machinery to cover field theories in curved spacetime, we’ll discuss how to express
general relativity in the Lagrangian language — the Lagrangian which reproduces Einstein’ s
equation is surprisingly concise, and it offers a useful perspective on the theory. We’ll move
from there to a discussion of an issue which I got somewhat stuck on when learning the theory:
the relationship between the concept of energy-momentum as it appears in Einstein’ s equation
and the concept as it appears in non-gravitational physics. I hope I can give an explanation that
will prevent you from getting as confused about this point as I was.
In addition to the books cited in the main article, there are a couple of sources worth men-
tioning specifically for this supplement.
• The discussion on the relationship between the gravitational and inertial energy-momentum
tensors is based on the first few pages of an article called “Canonical Pseudotensors, Spar-
ling’ s Form, and Noether Currents” by László B. Szabados, which is mostly about the some-
what related topic of how one might define a quantity to represent the energy-momentum
of the gravitational field itself.
• A very similar computation is also done in an article called “On the Energy-Momentum
T ensor” by Ricardo E. Gamboa Saraví.

===== PAGE 2 =====
Section 2 Lagrangians in Curved Spacetime 2
• Our discussion of the two energy-momentum tensors will be limited to the case of ten-
sor fields coupled to gravity. The paper “Stress-Energy-Momentum T ensors and the
Belinfante–Rosenfeld Formula” by Mark J. Gotay and Jerrold E. Marsden generalizes the
procedure we’ll be discussing to cover essentially any situation in which diffeomorphisms
of spacetime can be made to act on the fields.
I’m grateful to Jordan Watkins for helpful comments on an earlier draft, and many very
helpful conversations on this topic.
2 Lagrangians in Curved Spacetime
We’ll start with a quick overview of how Lagrangian mechanics works for field theories in curved
spacetime. While it is possible to set everything up in a very pleasingly coordinate-free way,
I’m going to skip doing that here, since it doesn’t add enough to the discussion to be worth
taking the time, opting instead for the weaker promise to write everything in such a way that it
is usually not too difficult to translate each expression to its coordinate-free version. (I plan to
return to the coordinate-free presentation in a future article in this series.)
2.1 Fields and Lagrangians
So, throughout this discussion, we’ll imagine that we’re working on a local coordinate patch
𝑈 on a smooth oriented manifold 𝑀 with coordinates𝑥 1,...,𝑥 𝑛 . The manifold 𝑀 is meant
to represent spacetime, so in most physical applications,𝑛 will be 4. Because we’re about to
apply this to general relativity, we’ll assume𝑀 comes equipped with a metric𝑔𝑎𝑏 , although for
now we will simply take the metric to be fixed in advance rather than arising from Einstein’ s
equations.
The history of the physical system we’re modeling will be described by sections of some
smooth fiber bundle 𝜋 : 𝐸 → 𝑀 . These sections are often called fields. A couple popular
choices for𝐸 are𝑀× R (giving us a scalar field) or the tangent bundle𝑇𝑀 (giving us a vector
field). The bundle𝐸 doesn’t necessarily have to be a vector bundle in general, although it will
be for us. It’ s also common for𝐸 to be a product of several different bundles, and in this case we
think of each of the bundles in the product as corresponding to a different field.
For the purposes of this article, though, we’ll be specializing to the case of a single tensor
field. This means, using the terminology and notation from the main article, that 𝐸 is the(𝑟,𝑠)-
tensor bundle𝑇𝑟
𝑠 𝑀 . The coordinates on our patch 𝑈 will then let us put coordinates on the
fibers of𝐸 as well, which we could write𝑦𝑎1···𝑎𝑟
𝑏1···𝑏𝑠
. For the sake of readability we’ll usually pack
all of those indices into a “multi-index” 𝐴, writing an arbitrary coordinate simply as 𝑦𝐴 and
only expanding this out when absolutely necessary. (Despite appearing as a superscript, the
multi-index𝐴 is meant to stand in for both the upper and lower indices of an(𝑟,𝑠)-tensor.)
As in classical mechanics, the laws of physics will be specified in terms of a Lagrangian,
which is a real-valued function that depends on the values and derivatives of a section at a given
point. In principle one could allow the Lagrangian to depend on the derivatives of a section up to
𝑘 ’th order for some large𝑘 , but for simplicity we’ll mostly restrict to the case of first derivatives.
In our present context, where our spacetime comes equipped with an arbitrary metric, these
should be covariant derivatives, since this will make it easier to make sure the expression for
the Lagrangian respects the symmetries of general relativity .

===== PAGE 3 =====
Section 2 Lagrangians in Curved Spacetime 3
In other words, we’ll think of our Lagrangian as a function of the form𝐿(𝑥𝑎,𝑦 𝐴,𝑣𝐴
𝑎). (In an
expression like this, think of𝑥𝑎 or𝑦𝐴 as standing in for all the possible coordinates of that form.)
The𝑥𝑎 ’ s are coordinates on the base𝑀 , the𝑦𝐴’ s are coordinates in the fiber, and the𝑣𝐴
𝑎 ’ s are
coordinates which represent the derivatives of a section of𝐸 , in a way we’ll now make precise.
In the coordinate-free version of this story, the𝑥𝑎 ’ s,𝑦𝐴’ s, and𝑣𝐴
𝑎 ’ s would be coordinates on
the first jet bundle of𝐸 , written𝐽 1𝐸 . (Because we’ve restricted ourselves to a coordinate patch,
we don’t actually need a global definition of this object, and I will in fact hold off on this until
the promised future article. For now we will content ourselves with the local description we’ve
already given.) Given any section𝜙 :𝑀→𝐸 , we can produce a section𝑗 1𝜙 :𝑀→ 𝐽 1𝐸 called
the first jet prolongation of𝜙 by setting
𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥) =(𝑥,𝜙 𝐴(𝑥),∇𝑎𝜙𝐴(𝑥)).
As a quick example, if we had𝑀 = R2 with the standard coordinates𝑥 1,𝑥 2 and𝐸 =𝑇 2
0𝑀 ,
then the total space of𝐸 would be 6-dimensional, with coordinates𝑥 1,𝑥 2,𝑦 11,𝑦 12,𝑦 21,𝑦 22. The
total space of the jet bundle 𝐽 1𝐸 would then be 14-dimensional: the bundle 𝐽 1𝐸 → 𝐸 has
8-dimensional fibers, with coordinates𝑣𝑖𝑗
𝑘 for all choices of𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 from{1, 2}, and the bundle
𝐽 1𝐸→𝑀 has 10-dimensional fibers.
We’ll often have occasion to talk about covariant derivatives of partial derivatives of𝐿, so it’ s
worth taking a moment to be clear about what such expressions mean. Suppose for simplicity
that we just have one(𝑟,𝑠)-tensor field so that𝐸 =𝑇𝑟
𝑠 𝑀 . Given any section𝜙(𝑥) =(𝑥,𝜙 𝐴(𝑥)) ,
I encourage you to convince yourself that
𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑦𝐴(𝑥,𝜙 𝐴(𝑥),∇𝑎𝜙𝐴(𝑥))
should naturally be thought of as an(𝑠,𝑟)-tensor: the natural way to get a number out of it is to
pair it with an(𝑟,𝑠)-tensor, thought of as a tangent vector at𝜙(𝑥) in the fiber of𝐸 . When we
write expressions like∇𝑎(𝜕𝐿/𝜕𝑦𝐴), we will therefore mean the covariant derivative of𝜕𝐿/𝜕𝑦𝐴
thought of as an(𝑠,𝑟)-tensor. Similarly,
𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
(𝑥,𝜙 𝐴(𝑥),∇𝑎𝜙𝐴(𝑥))
is naturally an(𝑠+ 1,𝑟)-tensor.
In the physics literature, you will usually see 𝜕𝐿/𝜕𝜙𝐴 for what I’m calling 𝜕𝐿/𝜕𝑦𝐴, and
𝜕𝐿/𝜕(∇𝑎𝜙𝐴) for what I’m calling𝜕𝐿/𝜕𝑣𝐴
𝑎 . These expressions (especially the second one) are a
common source of confusion for people learning this theory for the first time, so I’m deliberately
avoiding them, but it’ s worth knowing the standard notation in case you encounter it elsewhere.
2.2 The Euler–Lagrange Equations
Just as in classical mechanics, specifying a Lagrangian determines the laws of physics that our
fields have to satisfy via an action principle, in the following way . Given any compact region of
spacetime𝐷⊆𝑀 and any section𝜙, we’ll define the action to be the quantity
𝑆𝐷[𝜙] =
∫
𝐷
𝐿(𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥))𝜔𝑔,
where𝜔𝑔 is the volume form on𝑀 arising from our metric𝑔𝑎𝑏 . We’ll define a variation of𝜙 on
𝐷 to be a one-parameter family of sections𝜙𝑢 such that𝜙0 =𝜙 and every𝜙𝑢 =𝜙 on𝜕𝐷.

===== PAGE 4 =====
Section 2 Lagrangians in Curved Spacetime 4
We then declare that the physically realizable field histories𝜙 are the ones with the property
that, for every compact region𝐷 and every variation𝜙𝑢 on𝐷, we have
𝑑
𝑑𝑢𝑆𝐷[𝜙𝑢]

𝑢=0
= 0.
When we have a variation in mind, we will follow the common convention in physics of writing
𝛿 for(𝑑/𝑑𝑢)|𝑢=0 and omitting the subscript𝑢 on other expressions when we do so. For example,
𝛿𝜙𝐴 means(𝑑/𝑑𝑢)(𝜙𝑢)𝐴|𝑢=0, and the condition on the action just described can be written
“𝛿𝑆𝐷 = 0.”
As in classical mechanics, it’ s possible to rewrite this condition in a way which doesn’t refer
to variations. Suppose we have a𝜙 which satisfies our condition. Then, for every region𝐷 and
every variation𝜙𝑢 on𝐷, we have
0 =𝛿𝑆𝐷 =
∫
𝐷
 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑦𝐴𝛿𝜙𝐴+ 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
𝛿(∇𝑎𝜙𝐴)

𝜔𝑔.
(The derivatives of𝐿 are still being evaluated at𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥).) The derivatives with respect to𝑢 and
𝑥𝑎 commute, so𝛿(∇𝑎𝜙𝐴) =∇𝑎(𝛿𝜙𝐴). We can therefore write
0 =
∫
𝐷
 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑦𝐴𝛿𝜙𝐴+ 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
∇𝑎(𝛿𝜙𝐴)

𝜔𝑔
=
∫
𝐷
 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑦𝐴−∇ 𝑎
𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎

𝛿𝜙𝐴𝜔𝑔+
∫
𝐷
∇𝑎
 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
𝛿𝜙𝐴

𝜔𝑔.
The second integral is a covariant divergence integrated against the volume form. By the
covariant-derivative analogue of the divergence theorem, this is equal to an integral on the
boundary𝜕𝐷, which vanishes because𝛿𝜙𝐴 is zero there. We’re left with just the first integral. In
order for this integral to vanish for all possible choices of region𝐷 and variation𝛿𝜙𝐴, we must
have that
EL𝐴(𝜙) := 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑦𝐴(𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥))−∇ 𝑎
 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
(𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥))

= 0
for all𝐴. These are called the Euler–Lagrange equations.
2.3 Noether Currents
Another piece of the classical-mechanical Lagrangian story that generalizes nicely to this setting
is the relationship between infinitesimal symmetries and conserved quantities from Noether’ s
Theorem.
There are a few ways to formalize these ingredients, and we’re going to go through just
one. We’ll say that an infinitesimal transformation of sections of 𝐸 is a smooth function
𝑤𝐴(𝑥𝑎,𝑦 𝐴,𝑣𝐴
𝑎) which returns a vertical tangent vector at(𝑥𝑎,𝑦 𝐴)∈ 𝐸 . (Recall that a tangent
vector𝑣 at a point𝑒∈𝐸 is vertical if𝜋∗𝑣 = 0 in𝑇𝜋(𝑒)𝑀 .) In other words,𝑤𝐴 takes in information
about the value and derivative of a section at a point 𝑥, and it tells you a direction in which
to push the value of the section at that same point. By starting with a section 𝜙 and flowing
along𝑤𝐴, we can produce a continuous transformation of𝜙, that is, a one-parameter group of
sections𝜙𝑢(𝑥) =(𝑥,(𝜙𝑢)𝐴(𝑥)) such that
𝑑
𝑑𝑢(𝜙𝑢)𝐴(𝑥) =𝑤𝐴(𝑗 1𝜙𝑢(𝑥)).

===== PAGE 5 =====
Section 2 Lagrangians in Curved Spacetime 5
T o head off a confusion I had when encountering this for the first time, while it looks like
the requirement that𝑤𝐴 be vertical would prevent us from considering things like spacetime
translations, this is not actually the case. If, for example,𝑋𝑎 is a vector field on our spacetime
𝑀 , then flowing sections along𝑋𝑎 is the continuous transformation that arises when we set
𝑤𝐴 =L𝑋𝜙𝐴 whereL denotes the Lie derivative. Lie derivatives of tensor fields only depend on
the first derivatives of the field, so we can express the right side as a function of𝑥𝑎 ,𝑦𝐴, and𝑣𝐴
𝑎 as
required.
In order to make Noether’ s Theorem work, we’ll need a formal definition of an “infinitesimal
symmetry” of a Lagrangian system: we want a condition we can impose on 𝑤𝐴 which will
imply that the corresponding continuous transformation takes solutions of the Euler–Lagrange
equation to solutions. A natural first guess might be that we should call 𝑤𝐴 an infinitesimal
symmetry whenever the continuous symmetry preserves the Lagrangian, that is, whenever for
any section𝜙 we have(𝑑/𝑑𝑢)𝐿(𝑗 1𝜙𝑢(𝑥)) = 0 for all𝑥, where𝜙𝑢 is the one-parameter group of
sections we just defined.
In fact, this turns out to be too restrictive — for example, this won’t be true for spatial
translations in situations where that is a symmetry of the physical system. Luckily, as I encourage
you to verify, it’ s enough if(𝑑/𝑑𝑢)𝐿(𝑗 1𝜙𝑢(𝑥)) is a total divergence, that is, if there’ s a smooth
function𝐹𝑎(𝑥𝑎,𝑦 𝐴,𝑣𝐴
𝑎) returning a tangent vector at𝑥𝑎∈𝑀 such that
𝑑
𝑑𝑢𝐿(𝑗 1𝜙𝑢(𝑥)) =∇𝑎(𝐹𝑎(𝑗 1𝜙𝑢(𝑥))).
This is equivalent to requiring
𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑦𝐴𝑤𝐴+ 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
(∇𝑎𝑤𝐴) =∇𝑎𝐹𝑎.
(Although we’ve stopped including it in the notation, all of these functions are still being eval-
uated at𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥)!) When this happens, we’ll call𝑤𝐴 an infinitesimal symmetry and the corre-
sponding continuous transformation a continuous symmetry.
From this perspective, Noether’ s Theorem is quite simple to prove. Observe that, when𝑤𝐴
is an infinitesimal symmetry, we have
0 = 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑦𝐴𝑤𝐴+ 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
(∇𝑎𝑤𝐴)−∇ 𝑎𝐹𝑎
= EL𝐴(𝜙)𝑤𝐴+∇ 𝑎
 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
𝑤𝐴−𝐹𝑎

.
Inspired by this, let’ s define theNoether current corresponding to our symmetry𝑤𝐼 to be
𝐽𝑎 =𝐹𝑎− 𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
𝑤𝐴.
What we’ve just shown is that, if you take a solution𝜙 of the Euler–Lagrange equations and plug
in its values and derivatives as the𝑦𝐴’ s and𝑣𝐴
𝑖 ’ s, then we’ll have∇𝑎𝐽𝑎 = 0. In other words, 𝐽𝑎
will be a conserved current in the sense discussed in the main article.
It’ s important to note here that this procedure does not actually uniquely define𝐽𝑎 — if ˜𝐽𝑎
satisfies∇𝑎[𝐽𝑎(𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥))− ˜𝐽𝑎(𝑗 1𝜙(𝑥))] = 0 for all sections 𝜙, then ˜𝐽𝑎 will be an equally valid
conserved current, and nothing about what we just did gives us a way to distingish between
them. (Indeed, the same ambiguity arises in the the definition of𝐹𝑎 .) When two currents𝐽𝑎 and

===== PAGE 6 =====
Section 3 The Einstein–Hilbert Action 6
˜𝐽𝑎 are related in this way, we’ll call them equivalent, and for this reason, it is probably better to
talk about a Noether current corresponding to a given symmetry rather thanthe Noether current.
In particular, if you integrate 𝐽𝑎 or ˜𝐽𝑎 over a spacelike hypersurface to produce a conserved
scalar quantity, the result will be the same. This will turn out to be important when we discuss
the various ways to interpret the energy-momentum tensor.
As mentioned above, there are a few other choices one could make in the process of formal-
izing all this. One that you might see in the literature (including in the Gotay–Marsden paper
mentioned in the introduction) is to remove the requirement that𝑤𝐴 be a vertical vector, that
is, allowing our infinitesimal transformations to also point in spacetime directions. In order for
the corresponding continuous transformation to still take sections of𝐸 to sections, we need to
amend the action on sections a bit to drag each point of 𝐸 back to the fiber where it belongs.
This makes some symmetries a bit easier to write down, at the cost of making the formula for 𝐽𝑎
a bit more complicated.
3 The Einstein–Hilbert Action
In general relativity, gravity is described in terms of the metric𝑔𝑎𝑏 on our spacetime𝑀 , which
we “promote” into a dynamical variable. That is, rather than think of the metric as simply a part
of the specification of our background spacetime𝑀 , we treat it as one of the quantities that we
are interested in solving for, just like the fields.
Given the framework we just laid out, this suggests that we need to include the metric in our
Lagrangian somehow, and to require the derivative of the action to vanish under variations of
both the metric and the fields. This requires a couple of small changes to our setup. First, in our
previous discussion, the Lagrangian could depend on the metric indirectly via its dependence
on the point 𝑥∈ 𝑀 . But now that the metric is a dynamical variable we’re going to need to
include it explicitly as a parameter. Second, we’ll need to find a Lagrangian involving only the
metric which we can add on to the Lagrangian for matter and which will produce Einstein’ s
equation as one of the Euler–Lagrange equations. (If you read “Electromagnetism as a Gauge
Theory,” it might be interesting to compare what we’re about to do to the way electromagnetism
was incorporated into the Lagrangian in that context.)
Our action will therefore take the form
𝑆𝐷[𝜙𝐴,𝑔 𝑎𝑏] =(𝑆𝑚)𝐷[𝜙𝐴,𝑔 𝑎𝑏]+( 𝑆𝐸𝐻)𝐷[𝑔𝑎𝑏].
The𝑚 stands for “matter,” and𝑆𝑚 is an action of the same type that we were considering in the
previous section, except with any dependence on the metric now occuring through the metric’ s
status as a parameter to the Lagrangian. The second term is called the Einstein–Hilbert action,
and it takes a remarkably simple form: the action that reproduces Einstein’ s equation turns out
to be
(𝑆𝐸𝐻)𝐷[𝑔𝑎𝑏] = 1
16𝜋𝐺
∫
𝐷
𝑅𝜔𝑔,
where𝑅 is the scalar curvature of the metric and𝜔𝑔 is, as it was above, the volume form.
This action doesn’t quite fit into our earlier framework for a couple of reasons. First, the
curvature of a metric actually depends on its second derivatives, whereas the Lagrangians we
considered earlier were only allowed to depend on first derivatives. We did this for simplicity, but
there is actually no reason that one couldn’t run exactly the same arguments with a Lagrangian
that depends on derivatives up to any fixed order; the logic is essentially unchanged, but the

===== PAGE 7 =====
Section 3 The Einstein–Hilbert Action 7
formulas for the Euler–Lagrange equations and the Noether current are a bit more complicated.
(The Szabados paper mentioned in the introduction goes into this a bit.) Second, all covariant
derivatives of the metric are zero, and so it would not make sense to use them as parameters. T o
address both of these concerns, we can think of the integrand in the Einstein–Hilbert action
as a function of𝜕𝑐𝑔𝑎𝑏 and𝜕𝑐𝜕𝑑𝑔𝑎𝑏 , the first and second partial derivatives of the metric in our
chosen coordinate system.
By the linearity of partial derivatives, in order to check that the derivative of the action is zero
under simultaneous variations of the fields and the metric, it’ s enough to consider variations of
the fields and variations of the metric separately . When we vary just the fields, the variation of
the Einstein–Hilbert action vanishes, and so we are back in the situation we considered in the
previous section. The resulting Euler–Lagrange equations will therefore be exactly the same as
the ones we would have gotten if we had thought of our system as living in a spacetime with a
fixed metric.
Varying the metric is more interesting. We can’t just throw everything into our formula
for the Euler–Lagrange equation, because the dependence of the action on 𝑔𝑎𝑏 doesn’t take
the form we assumed when we derived it. In addition to the issues involving the derivatives
of the metric that we just discussed, there is also the fact that the covariant derivatives∇𝑎𝜙𝐴
themselves depend on the metric, as does the volume form𝜔𝑔 .
T o mimic the proof of the Euler–Lagrange equations in this new context, we would want
to find some function𝛿𝑆/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 depending on the values and derivatives of the fields and the
metric such that, for any region𝐷 and any variation(𝑔𝑢)𝑎𝑏 of the metric on𝐷, we have
𝛿𝑆𝐷 =
∫
𝐷
𝛿𝑆
𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏
(𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏)𝜔𝑔.
(Recall that𝛿 refers to the derivative with respect to𝑢.) We would then be able to conclude, just
like in our proof of the Euler–Lagrange equations, that if𝛿𝑆𝐷 = 0 for all such variations, then
𝛿𝑆/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 = 0.
Such a𝛿𝑆/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 , when it exists, is called the functional derivative of𝑆𝐷 with respect to
𝑔𝑎𝑏 . (The notation is meant to be reminiscent of the formula 𝑑𝑓 = ˝𝑛
𝑖 =1(𝜕𝑓/𝜕𝑥𝑖)𝑑𝑥𝑖 for a real-
valued function𝑓 on R𝑛 . Note also that, using this notation, we could write the Euler–Lagrange
expression from the last section simply as EL𝐴(𝜙) = 𝛿𝑆/𝛿𝜙𝐴.) Assuming that the functional
derivatives of both the matter and Einstein–Hilbert actions exist and that we are able to compute
them, we could write the resulting equations of motion in the form
𝛿𝑆𝐸𝐻
𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏
=−𝛿𝑆𝑚
𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏
.
(If you read about this story elsewhere in the literature — including in Carroll’ s book — you
should be aware that it’ s very common to adopt a different convention for functional derivatives,
where they would instead say, for example,𝛿𝑆𝐷 =
∫
𝐷
𝛿𝑆
𝛿𝜙𝛿𝜙𝑑 4𝑥. In other words, they use𝑑 4𝑥
in the position where we had the volume form 𝜔𝑔 . This will make some formulas look a bit
different.)
The computation of 𝛿𝑆𝐸𝐻/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 is fairly straightforward but pretty long, so we won’t go
through it here. It can be found in most textbooks on the subject, and in particular in Appendix
E of Wald and Section 4.3 of Carroll. The result is
𝛿𝑆𝐸𝐻
𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏
=− 1
16𝜋𝐺(𝑅𝑎𝑏− 1
2𝑅𝑔 𝑎𝑏).

===== PAGE 8 =====
Section 4 The Two Energy-Momentum Tensors 8
This is (apart from the factor out front and the raised indices) the quantity that appears
on the left side of Einstein’ s equation, which is a promising sign! In particular, we can at least
conclude from this that, in the absence of matter, we do indeed recover the vacuum version
of Einstein’ s equation. The extent to which we can claim to recover Einstein’ s equation in the
presence of matter depends on whether we can conclude that the energy-momentum tensor of
the matter is given by
𝑇𝑎𝑏 = 2𝛿𝑆𝑚
𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏
.
In most textbook presentations of this part of the story, including the two I just cited, they
essentially stop here and declare victory, stating that the quantity on the right side of this
equation is the energy-momentum tensor and that we have therefore successfully reproduced
Einstein’ s equation from a Lagrangian.
In my opinion, this leaves a fairly big question unanswered: why should we believe that
2𝛿𝑆𝑚/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 has anything to do with energy-momentum as we understood it before we knew
about Einstein’ s equation? This is the question we’ll take on in the next section.
4 The Two Energy-Momentum Tensors
We can state the central issue as follows. In general relativity, energy-momentum plays two
quite different roles, and it will be useful to have some terminology available to distinguish
them from each other. Let’ s call itinertial energy-momentum when it plays the role it plays in
non-gravitational physics. The inertial energy-momentum of a massive particle, for instance, is
its mass times its 4-velocity . And we’ll call itgravitational energy-momentum when it serves as
the source for gravity . In other words, gravitational energy-momentum is the quantity that goes
on the right side of Einstein’ s equation.
One of the central claims of general relativity is, of course, that these two quantities are
identical; this is one of the things that makes gravity unique among the fundamental forces
of nature. The argument from the last section certainly provides a justification for identifying
2𝛿𝑆𝑚/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 with gravitational energy-momentum, but if we’re going to claim that our Lagrangian
story has reproduced general relativity, it would be nice if we could find an argument for also
identifying this quantity with inertial energy-momentum. Specifically, we have a preexisting
characterization of inertial energy-momentum from our knowledge of Lagrangian mechanics
in non-gravitational physics: it’ s the Noether current corresponding to spacetime translations.
What does that Noether current have to do with 2𝛿𝑆𝑚/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 ?
It is worth saying at the outset that there is a weaker claim we could make with much less
effort than we’re about to expend. The natural generalization of a spacetime translation to
curved spacetime is the flow along a vector field. As we’ll discuss in more detail momentarily,
flowing the fields along a vector field isn’t a symmetry in general, but it is when we flow along
a Killing vector field, that is, when the flows are isometries. In this case, we can quite easily
extract a conserved current from the covariant conservation law ∇𝑎𝑇𝑎𝑏 = 0, which follows
from Einstein’ s equation: the vector field𝐾𝑎 is Killing if and only if∇𝑎𝐾𝑏 =−∇𝑏𝐾𝑎 , and this,
combined with the symmetry of𝑇𝑎𝑏 , gives us that∇𝑎(𝐾𝑏𝑇𝑎𝑏) = 0.
This does give us a way to turn our symmetry into a current that is conserved, but in my
view it’ s not a fully satisfying answer to the question at hand. When I learned this for the first
time, I wanted to see directly how the quantity that arises from applying the Noether machine
to spacetime translations is related to the quantity that shows up on the right side of Einstein’ s

===== PAGE 9 =====
Section 4 The Two Energy-Momentum Tensors 9
equation, and the fact we just established doesn’t get us there on its own. Our goal in this section
is to fill in this gap.
4.1 Gravitational Energy-Momentum
In order to perform this comparison, we’ll need to find explicit formulas for the two energy-
momentum tensors. We’ll start with the gravitational energy-momentum tensor, which will
require introducing a bit of notation that I’m borrowing from the Szabados paper mentioned in
the introduction. There are many formulas in differential geometry, usually involving various
sorts of derivatives, which involve a sum over all possible ways of replacing one of the indices
on the tensor being differentiated with a new index. For example, given a vector field𝑋𝑎 , the
Lie derivativeL𝑋𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟𝑏1···𝑏𝑠 of an(𝑟,𝑠)-tensor can be written
L𝑋𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟
𝑏1···𝑏𝑠 =𝑋𝑐∇𝑐𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟
𝑏1···𝑏𝑠−(∇ 𝑐𝑋𝑎1)𝑇𝑐𝑎 2···𝑎𝑟
𝑏1···𝑏𝑠
−···−(∇ 𝑐𝑋𝑎𝑟)𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟−1𝑐𝑏1···𝑏𝑠
+(∇ 𝑏1𝑋𝑐)𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟
𝑐𝑏 2···𝑏𝑠
+···+(∇ 𝑏𝑠𝑋𝑐)𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟
𝑏1···𝑏𝑠−1𝑐.
We’ll need to talk about a few of these formulas in what follows, and so it will be very helpful to
have a concise way to write these index games. Recall that 𝛿𝑎
𝑏 is the(1, 1)-tensor corresponding
to the identity map; in other words, in coordinates, it’ s equal to 1 when𝑎 =𝑏 and 0 otherwise. If
we then define
Δ𝑒𝑎 1···𝑎𝑟𝑑1···𝑑𝑠
𝑓 𝑏1···𝑏𝑠𝑐1···𝑐𝑟
=(𝛿𝑒
𝑐1𝛿𝑎1
𝑓 𝛿𝑎2
𝑐2··· 𝛿𝑎𝑟
𝑐𝑟 +···+ 𝛿𝑎1
𝑐1··· 𝛿𝑎𝑟−1
𝑐𝑟−1𝛿𝑒
𝑐𝑟𝛿𝑎𝑟
𝑓 )𝛿𝑑1
𝑏1
··· 𝛿𝑑𝑠
𝑏𝑠
−𝛿𝑎1
𝑐1··· 𝛿𝑎𝑟
𝑐𝑟(𝛿𝑒
𝑏1
𝛿𝑑1
𝑓 𝛿𝑑2
𝑏2
··· 𝛿𝑑𝑠
𝑏𝑠
+···+ 𝛿𝑑1
𝑏1
··· 𝛿𝑑𝑠−1
𝑏𝑠−1
𝛿𝑒
𝑏𝑠𝛿𝑑𝑠
𝑓 ),
we can pack our expression for the Lie derivative into just two terms:
L𝑋𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟
𝑏1···𝑏𝑠 =𝑋𝑐∇𝑐𝑇𝑎1···𝑎𝑟
𝑏1···𝑏𝑠−(∇ 𝑒𝑋 𝑓)Δ𝑒𝑎 1···𝑎𝑟𝑑1···𝑑𝑠
𝑓 𝑏1···𝑏𝑠𝑐1···𝑐𝑟
𝑇𝑐1···𝑐𝑟
𝑑1···𝑑𝑠.
(Note that the definition of Δ depends on the values of𝑟 and𝑠 , not just on the two lists of
𝑟+𝑠+ 1 indices attached to Δ; a different way of splitting𝑟+𝑠 into two nonnegtaive integers
will result in a change of sign on some of the terms. Also, note that the above formula suggests
that, if𝑟 =𝑠 = 0, suggests we should set Δ𝑒
𝑓 = 0.)
This is definitely an improvement, but still kind of a notational handful. We can cut down
on the indices considerably by reintroducing the “multi-index” notation we were using before.
We’ll adopt the further convention that, if a superscript𝐴 stands for the indices that belong on
an(𝑟,𝑠)-tensor, then a subscript𝐴 stands for the indices of an(𝑠,𝑟)-tensor. Using this, we can
write the previous formula as
L𝑋𝑇𝐴 =𝑋𝑐∇𝑐𝑇𝐴−(∇ 𝑒𝑋 𝑓)Δ𝑒𝐴
𝑓𝐵𝑇𝐵.
There are a lot of facts about derivatives of tensors that can similarly be written in this way .
For example, we have
∇𝑎𝑇𝐴 =𝜕𝑎𝑇𝐴+ Γ𝑏
𝑎𝑐 Δ𝑐𝐴
𝑏𝐵𝑇𝐵
[∇𝑎,∇𝑏]𝑇𝐴 =𝑅𝑑𝑐𝑎𝑏 Δ𝑐𝐴
𝑑𝐵𝑇𝐵
[L𝑋,∇𝑎]𝑇𝐴 =(𝑅𝑐𝑏𝑑𝑎𝑋𝑑+∇ 𝑎∇𝑏𝑋𝑐)Δ𝑏𝐴
𝑐𝐵𝑇𝐵.

===== PAGE 10 =====
Section 4 The Two Energy-Momentum Tensors 10
Let’ s write𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav = 2𝛿𝑆𝑚/𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 for our gravitational energy-momentum tensor. If you pick an
arbitrary variation of the metric and consider
𝛿𝑆𝑚 =
∫
𝐷
𝛿(𝐿𝑚𝜔𝑔) =
∫
𝐷

𝐿𝑚𝛿𝜔𝑔+
𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
𝛿(∇𝑎𝜙𝐴)+ 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑔𝑎𝑏
𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏

𝜔𝑔

,
it’ s a nice exercise (also done, after some translation between our notations, on p. 10 of the
Saraví paper) to show that this produces the formula
𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav = 2𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑔𝑎𝑏
+𝐿𝑚𝑔𝑎𝑏+ 1
2∇𝑐(Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐+ Σ𝑏𝑎𝑐− Σ𝑎𝑐𝑏− Σ𝑏𝑐𝑎− Σ𝑐𝑎𝑏− Σ𝑐𝑏𝑎),
where
Σ𝑖𝑗 𝑘 = 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴
𝑖
Δ𝑗𝐴
𝑘𝐵𝜙𝐵.
(If you try to prove this, remember that any integral of a total divergence is zero, and that any
expression of the form𝑇𝑎𝑏𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 can also be written 1
2(𝑇𝑎𝑏+𝑇𝑏𝑎)𝛿𝑔𝑎𝑏 because of the symmetry
of𝑔𝑎𝑏 .)
4.2 Inertial Energy-Momentum
Let’ s now turn to the inertial energy-momentum tensor. As mentioned above, in non-gravitational
physics on flat spacetime, we have a clear picture of what inertial energy-momentum ought to
mean: it’ s the Noether current corresponding to spacetime translations. In curved spacetime,
of course, there is no reason to think that spacetime translation is any sort of symmetry at all;
the metric is different at different points, so simply translating the fields across spacetime will
certainly affect the value of the Lagrangian.
You might instead consider translating the fields and the metric. Unfortunately, while we
won’t go over this in detail here, Noether’ s Theorem turns out to be vacuous in this case. (This is
probably to be expected — as we discussed in the main article, the covariant conservation law
∇𝑎𝑇𝑎𝑏 does not imply the existence of any conserved currents in general.) The main exception
is, as we mentioned above, when our metric has a Killing vector field. In this case, we do get
a symmetry by flowing along this vector field, and we can apply the Noether machine to get a
nontrivial conserved current.
So for the moment let’ s suppose𝐾𝑎 is a Killing vector field. In order to ensure that flowing the
fields along𝐾𝑎 is actually a symmetry, we’ll also assume going forward that that our Lagrangian
doesn’t depend directly on the point𝑥∈𝑀 .
We’ll start by writing an expression for the derivative of the matter Lagrangian in the direction
of𝐾𝑎 . Regardless of whether or not𝐾𝑎 is Killing, we have
𝐾𝑎∇𝑎𝐿𝑚 = 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑦𝐴L𝐾𝜙𝐴+ 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
L𝐾(∇𝑎𝜙𝐴)+ 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑔𝑎𝑏
L𝐾𝑔𝑎𝑏.
At first glance, this doesn’t look like it fits into our Noether current story . First, for our definition
of “infinitesimal symmetry,” the expression multiplying𝜕𝐿𝑚/𝜕𝑣𝐴
𝑎 has to be∇𝑎 of the expression
multiplying𝜕𝐿𝑚/𝜕𝑦𝐴, which seems not to be the case here. Second, we need the left side to be a
total divergence, which it seems not to be. And third, we have the extra term involving 𝑔𝑎𝑏 .
Luckily, all of these issues are solved when𝐾𝑎 is Killing. By the definition of a Killing vector
field, we haveL𝐾𝑔𝑎𝑏 = 0, so the last term vanishes. Furthermore, L𝐾 commutes with∇𝑎

===== PAGE 11 =====
Section 4 The Two Energy-Momentum Tensors 11
whenever𝐾𝑎 is Killing. (One quick way to see this is to use the definition of the Lie derivative in
terms of flows; since the flows are isometries, they preserve covariant derivatives.) We therefore
can write
𝐾𝑎∇𝑎𝐿𝑚 = 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑦𝐴L𝐾𝜙𝐴+ 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
∇𝑎(L𝐾𝜙𝐴)
= EL𝐴(𝜙)L𝐾𝜙𝐴+∇ 𝑎
𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
L𝐾𝜙𝐴

.
Using the fact that𝐾𝑎 is Killing once again to conclude that∇𝑎𝐾𝑎 = 0, we see that
∇𝑎

𝐾𝑎𝐿𝑚− 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
L𝐾𝜙𝐴

= 0,
when𝜙𝐴 satisfies the Euler–Lagrange equations. In other words,
𝐽𝑎 =𝐾𝑎𝐿𝑚− 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
L𝐾𝜙𝐴
is a Noether current for to our symmetry .
What if, as will almost always be the case, there is no Killing vector field? It still seems like we
ought to be able to talk about inertial energy-momentum, at least in an approximate sense. If I’m
at some point𝑥, and I never travel far enough away from𝑥 to notice the curvature of spacetime,
I could produce an inertial energy-momentum tensor from my (technically erroneous, but
approximately correct) belief that spacetime is flat near𝑥, and it still makes sense to ask about
the relationship between this quantity and the source for gravity .
One way to formalize this concept of “the coordinates you would use if you were ignorant of
gravity” is through the use of Riemannian normal coordinates. Recall that, around every point
of spacetime, we can find a coordinate patch such that, at our chosen point, 𝑔𝑎𝑏 is equal to the
Minkowski metric and the covariant derivatives are given by ordinary partial derivatives. In this
coordinate system, the coordinate translation vector fields are not Killing, but they are close; if
we restrict to points whose coordinates differ from our chosen point by at most𝜖, then the error
— that is, the difference between∇𝑎𝐽𝑎 and zero — is on the order of𝜖|𝑅𝑎𝑏|+ 𝑂(𝜖2).
4.3 The Comparison
With explicit expressions for our two energy-momentum tensors in hand, we’re almost ready to
see how they are related.
T o facilitate this comparison, we’ d like to get our expression for the Noether current into a
form which contains a(2, 0)-tensor that we might somehow relate directly to𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav. I encourage
you to verify that we can write
𝐽𝑎 =𝐾𝑏 Θ𝑎𝑏+(∇ 𝑏𝐾𝑐)Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐,
where
Θ𝑎𝑏 =𝛿𝑎
𝑏𝐿𝑚− 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
∇𝑏𝜙𝐴
is the so-called canonical energy-momentum tensor.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Section 4 The Two Energy-Momentum Tensors 12
It’ s instructive to take a small detour to see what this expression looks like in the case of
translations and rotations in Minkowski space. For translations,𝐾𝑏 will be a constant vector, so
the second term in𝐽𝑎 vanishes, leaving us with just
𝐽𝑎 =𝐾𝑏 Θ𝑎𝑏.
In particular, if we had started by considering a field theory in flat spacetime and considered
only spacetime translations, Θ𝑎𝑏 is the quantity we might have naturally singled out as “the”
energy-momentum tensor, so that for any vector𝑉𝑏 , the quantity𝑉𝑏 Θ𝑎𝑏 could be thought of as
linear energy-momentum current density in the𝑉𝑏 direction.
I encourage you to convince yourself that rotation in the plane spanned by two constant
spacelike vectors𝑉𝑎 and𝑊𝑎 is generated by the vector field𝐾𝑏 =𝑥𝑐(𝑉𝑐𝑊𝑏−𝑊𝑐𝑉𝑏), where𝑥𝑐
is the R4-valued function on spacetime which outputs the spacetime coordinates of each point,
and that the resulting current is
𝐽𝑎 =𝑥𝑐(𝑉𝑐𝑊𝑏−𝑊𝑐𝑉𝑏)Θ𝑎𝑏+𝑉𝑏𝑊𝑐(Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐− Σ𝑎𝑐𝑏).
Using the interpretation of𝑉𝑏 Θ𝑎𝑏 we just discussed, the first term is naturally interpreted as
orbital angular momentum, that is, the contribution to angular momentum arising from linear
motion parallel to the plane of rotation and orthogonal to𝑥𝑐 . The second term would then be
an “intrinsic” contribution to angular momentum, that is, one that doesn’t arise from linear
motion but from motion “internal” to the space in which the fields take their values. (Notice
that, for a scalar field, Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐 = 0, so this contribution will vanish.) Physicists often call this spin
angular momentum, and we’ll adopt this terminology when we discuss this quantity a bit more
in just a moment.
We’re now finally ready to talk about how our two quantities are related. Following Szabados,
we’ll be aided by the following fact. Pick an arbitrary vector field𝑋𝑎 . Using the fact thatL𝑋𝑔𝑎𝑏 =
∇𝑎𝑋𝑏+∇𝑏𝑋𝑎 , and still assuming that𝐿𝑚 doesn’t depend directly on𝑥, we can write
∇𝑎(𝐿𝑚𝑋𝑎) =𝑋𝑎∇𝑎𝐿𝑚+ 1
2𝐿𝑚𝑔𝑎𝑏L𝑋𝑔𝑎𝑏
= EL𝐴(𝜙)L𝑋𝜙𝐴+
𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑔𝑎𝑏
+ 1
2𝐿𝑚𝑔𝑎𝑏

L𝑋𝑔𝑎𝑏
+∇ 𝑎
𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
L𝑋𝜙𝐴

+ 𝜕𝐿𝑚
𝜕𝑣𝐴𝑎
(L𝑋(∇𝑎𝜙𝐴)−∇ 𝑎(L𝑋𝜙𝐴)).
After an honestly unreasonably long computation which I won’t reproduce here (if you’re
interested, Saraví’ s paper goes through an essentially equivalent one) this equality can be
digested into the following form:
EL𝐴(𝜙)L𝑋𝜙𝐴+𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav(∇𝑎𝑋𝑏) =∇𝑎(𝑋𝑏 Θ𝑎𝑏+ ˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐(∇𝑏𝑋𝑐)),
where
˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐 = 1
2(Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐− Σ𝑎𝑐𝑏+ Σ𝑏𝑐𝑎− Σ𝑏𝑎𝑐+ Σ𝑐𝑏𝑎− Σ𝑐𝑎𝑏).
Assume that the fields satisfy the Euler–Lagrange equations, so that the first term vanishes.
Then, since the vector field𝑋𝑎 is arbitrary, the coefficients of𝑋𝑐 ,∇𝑏𝑋𝑐 and∇𝑎∇𝑏𝑋𝑐 on each
side of this equation must all separately be equal, so we can conclude that
𝑇𝑏𝑐
grav = Θ𝑏𝑐+∇ 𝑎 ˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Section 4 The Two Energy-Momentum Tensors 13
The expression on the right is called the Belinfante–Rosenfeld formula for the energy-
momentum tensor. If we had started with the “canonical” energy-momentum tensor Θ𝑏𝑐 —
which we might have been led to do if we’ d started by looking at spacetime translations in
Minkowski space as above — then we can look at the second term as a “correction” to our
energy-momentum tensor. Indeed,Θ𝑎𝑏 is not especially close to being an adequate gravitational
energy-momentum tensor; it isn’t even symmetric in general, and it will also often fail to be
gauge-invariant in physical theories where that’ s a relevant concern.
In Minkowski space, you can sort of picture the Belinfante–Rosenfeld formula as telling
you that you need to include contributions from spin angular momentum in order to pro-
duce the quantity that can serve as a source for gravity, although that interpretation doesn’t
generalize beyond that setting, because we needed to take advantage of the entire coordinate
system on Minkowski space to identify Θ𝑎𝑏 and Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐 with linear energy-momentum and spin
respectively. In general, Θ𝑎𝑏 and ˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐 are not, by themselves, especially physically meaning-
ful quantities, while𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav obviously is, and accordingly I think the perspective in which the
Belinfante–Rosenfeld formula is seen as a way of correcting the deficiencies in Θ𝑎𝑏 is a some-
what limited one.
Finally, let’ s see what this tells us about our Noether current in the presence of a Killing field,
which we had gotten into the form
𝐽𝑎 =𝐾𝑏 Θ𝑎𝑏+(∇ 𝑏𝐾𝑐)Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐.
I encourage you to verify that, since∇𝑏𝐾𝑐 is antisymmetric (because𝐾𝑐 is Killing) this is equal
to
𝐽𝑎 =𝐾𝑏 Θ𝑎𝑏+(∇ 𝑏𝐾𝑐) ˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐,
and that the Belinfante–Rosenfeld formula then implies that
𝐽𝑎 =𝐾𝑏𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav+∇𝑏(𝐾𝑐 ˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐)
whenever the Euler–Lagrange equations are satisfied.
The tensor𝐾𝑐 ˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐 is antisymmetric in𝑎 and𝑏, and this implies that∇𝑎∇𝑏(𝐾𝑐 ˜Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐) = 0. (This
fact, which is true of any antisymmetric tensor, is somewhat nonobvious but purely geometric,
and it is worth working out on your own if it’ s unfamiliar.) The currents𝐽𝑎 and𝐾𝑏𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav therefore
differ by a quantity that is divergence-free. In other words, in the language we used when we
introduced Noether currents,𝐽𝑎 and𝐾𝑏𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav are equivalent conserved currents for the symmetry
arising from flowing along a Killing vector field.
This, finally, is the promised relationship between the gravitational and inertial energy-
momentum tensors. They are not equal in general, just equivalent in the sense just described.
(In a couple simple cases — most obviously for a scalar field, where Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐 = 0 — we will have
equality, but when this happens I think it should essentially be regarded as a coincidence.) Our
𝐽𝑎 is the quantity that arises directly from Noether’ s Theorem, but remember that Noether’ s
Theorem does not have the capacity to choose from among equivalent currents, and so we
would be justified in saying that𝐾𝑏𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav is a Noether current corresponding to our translation
symmetry .
By contrast, the procedure that produced𝑇𝑎𝑏
grav does actually pick out that specific tensor once
the Lagrangian has been specified. For this reason, it is best to think of this object, rather than
anything involving Θ𝑎𝑏 or Σ𝑎𝑏𝑐 , as “the” energy-momentum tensor whenever the distinction
might matter: it is the quantity that serves as a source for gravity and also, in the presence of a
Killing symmetry, it leads to one of the possible quantities that can be used as the corresponding
Noether current.
