===== PAGE 1 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for
Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy
A. Ashtari Esfahani 1, S. Böser 2, N. Buzinsky 3,
M. C. Carmona-Benitez 4, R. Cervantes 1, C. Claessens 1,
L. de Viveiros 4, M. Fertl 2, J. A. Formaggio 3, J. K. Gaison 5,
L. Gladstone 6, M. Grando 5, M. Guigue 5, J. Hartse 1,
K. M. Heeger 7, X. Huyan 5, A. M. Jones 5, K. Kazkaz 8, M. Li 3,
A. Lindman 2, A. Marsteller 1, C. Matthé 2, R. Mohiuddin 6,
B. Monreal 6, E. C. Morrison 5, R. Mueller 4, J. A. Nikkel 7,
E. Novitski 1, N. S. Oblath 5, J. I. Peña 3, W. Pettus 9,
R. Reimann 2, R. G. H. Robertson 1, L. Saldaña 7,§, M. Schram 5,
P. L. Slocum 7, J. Stachurska 3, Y.-H. Sun 6, P. T. Surukuchi 7,
A. B. Telles 7, F. Thomas 2, M. Thomas 5, L. A. Thorne 2,
T. Thümmler 10, L. Tvrznikova 8, W. Van De Pontseele 3,
B. A. VanDevender 1,5, T. E. Weiss 7, T. Wendler 4, E. Zayas 3,
A. Ziegler 4
E-mail: §luis.saldana@yale.edu
1 Center for Experimental Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics and Department of
Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
2 Institute for Physics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany
55099
3 Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA 02139, USA
4 Department of Physics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802,
USA
5 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99354, USA
6 Department of Physics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106,
USA
7 Wright Laboratory, Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA
8 Nuclear and Chemical Sciences, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
Livermore, CA, USA 94550
9 Center for Exploration of Energy and Matter and Department of Physics, Indiana
University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
10 Institute for Astroparticle Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe,
Germany 76021
Abstract. TheobjectiveoftheCyclotronRadiationEmissionSpectroscopy(CRES)
technology is to build precise particle energy spectra. This is achieved by identifying
the start frequencies of charged particle trajectories which, when exposed to an
external magnetic field, leave semi-linear profiles (called tracks) in the time-frequency
arXiv:2402.13256v1  [physics.ins-det]  5 Jan 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 2
plane. Due to the need for excellent instrumental energy resolution in application,
highly efficient and accurate track reconstruction methods are desired. Deep learning
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) - particularly suited to deal with information-
sparse data and which offer precise foreground localization - may be utilized to
extract track properties from measured CRES signals (called events) with relative
computational ease. In this work, we develop a novel machine learning based model
which operates a CNN and a support vector machine in tandem to perform this
reconstruction. A primary application of our method is shown on simulated CRES
signals which mimic those of the Project 8 experiment - a novel effort to extract the
unknown absolute neutrino mass value from a precise measurement of tritiumβ−-
decay energy spectrum. When compared to a point-clustering based technique used
as a baseline, we show a relative gain of 24.1% in event reconstruction efficiency and
comparable performance in accuracy of track parameter reconstruction.
Keywords: neutrino mass, cyclotron radiation, project 8, machine learning, deep
learning, convolutional neural network, unet, support vector machine
Submitted to: Machine Learning: Science and Technology
1. Introduction
Over the past ten years the use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as a machine
learning (ML) method has gained considerable attention in the high energy physics
community for tasks such as particle identification, event reconstruction, and anomaly
detection [1, 2, 3]. Due to reduction in number of fully-connected layers and featuring
translationalandrotationalequivariance, CNNsoriginallydesignedtomimicasimplified
version of the animal visual cortex have become the preferred choice for tackling various
computer vision problems [4]. Of particular interest to this work is their application to
the semantic segmentation of images: assigning a classification label to every pixel via
learned inference for the purposes of object reconstruction. In a CNN, aconvolutional
stepaidsinhighlightinganddetectingspecificaspectsoftheimage, e.g. cornersoredges,
which become more abstract with sequential applications offilters throughout many
layers. The task of finding the optimal set of filters which most accurately performs
the segmentation is relegated to a supervised learning optimization task. With this
approach, hand-engineering of features and hand-tuning of model parameters become
obsolete.
In Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy (CRES) experiments [5, 6, 7], the
goal is to reconstruct the trajectories of charged particles, which are referred to as
tracks. These tracks profile as narrow traces over the frequency and time plane and
are all contained in images called spectrograms - see Figure 1. The CRES procedure
is to accurately identify the track start frequencies and, using the cyclotron motion
relationship given in Eq. (1), precisely reconstruct the energy spectrum of the underlying
physical process. For example, the spectrum of interest could be that of tritiumβ−-
decay electrons for absolute neutrino mass measurements [8] or ofβ±-particles in nuclear

===== PAGE 3 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 3
decays of6He and 19Ne to study chirality-flipping in the weak sector [7]. In the example
spectrogram from the Project 8 experiment† shown in Figure 1, a single tritiumβ−-
decay electron is manifested as a collection of multiple tracks within an event, inter-
spread in frequency by rapid energy losses due to scattering collisions with residual gases
in the apparatus [9]. Traditionally, CRES tracks are reconstructed by first filtering a
spectrogram for bins of high signal-to-noise ratio‡ (SNR) and subsequently applying
point-clustering techniques which look for pre-configured patterns in the data. The
resulting reconstruction model is made robust by tuning a large number of parameters
by hand [10]. When we consider that the experimental sensitivity to neutrino mass
depends on the number of events observed (and therefore reconstructed) [11] and that
the statistical variance on the extracted mass is related to the total number of events
in the observation window byσ2
stat∼Ntot [12], the need for a reconstruction technique
which is both efficient and accurate becomes prominent.
Event Start
Electron Tracks
Jump Due to Scattering
Time (ms)
Frequency - 24 GHz (MHz)
Relative Power (A.U.)
Figure 1: A CRES signal as seen in a spectrogram from the Project 8 experiment. Here, a
single internal conversion electron from 83mKr makes an event consisting of multiple tracks
scattered in frequency due to rapid energy losses from inelastic collisions with residual gases.
Radio-frequency thermal noise is shown as yellow-colored pixels of relatively low power. This
figure was filtered to make the event features more visible as foreground.
In this work, we present an alternative approach to CRES signal reconstruction
which utilizes the power of ML-based modules, principally the CNN, to rid the need
for pre-engineering of features and parameters in the analysis. Additionally, we provide
a methodology with demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in segmentation tasks
over a large number of applications [13]. Nevertheless, despite the relatively simple
†https://www.project8.org/
‡The SNR is defined as the deposited power divided by the average power of all noise bins in the
image.

===== PAGE 4 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 4
geometric features of CRES tracks, segmentation becomes challenging in the presence
of radio-frequency (RF) thermal noise which serves as a background covering more than
99.99% of all pixels in a single spectrogram on average. The immense class-imbalance
problem requires a comprehensive model which is not only accurate but also efficiently
rejects false positives. The latter problem becomes highly prominent in the presence of
very short CRES tracks of low SNR, which may be easily mistaken for random correlated
noise fluctuations of high SNR and vice versa.
The novel reconstruction model presented in this work is based on a CNN, acting as
a track-pixel segmentation step, and a support vector machine (SVM), acting as a track-
object false-positive veto, working in tandem. This marks the first step towards a fully
ML-based reconstruction approach for CRES-type experiments. In particular, we focus
our application to CRES signal profiles as observed in the Project 8 experiment and
perform a validation comparison to the existing baseline reconstruction algorithm over
simulated data. We proceed by first discussing the signal acquisition and baseline event
reconstruction used in the Project 8 experiment in Section 2. Section 3 describes the new
ML-based reconstruction method developed for CRES events and Section 4 outlines the
generation of simulated data for training and validation. The optimization performed
on both reconstruction methods is described in Section 5. Section 6 summarizes the
results from both techniques and the improvements in efficiency achieved by the ML
approach.
2. CRES Event Reconstruction
CRES works by reconstructing energies from the cyclotron radiation emitted by charged
particles when subjected to an external magnetic field [5]. For example, in the case of
tritium β−-decay (T→ 3He+ +e− +νe), the semi-relativistic daughter electrons carry
kinetic energyEkin and emit cyclotron radiation with frequency
fc = 1
2π
|e|B
me +Ekin/c2 (1)
whereme ande are the electron’s mass and charge respectively, andB is the magnitude
of the applied magnetic field. This relationship allows for reconstruction ofEkin via
frequency sampling once the magnetic field is known [5]. Due to conservation of energy
and momentum, the mass of the daughter neutrino is extracted by precision analysis of
the spectrum near the tritium endpoint (Q≃ 18.6 keV), where the effect of the massive
neutrino on the spectral shape is maximal [12].
For purposes of neutrino mass measurement, the Project 8 experiment sources
electrons viaβ−-decay from molecular tritium and via internal conversion from83mKr;
the latter only used for energy calibration. Both the source and electrons are confined
in a cylindrical waveguide and subjected to an axial ∼ 1 T field produced by an
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) magnet. Additional current-carrying coils are
wound around the waveguide to produce magnetic field gradients of O(mT) which

===== PAGE 5 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 5
serve as “walls” for axial magnetic trapping. The resulting emitted cyclotron radiation
is directed into a radio-frequency (RF) antenna receiver chain made up of low-noise
amplifiers among additional components [10]. A picture of the experiment alongside a
schematic of the detector can be seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: In Phase II of the Project 8 experiment, a cylindrical waveguide, which confines both
source gas and daughter electrons, is placed inside the bore of an NMR magnet that produces
a background∼ 1 T field necessary to elicit cyclotron motion. Additional electron trapping
coils are wound around the waveguide which aid in creating custom-profile magnetic traps.
The emitted cyclotron radiation travels through the upper waveguide window into a chain of
low-noise amplifiers (among other components) to be sampled and reconstructed. Schematic
and photographs provided by the Project 8 experiment.
For an electron emitted near the tritiumβ−-decay endpoint, the cyclotron radiation
has a frequency of approximately 26 GHz. The raw signal received by the antenna chain
is down-mixed, filtered, and sampled by a ROACH2 [14] digitizer which performs a
Fourier transform to extract frequency information [15]. The data acquisition software
is triggered in the presence of high power bins in the frequency-domain and the original
raw time series is subsequently saved to disk for offline event reconstruction.
The time series data from the antennas consists of a CRES signal superimposed
onto an RF noise background. In order to extract the signal information from this, a
series of offline short-time Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) are performed which, when
stacked, result in a spectrogram describing the evolution of the frequency profile over
time (see Figure 1). A generic CRES event consists of one or multiple tracks separated
by jumps in frequency, due to energy losses from scattering off residual gas molecules§,
while the noise background appears as a random distribution of power spectral density.
§The sampled frequency is an average over many axial trajectories within the magnetic trap, so at
an instant collision, the spectrogram shows an energy loss as a discontinuous jump in frequency.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 6
In the absence of pile-up and Doppler-shifted sidebands [9, 16], the energy of the event is
directly extracted from the reconstructed start frequency of the first track in time. It is
for this type of CRES image to which the application of our new technique is developed.
2.1. Project 8 Baseline Reconstruction
In Project 8, reconstruction of CRES events from spectrograms has thus far relied
on point-clustering based approaches such as extensions of DB-SCAN [17]. A robust
clustering technique dubbed the Sequential Track Finder [18, 19] has been developed
to reconstruct both 83mKr and tritium events and has been successfully used to build
the first CRES tritium spectrum and extract a neutrino mass upper limit [8]. In the
following we briefly summarize the baseline track and event reconstruction strategy
leaving additional details to [8, 10].
The first step in reconstruction is to scale and normalize the power deposited in each
frequency-time bin by subtracting the average noise amplitude and dividing the result
by the variance of the noise in that frequency slice over all time bins. The outcome
is a frequency-independent intensity measure (termed the normalized power spectral
density) which is used as a filter, allowing only those above a configured minimum
threshold to remain. The resulting filtered spectrogram is scanned over increasing time
slices and track objects are created as lines for all groupings of bins that meet proximity-
basedconfiguredconstraints. Trackcandidatesarefinallyeitherkeptordiscardedifthey
respectively obey or fail further frequency- and time-gap tolerances set by the user.
Every surviving track has its start and/or endpoint sequentially discarded until
the respective bin SNR exceeds a minimum “trimming” threshold; for this analysis,
the threshold was pre-configured to SNR= 6. To fix actual tracks which have been
erroneously identified by the algorithm into multiple sub-tracks, a clustering technique
is further employed at the track-level to merge two or more of them only if certain
mutual conditions are met e.g. similarity in track slope or overlaps frequency and time.
Finally, a straight line is fitted to each remaining candidate in the spectrogram and
multiple of these are grouped into an event following a head-to-tail matching in time
between frequency scatters. The resulting first track in time designated as the start of
the event.
In order to control the false positive reconstruction rate, a further cut on normalized
power spectral density is applied at the event level: a minimum threshold is set to
dynamically vary depending on the number of tracks in the event and the number
of bins in the event’s first track. Threshold values are lessened when the first track
consists of more bins and is followed by many scattered tracks, effectively giving higher
true positive confidence to a reconstructed event if there is evidence that it is more
spatially dense (both locally and globally). As will be described later, control over the
false positive event rate via these thresholds allows us to tune the baseline algorithm
and perform a direct comparison to the ML model.
In total, the baseline reconstruction consists of 29 configurable parameters whose

===== PAGE 7 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 7
values are manually set and optimally inferred from analysis of: the distributions of
average power in events’ first tracks, the total number of false events reconstructed from
noise-only data, and a “target” false event rate among others.
3. Machine Learning Model for Event Reconstruction
In this section we describe a new event reconstruction model whose backbone is the
application of a CNN for track segmentation and an SVM which serves as a false positive
veto. The motivation to employ a CNN-based deep learning approach described in
Sec. 1, plus the demonstrated achievements such class of models offer including highly-
accurate localization of foreground images, robustness against noise, and relative ease
of optimization given commercially available hardware [13], make the ML technique
a strong potential candidate for CRES signal reconstruction. An illustration of the
complete proposed model chain is shown in Figure 3 and its submodules described in
the following text. Discussion of the generation and properties of the simulated data to
be used for training and validation will be left to Section 4.
Machine Learning Based Analysis
False Positive Veto 
(Support Vector Machine)
Cyclotron Frequency 
from Event Properties Neutrino Mass Analysis
Baseline AnalysisLinear Pixel Clustering
Tracks
Splitting into Images
Images
Semantic Segmentation
(U-Net)
Filtered Tracks
Event Building & Filtering
Event BuildingElectron Events
Track Trimming
True Tracks
Trimmed Tracks
Tracks
Pixel Filtering by SNR
(Discriminator)
Filtered Spectrogram
Time Series Fourier Transform
Raw Spectrogram
Track Trimming
Trimmed Tracks
Track Filtering
Figure 3: A modular illustration of the proposed ML-based model for CRES event
reconstruction (right dashed blue box) versus the existing baseline approach (left dashed green
box) as applied in the Project 8 experiment.

===== PAGE 8 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 8
3.1. Spectrogram Segmentation
A typical CRES event in the Project 8 Phase II experimental setup roughly occupies
a frequency span of 24 MHz and is fully contained within a 21 ms window of
time. In this space, pixels belonging to track signals constitute less than 0.01% of
the spectrogram image on average¶, revealing a strong class-imbalanced classification
problem with respect to the noise-filled background. To accurately segment these
data-sparse images, we employ a deeper variant of the CNN U-Net architecture, first
proposed in 2015 for biomedical imaging of neuronal structures in stacks of electron
microscopy images [20]; see our model schematic in Figure 4. The U-Net architecture
has been previously shown to produce very accurate segmentation with detailed spatial
resolution in class-imbalanced problems [21, 22, 23, 24]. The key to success in achieving
high spatial resolution is the novel sharing of “skip connections” from its encoder
side (convolutional feature extraction) to itsdecoder side (spatial amplification with
transpose convolutions).
In our application, the U-Net inputs are unpadded single-channel simulated CRES
images of size 512 by 512 pixels (or 12.5 MHz by 21 ms) where the intensity of a pixel is
the normalized power spectral density deposited in each frequency-time bin. Each input
is accompanied by an equally-sized single-channel array of ground truth labels where
0 labels background and 1 labels track pixels. The pixel intensities are transformed to
follow a standard normal distribution (standard scaled). It is important to note that the
utilization of a CNN for track reconstruction advantageously offers an architecture that
remainsunaffectedbythegeometricalformoftheinputCRESsignal(spectrogramswith
single or multiple-events, semi-linear or even curved tracks∥) or the dimensionality of
the input image (2- or 3-dimensional). The only model parameters which would require
any alteration are the values of internal operations which are customized to produce a
desired output shape and size. This is an advantage not present in the baseline approach
whose reconstruction steps and parameters assume a very specific signal form.
In the U-Net architecture, the encoding arm makes use of the same basic operation
many times over:
Encoder Unit(N filters)≡
Convolution×N
z }| {
3× 3, stride 1 ▶
Convolution×N
z }| {
3× 3, stride 1 ▶
Max-Pooling
z }| {
2× 2, stride 2, where
▶≡ ReLU→ Batch Norm.→ Dropout.
(2)
¶This ratio could be even lower depending on the size of the acquisition window, which could span
a space significantly larger than a single CRES event.
∥CRES tracks featuring a prominent degree of geometric curvature may appear when charged
particles emit cyclotron radiation at a resonant frequency of the confinement apparatus (such as in a
cavity). This results in a significant loss of power over a prolonged period of time which changes the
frequency of the signal continuously over time within a small window.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 9
Figure 4: An illustration of the deeper U-Net variant used for CRES signal segmentation.
Blocks in black represent input layers (either images or feature maps) while those in white
their respective concatenated versions. Input spatial dimensions are specified by vertically
aligned integers (squared) while layer dimensions by horizontally aligned integers. The group
of operations on the left side of the “U” defines the encoder while the group on the right defines
the decoder.
Similarly, the decoding arm uses:
Decoder Unit(N filters)≡
Transpose Conv.×N
z }| {
2× 2, stride 2 ▶ Concat. ▶
Convolution×N
z }| {
3× 3, stride 1 ▶
Convolution×N
z }| {
3× 3, stride 1.
(3)
Readers unfamiliar with ML operations may refer to textbooks such as [25] for
terminology. In our implementation, both arms meet after the application of six encoder
units at a spatial resolution of 8 by 8 pixels with 1024 feature maps. This “middle”
portion furthermore consists of two more convolutions of the same type as Eq. (2)
without the max-pooling step. All filter weights are He initialized [26] in order to
constrain the hidden-layer variance to unity following the ReLU activation. While CRES
tracks are essentially “featureless” when compared to neuronal structures, they are also
confined to a very small area of the entire image. Therefore, we use additional encoding
units to achieve a higher receptive field of our small-range pixel structures at the expense

===== PAGE 10 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 10
of extracting some number of redundant filters. The depth of the network (number of
layers) will be treated as an architectural hyperparameter in Section 5.1.
During training, we found it necessary to apply batch normalization after the
ReLU activation in ▶ (as in Eq. (2) and Eq. (3)) in order for the losses to suitably
converge. The addition of dropout layers allowed us to introduce regularization which
improved generalization and avoided overfitting; optimization results will be discussed in
Section 5.1. In the final steps of this module, feature maps are put through a convolution
with two segmenting filters: one for track and one for background pixels, making the
prediction of the network a 2-channel image of size 512 by 512 pixels with logits as
intensities. To produce the desired segmentation mask, we apply a softmax function
followed by an argmax function that selects one class per pixel following the highest
probability. The resulting 1-channel mask may be directly compared to the respective
ground truth mask for accuracy.
3.2. Building a Loss Function for Segmentation
Within confinement in the waveguide and magnetic trap, CRES electrons kept at a
nominal pressure of 1.6− 2.6× 10−6 mbar often scatter off residual H2 molecules,
the leading source of background gas in the experiment; for further details on full
experimental gas composition see [10]. This process incurs a minimum electron energy
loss of approximately 11 eV (0.60 MHz), resulting in a wide inter-track separation of
23 pixels. Because of the large gap between foreground objects, we discard the border
definition and weighting scheme of the original architecture [20]. Instead, due to the
large class imbalance, we use a pixel weight
w(ri) = 1
percentage ofC(ri)∈ Image (4)
for the loss whereC(ri) is the ground truth class label of pixeli at position r in the
image. The weight is added to the pixel-wise softmax cross entropy loss in order to
suppress penalty bias from the statistically boosted background.
A further class imbalance is present in CRES spectrograms which is due to varying
track topology within events. Recall that a given spectrogram may contain an event
consisting of a single track or one made up of multiple scattered tracks. Generally, longer
tracks are easier to reconstruct than short ones due to the consistency of the narrow
signal profile over time, regardless of SNR. Conversely, segmentation is more challenging
for short tracks which may resemble clumps of randomly adjacent noise pixels in the
other extreme. In light of this prominent feature variation within events/spectrograms,
efficient training demands that the loss account for penalizing misclassification of hard-
to-classify pixels more severely than easy-to-classify pixels. Thus, we introduce a focal
modulation term [27] to define a compound total pixel-loss over two classes per each
image:

===== PAGE 11 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 11
Loss =−
X
ri∈Image
(1−p)γw(ri) log(p) +pγw(ri) log(1−p) (5)
wherep is the class probability for track pixels (foreground),w(ri) is defined in Eq. (4),
and the sum is over all pixelsi at location r in the image. The new hyperparameterγ
controls the shift in penalty due to the imbalance, with higher values suppressing the
loss for confident predictions (p≫ 1) and boosting it for uncertain ones (p≪ 1).
3.3. Track Instance Segmentation and Trimming
We produce track objects from the predicted segmentation masks with the use of
scikit-image [28]. Specifically, we employ the morphological operations of themeasure
submodule to group connected pixel areas (nearest neighbor pixels in all directions)
into track instances, obtain their coordinates, and fit a line to each using a least squares
estimation. In order to account for over-coverage segmentation of foreground in the
direction parallel to the track (from which the start time is drawn), we introduce the
same trimming procedure and trimming threshold as the baseline approach for both
ends (see Section 2.1). The result is a reduction of start time over-coverage from
approximately 3.5 pixels to less than 0.1 pixel. The start frequency of each track is
then calculated using the intersection of the fitted line with the start time bin.
3.4. False Positive Veto and Event Reconstruction
A false positive is a model inference which erroneously labels and groups adjacent
background pixels as a track. The mispredictions encountered largely encompass the
short track regime where occasional patches of noise with relatively high SNR resemble
true short tracks. Physically, the length of a track is constrained by the gas pressure
within the confining waveguide: higher pressure leads to frequent particle scattering
and, thus, shorter signal duration. The converse occurs for lower pressures, resulting in
longer tracks. In Project 8 Phase II, the gas pressure was optimized to balance both
the number of detected decay events and the scattering rate controlling the number
of electron-residual gas collisions [10]. Under this scheme, the shortest tracks allowed
could be as small as 3 pixels in length. In our simulation of training images (described in
Section 4), we also allowed for events with equally short tracks. In light of this inclusion,
the number of false positive tracks predicted by the semantic + instance segmentation
modules averaged to about 1 false track every 13 images.
To lower the false track prediction rate, we introduce a radial-basis kernel SVM
trained to serve as a false positive veto. The input to the SVM are single track objects
representedbya4-dimensionalvectorcomposedof: trackslope, trackSNR,tracklength,
and start time. In general, the use of SNR and track length as discriminating features
greatly improves the classification accuracy for long tracks with sharp profiles. The
slope also acts as a powerful discriminatory feature for those segmented tracks which
do not follow physical constraints: a true CRES track must have a positive slope while

===== PAGE 12 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 12
a false track may be flat, vertical, or have a negative incline. Additional use of the
start time allows for removal of false positives found near or at the vertical edges of the
image with all such regions strictly excluded during simulation. The SVM veto module
is able to greatly reduce the false positive track rate to 1 false track every 233 images∗∗.
Full events are then reconstructed from remaining tracks using the same head-to-tail
matching constraints as the baseline approach described in Section 2.1. The first track
in time is taken as the start of the event.
4. Simulation of CRES Events for Optimization
A significant advantage of using the simulated data described below for training and
testing a model is the confident knowledge of ground truth properties. To avoid
simulating CRES events with traditional particle-tracking calculations which demand
great computational power and processing times, we developed a simpler and more
efficient parametric-based Monte Carlo approach within the Locust software package
[29]. The Locust software models the response of an antenna and receiver chain to time-
varying electromagnetic fields with the use of internal classes called “generators”. For
our application, the newly developedLMCFakeTrackSignalGenerator produces a CRES
event of desired structure and duration by sampling individual track parameters from
a number of different probability density functions (PDFs) at run time. For example,
lengths of tracks within an event are drawn as samples from an exponential distribution
with configured mean. A thermal noise floor may also be added to the simulation
by drawing random voltages from a normal distribution of configured mean power.
The combined signal plus background are processed through a simulated Project 8-like
antenna module, RF receiver, and data acquisition chain to produce a raw time series
and then a spectrogram. Tens of thousands of simulated spectrograms may be produced
within just a few CPU hours.
4.1. Validation of Simulated Data
To obtain a physically realistic SNR distribution from which we simulate signal intensity,
we first perform a one-shot particle-tracking simulation with Kassiopeia [30] of 17.8
keV 83mKr electrons in a harmonic magnetic trap of 1.4 mT depth, a relatively deep
magnetic field trap configuration which increases effective volume for electron trapping
[8]. Electrons are given random starting positions along detector boundaries and pitch
angles of θ≥ 89◦ to remain consistent with trapping limitations††. Particle-tracking
occurs over a duration of40.96 µs (the exact length of one spectrogram time bin) from
which the incident electromagnetic fields are mixed and sampled using Locust. A fixed
gain scales the resulting power, and the SNR distribution with approximate mean SNR
∗∗Further improvement in false positive rate is seen with the addition of the event-builder module
which completes the reconstruction sequence (see Table 4).
††The pitch angle is the angle between the electron’s momentum and the magnetic field direction at
the bottom of the trap and directly constraints magnetic trapping.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 13
= 3 is finally retrieved relative to the noise floor. Note that this SNR distribution is
only used to configure the power of first tracks in Locust-simulated events.
For subsequent tracks, LMCFakeTrackSignalGenerator internally draws pitch
angles from the electron-H2 inelastic scattering differential distribution of Rudd [31] and
the scattered track power is calculated using the power-pitch angle relation given by the
phenomenological CRES model [9]. As the condition for trapping relies on a minimum
pitch angle value, the scattering distribution also implicitly controls the total number of
tracks per event through the scattering scale parameterG3, a fitting parameter of the
cross section model [31] to be inferred from the data. The size of the frequency jump
between scatters is dictated by losses in energy taken from oscillator strength data [32]
together with a Bethe inelastic-scattering theoretical model for low energies (< 50 eV).
Extrapolation to arbitrarily high energy losses (> 50 eV) is done using the model from
Aseev [33].
We tune the remaining simulation parameters to match realistic events by studying
the track and event properties of 6300 real Phase II 17.8 keV83mKr electrons events
born within a 1.4 mT-deep quadrupole-harmonic trap [18]. Using the standard baseline
method, reconstructed track properties such as slope and length were fit to their
respective statistical distributions and the relevant moments were extracted for use in
simulation (see Table 1). One important point to note is that the resulting reconstructed
mean number of tracks per event is not expected to reflect the true underlying physical
value since very short/low-SNR tracks are often missed during reconstruction. To find
the true underlying number, multiple sets of tracks were simulated while varying the
scattering scale parameterG3. The number of reconstructed tracks per event was then
compared to the reference, real, data until the value ofG3 = 0.0064 was found to be
optimal in matching both. With this, the simulated average number of tracks per event
is 5.1.
Table 1: Simulated event properties’ constraints including source PDFs where applicable.
Values were chosen in order to simulate data which matches real Project 8 Phase II CRES
events.
Parameter PDF Value(s)
Start Frequency Uniform Between 25.9060 and 25.9065 GHz
First Track Power Exponential Drawn from Kassiopeia simulation
Scattering Pitch Angle (1 + cos2(dθ)/G2
3)−1 [31] G3 = 0.0064
Start Time Uniform Between 50 µs and 13 ms
Track Length Exponential λ−1 = 0.18 ms
Track Slope Normal µ = 0.3523 MHz/ms
σ = 0.0545 MHz/ms
No. of Events per Simulation Fixed 1
Magnetic Field Fixed B = 0.9578 T
Thermal Noise Power Spectral Density Normal µ = 3.0× 10−14 W/Hz
σ = 1 W/Hz

===== PAGE 14 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 14
Figure 5: Comparison of average SNR (left) and max SNR (right) between simulated and real
tracks showing the equivalence between simulation and reality [18]. Accompanying p-values
for the Shapiro-Wilkes test on residuals,p(SW ), are shown in the lower legends.
Equivalence between simulated and real events is shown by comparing a set of
92,400 generated fake events to 6,257 real events taken from 17.8 keV83mKr electron
data. Most relevant to the use of spatially small convolutional filters in the ML-based
approach is the validation of realistic SNR fluctuations along a simulated track. In
Figure 5 we show a comparison of the average SNR and maximum SNR of all tracks in
reconstructed real and simulated events. Applying the Shapiro-Wilkes test [34] to the
residuals, we cannot rule out the equivalence between simulated and real data at 95%
significance (p≫ 0.05, see figure legend).
4.2. Creation and Selection of Training and Test Data
With the simulated module vetted, we create a training set for model optimization
by running two concurrent Locust simulations per event: one including noise and
one without any noise. Besides the absence of noise in the latter, the two simulated
events remain identical as long as the same random seed is configured at run time.
Spectrograms are produced from Locust voltage time series using the Katydid software
[35] with each spectrogram measuring 4096 by 512 pixels (100 MHz by21 ms) with
physical dimensions of 24.41 kHz by 40.96 µs per pixel. As the U-Net architecture
expects square inputs‡‡, we vertically split each spectrogram into eight512× 512 pixel
square sections. Although the vast majority of events are confined to a single image, we
keep track of the ordered image index (0-7) in order to correctly identify the true start
of the event after classification. We are ensured that the first track in the event is not
split in two by confining the simulated event start frequency to a range of∼ 0.5 MHZ
(or∼ 20 pixels) within the first square§§. Images without at least a single track are
‡‡Arbitrarily large inputs are allowed at the cost of additional computational power for which tiling
or clipping strategies are usually employed [20, 24].
§§This effect does not alter the efficiency calculation in Section 6.3 but may have an effect on the
track property errors. As will be seen in the results of Section 6.2, no significant bias was detected.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 15
discarded for segmentation training purposes.
The noiseless versions of simulated events are used only to create segmentation
ground truth labels by assigning a value of 0 (background pixel) or 1 (track pixel) to
those which fall below or are above a minimum intensity threshold respectively; a limit
of 10% the maximum pixel intensity in the image was found to be suitable for labeling.
However, we found that allowing the ML model to train on pixels from very short tracks
of equally low SNR introduced a strong bias that favored acceptance of false positives
and false negatives. To account for this, we only select pixels from tracks with overall
relativelystrongsignalprofilesfortraining. Consideringthattheaveragebinnoisepower
spectral density follows a gamma distribution forN bins such thatXnoise∼ Γ(x;N, 1/N)
for random variable x, in order to see less than one false track in the entire set of
training images we must have SF(Γ(x;N, 1/N)) < 1/Ntot where SF is the survival
function and Ntot = ( Locust event-simulation time)× (Number of frequency bins)×
(Number of training images). This implies that x > SF−1(Γ(1/Ntot,N, 1/N)), giving
us a useful SNR vs. track length relationship to use as a minimum dynamic threshold
when selecting training points.
With the above parameters in place, we finally simulate 40,194 training images
(51,401 tracks), 10,413 validation images (13,196 tracks), and 10,575 test images (13,522
tracks). This constitutes an approximate 80%/20% split between train and validation
(together) and test sets. An example of a training image is shown in Figure 6 where in
the ground truth mask white represents track pixels and black represents background
pixels. For the pixel weight map, only the relative values between classes are important
and not the absolute scale (see Eq. (4)). The spectrograms, masks, and maps are stored
as 2-dimensional arrays in HDF5 files for ease of interfacing with U-Net code. The
pre-training-thresholding “original label” pixel masks are kept in order to compare the
predicted track objects (not segmentation) to the simulated ground-truth.
Figure 6: An example of a training image (simulated spectrogram) including its original
mask labels, training label, and weight map. The original labels serve as ground-truth for
comparisons with predicted segmentations and track objects while the training labels and
weight maps are used only during model optimization. The scales of x- and y-axes are (in)
pixels.

===== PAGE 16 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 16
5. Optimization of Reconstruction Models
InthissectionwedescribetrainingoftheMLmodelandthestrategytotunethebaseline
model for comparison.
5.1. Machine Learning Optimization
The implementation of the architecture in Figure 4 was written in Python with the
Tensorflow library [36] using AdaDelta as the optimizer. All optimization was conducted
on two NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPUs running in parallel and done separately for the U-Net
and SVM. Optimal hyperparameters for the U-Net were found via a randomized grid-
search using MLflow [37] with the following strategy: define an instance of the for each
tuple of sampled hyperparameters, optimize over the entire training set, and quantify
its success over the validation set using the pixel-wiseF1 score. Starting with 50 U-Net
instances, the number was halved after every epoch by keeping only those with highest
F1 scores. The final, optimal, hyperparameters are listed in Table 2.
Table 2: Optimal hyperparameters for U-Net and SVM modules including range of values
explored and/or statistical moments defining the sampling distributions.
Hyperparameter Module Range Explored/Stat. Moment Optimal Value
Kernel Size U-Net {3, 5, 7} 3
γ (modulation factor) U-Net {1, 2, 3} 2
Dropout Rate U-Net {0.0, 0.1, 0.2} 0.0
Network Depth U-Net {4, 5, 6, 7} 6
C SVM Exponential, λ = 0.01 130.8
γ (radial-basis) SVM Exponential, λ = 10 0.054
Intheaveragesimulatedtrackregime(0.18msinlengthand0.35MHz/msinslope),
a track crosses a width of about 3 pixels in height by 5 pixels in length. Here, the small
kernel size (3) and large number of encoder units (6) use low-resolution feature maps
to find the smallest possible signals which would otherwise be overtly- or multiply-
contained by maps with much bigger receptive fields. A dropout rate of zero makes
sense given the high class-imbalance as variance amplification is not expected to improve
accuracy when there is> 99% background-pixel abundance. Perhaps more telling of the
nature of CRES events, a modulation factor ofγ = 2 tells us that a steep penalty-shift
strategy is a necessity in order to overcome the large differences in track-composition
between different events.
Withtheoptimalhyperparametersfixed, modeltrainingwasperformedwithamini-
batch of two images and took five epochs to complete utilizing approximately 79 hours
of wall-time with 45.06 GB of memory. The development of the training and validation
losses, as well as the validationF1 score can be seen in Figure 7 where we employ an
exponentially-moving average to track the overall behavior in light of the small batch

===== PAGE 17 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 17
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Training Step
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
log (Loss)
Training, Smoothed ( = 0.90)
Validation, Smoothed ( = 0.90)
Epoch
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Training Step
0.99800
0.99825
0.99850
0.99875
0.99900
0.99925
0.99950
0.99975Validation F1 Score
Smoothed ( = 0.90)
Epoch
Figure 7: Development of the training (orange) and validation (blue) losses (left) and validation
F1 score (right) over the optimization procedure. An exponentially weighted moving average
(smoothed withα = 0.9) is also displayed.
size. In the figure, we see rapid progress in loss optimization andF1 score during the
first epoch, with subsequent epochs only featuring fractional gains. This is indicative of
the ease with which the U-Net learns to classify background pixels as a result of their
abundance, while very slowly succeeding in classifying the few track pixels present in the
images. As a measure of robustness, we build a ROC curve and extract the area under
the curve (AUC) as well. The final validation metrics after optimization are:F1 score
= 0.9996 and AUC= 0.9996, representing a model with excellent classification accuracy
and stability. For the test set of 10,575 images, segmentation took approximately 38
hours, i.e less than 0.22 seconds per image. Mirroring the strong validation result, the
test F1 score was 0.9986.
The SVM false track veto module was implemented in Python with the scikit-
learn library [38], trained with 9,468 tracks, and tested using 4,059 tracks. The SVM
hyperparameters C and γ were obtained using a 2-fold cross-validation strategy with a
randomized grid search and optimally found to beC = 130.8 and γ = 0.054 with F1
score = 0.9689, see Table 2. At testing, the final SVM model reached anF1 score of
0.9680 and an AUC of 0.9868. The hyperparameters values represent a model which
features a balanced variance (C≫ 1) and smooth classification boundary (γ≪ 1).
5.2. Baseline Tuning
Since the ML-based method is not yet able to reach the zero false event rate reported
in the Project 8 Phase II neutrino mass analysis [8], we tune the baseline parameters so
that its false positive event rate matches that resulting from the ML-method. As shown
in Section 6.3, this allows us to measure efficiency by comparing the accompanying true
positive event rates.
All baseline parameter configurations related to pixel clustering and track
identificationwerefixedtobethesameasinPhaseIItrackandeventreconstruction[39].

===== PAGE 18 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 18
For the remaining configuration, the minimum power thresholds for different number
of tracks and first-track number of bins need to be determined so that the number of
false positive events is adjusted to the desired value. For this, false positives events are
divided in groups based on the number of pixels in the first track and the total number
of tracks per event. First, test data was processed with the ML method to find the
number of false events reconstructed. Then, we manually tuned the the baseline power
thresholds per group until we achieved the same false event in the same set of data.
Becausetherewasjustonefalseeventdetectedusingeachmethod(seenextsection),
the false event rates shown here are only approximately equivalent. Since this study
serves as a proof of concept comparison between the ML and baseline models, we did
not pursue more intensive tuning of the baseline method that would have allowed for a
more reobust comparison.
6. Results and Comparison to Baseline Approach
Since the event building procedure is equivalent in both reconstruction approaches, we
first investigate the results of the track reconstruction modules on the test set of images,
comparing both to the ground truth and to each other. Then, we move on to compare
event reconstruction results on the same test set and focus on efficiencies as a final
measure of performance. As a visual reference for the ML model results, we display four
reconstructed events from the test set in Figure 8.
6.1. True and False Positive Tracks
Since the track object prediction from the ML model is a region of connected pixels, we
define a true positive as a track whose pixel area has a Jaccard index [40] greater than
0 with respect to the same pixel area in the ground truth mask. Conversely, a false
positive is a track whose Jaccard index is exactly zero. However, in order to discern
morphological discrepancy between under- and over-coverage cases, we introduce the
mismatch index between images (or sets of pixels)A and B:
M(A,B )≡



1−|A∩B|/|A| if B under-coversA
0 if A and B perfectly match
|A∩B|/|B| if B over-coversA.
(6)
with range (−1, 1), giving under-coverage a negative score, a perfect match a score
of zero, and over-coverage a positive score. Within the set of true positives the
majority (approximately 62%) have a positive mismatch index with average 0.49 and
the rest a negative mismatch index with average -0.32. This tells us that most ML
track predictions tend to be larger than the ground truth with further investigation
revealing that the over-coverage is in the direction normal to the track slope. In general,
predictions hold an average width about 1.5 times larger than the truth (see Figure 9 as
example). The under-coverage cases are almost all completely due to trimming the track

===== PAGE 19 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 19
ends (see next section), which uses the same pre-configured parameter as the baseline.
In the future, the over-coverage seen here could possibly be improved by the inclusion
of a Lagrange multiplier constraint for track width in a track-object based loss.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 20
0
100
200
300
400
500
Simulated Spectrogram
 Track Ground Truth
 Predicted Mask
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
100
200
300
400
500
0 200 400
0
100
200
300
400
500
0 200 400
 0 200 400
Figure 8: Four simulated CRES events (one per row) alongside their ML model reconstruction.
Reconstruction is performed on single and multi track events (first and second examples)
with precise localization. In the third example, the true event start is correctly reconstructed
although the last track in the event is missed. The last example shows the reconstruction of an
event start (first track) that is shorter than ground truth. In general, all reconstructed tracks
are slightly wider than ground truth. The scales of x- and y-axes are (in) pixels.

===== PAGE 21 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 21
180 200 220
380
390
400
410
420
430
440
450
460
Ground Truth
180 200 220
U-Net+SVM
Figure 9: An example comparison between a ML reconstructed track (right) and its respective
ground truth mask (left). Most ML track predictions tend to over-cover the truth mask in the
direction normal to the track, resulting in “wider” tracks. On the other hand, the trimming
procedure tends to over-cut tracks in the parallel direction, making them shorter; see Section
6.2 for quantitiative comparison. The scales of x- and y-axes are (in) pixels.
Tracks resulting from the baseline reconstruction are one-dimensional lines fitted to
individual pixels. Thus, we define a rectangular bounding box with the reconstructed
track as its diagonal and compare this region to the same area in the truth mask. If there
is any overlap in the box region with a ground truth track (also with its own bounding
box), the reconstructed track is labeled a true positive. A false positive results when
there is no overlap between masks. Due to the same trimming procedure, the baseline
tracks also tend to be shorter in the direction parallel to the track slope.
6.2. Absolute Track Property Errors
We quantify the accuracy and precision of both reconstruction methods by inspecting
the differences in reconstructed track propertyPi (e.g. track slope, start time) between
true positive track prediction and ground truth with the directional error
ϵPi =Pi,prediction−Pi,ground truth, (7)
keeping the sign in order to capture over- or under-estimation. Table 3 shows the mean
error for all track properties of importance, alongside their sample standard deviation.
Recall that the track start and end times are directly defined by the first and last
(horizontal) pixel bins, each bin with a physical-equivalent size of40.96 µs. Therefore,
to one standard deviation, the start time error from the ML reconstruction can be as
much as 2 pixels, whereas the baseline error can vary up to 4 pixels. To the same
precision, the ML end time error can be as much as 2 pixels while the baseline error
can be as much as 6 pixels. Taking the sign of the errors into account, we conclude that
both reconstructions produce tracks which start too late and end too early, resulting in
a negative mean track length error. However, the baseline track length errors remain
larger (up to about 8 pixels) than those of the ML method (up to about 3 pixels).

===== PAGE 22 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 22
Table 3: Reconstructed mean track parameter errors ± one sample standard deviation,
comparing the ML to baseline reconstruction results.
Track Parameter U-Net+SVM Error Baseline Error
Start Time 0.003± 0.082 ms 0.057± 0.093 ms
End Time - 0.002± 0.078 ms - 0.101± 0.157 ms
Track Length - 0.005± 0.113 ms - 0.158± 0.179 ms
Track Slope - 0.013± 0.079 MHz/ms 0.002± 0.066 MHz/ms
Start Frequency 0.003± 0.031 MHz 0.020± 0.034 MHz
End Frequency - 0.002± 0.027 MHz - 0.037± 0.058 MHz
For the track slope, Table 3 shows that the baseline makes a better estimate. First,
we can attribute this to over-coverage of tracks in the direction normal to their profile
by the ML model, which results in a thicker track width. This latter degree of freedom is
not present in the 1-dimensional reconstruction approach of the baseline method. Note
that the start and end frequencies, which are directly determined from intersections of
the slope with the respective start and end time bins, have errors which represent a
mixture of both time and slope quantities. Second, the baseline analysis makes explicit
use of the pixel SNR as a weight for slope regression while the ML approach does not;
this adjustment minimizes the error by boosting the importance of true-positive-like
pixels over true-negative-pixels in the fit.
Although the mean slope error is significantly lower in the baseline method, the
much smaller mean error on the start and end times in the ML-analysis are enough
to produce more accurate estimates of the track frequencies. For start frequencies, the
mean errors (alongside standard errors of the mean) areµML = (0.003±0.002) MHz and
µBaseline = (0.020± 0.002) MHz, showing an almost order of magnitude improvement in
accuracy. For precision, however, we look at the standard deviations (and their standard
errors): σML = (0.031± 0.001) MHz andσBaseline = (0.034± 0.001) MHz. Recalling that
a frequency bin is about 24 kHz across, these results constitute an average offset of 1.3
(ML) to 1.4 pixels (baseline), indicating that both methods tend to reconstruct tracks
further along the vertical in the image rather than earlier (i.e at higher frequencies).
Ultimately, the mean start frequency error results in a magnetic field miscalibration
which affects both 83mKr and tritium data. This effect incurs an energy shift of
approximately0.06eV(ML)to0.42eV(baseline)ontheeitherspectrum, showingafavor
towards higher accuracy in the former. On the other hand, the energy resolution (and
therefore spectrum smearing and neutrino mass value) is impacted by the spread of the
errors (i.e precision) which areσML = (0.655±0.021)eV andσBaseline = (0.718±0.021)eV
when converted to energy. From this, we conclude that both methods show comparable
sub-eV resolution and stand as viable candidates for high-resolution CRES spectroscopy.

===== PAGE 23 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 23
6.3. Efficiencies
A straightforward measure of efficiency is to compute the fraction of all simulated events
which were correctly reconstructed by each method, where the comparison to ground
truth is made with first tracks in events. However, Doppler shifting of the cyclotron
signal at the antenna results in a total radiated power which is shared between main
carrier and sidebands of different frequencies [9]. The relative strength of the sideband
signals depends on the pitch angle of the electron, which in turn is minimally bound
by the shape of the magnetic trap [9]. If conditions are such that the pitch angle
is significantly different from 90◦, the main carrier power may be low enough to be
undetectable.
In Project 8 Phase II real data, reconstructed events were observed to feature SNR
values varying between 4 and 20, consistent with events of pitch angles greater than
89.33◦. In our simulated data, the track power was sampled only for pitch angles larger
than 89◦. Taking the ratio of the effective trapping volumes between minimum pitch
angles 89.33◦ and 89◦, we expect only about44% of all simulated events to be visible
(detectable) after trapping conditions are satisfied. Furthermore, following theoretical
modeling of CRES signals with the Viterbi algorithm [41], the minimal reconstructable
track length given Phase II conditions is approximately 3 pixels, diminishing the
percentage of visible electrons by 59%. Finally, making a cut at the minimal Phase
II reconstructable SNR of 4 as a realistic approximation, we keep only 76% of this
fraction of events. Thus, we expect that in total only about 20% out of all simulated
events are actually reconstructable by either method.
Table 4: Statistics for reconstructed events including efficiency for ML-based and baseline
methods.
Quantity of Interest U-Net+SVM Baseline
No. of Reconstructed Events 355 286
True Positives 354 285
False Positives 1 1
Absolute Efficiency 18.1% 14.6%
To compare efficiencies between reconstruction methods, we follow the strategy
described in Section 5.2 to tune baseline parameters over the test set. In all of the
9805 simulated events, the ML model reconstructed 355 true positive events and only 1
false positive event. The baseline method was manually tuned to match 1 false positive
event and subsequently found 285 true positive events. We list this comparison in
Table 4 alongside a measure of absolute efficiency defined as the percentage (no. of true
positives/no. reconstructable events)×100 where the denominator is valued as 20% of
9,805 simulated events. In terms of this measure, the ML model achieves an increase
of 3.5% in absolute efficiency over the baseline method in this study. In terms of total
number of reconstructed events alone, the ML-method achieves a relative gain of 24.1%

===== PAGE 24 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 24
over the traditional method at the same number of reconstructed false positives.
As discussed in Section 5.2, the low-precision matching of baseline and ML false
event rates precludes a more precise comparison of true underlying efficiency between
models in this study. With higher-statistics simulations producing larger numbers
of false events, the baseline false event rate could again be tuned to match the ML
false event rate with higher precision, enabling a more direct efficiency comparison in
the future. Given that statistical sensitivity is expected to dominate neutrino mass
uncertainty in Project 8 (until very large source volumes are employed), and that the
statistical variance on the extracted mass scales with the number of reconstructed events
asσstat∼√Ntot [11], an increase in reconstructed event statistics such as the one shown
in this analysis could offer a significant advantage for spectrum reconstruction.
7. Conclusion and Outlook
Over the past years, results from the novel CRES technique have shown advances in the
field of spectroscopy by exploiting the basic relationship between frequency and energy
Eq. (1) of semi-relativistic particles [6, 8, 7]. As represented in the frequency-time plane
of a spectrogram, a single CRES event may be multi-faceted, displaying a number of
tracks separated by jumps whose starting frequencies must be accurately and precisely
extracted in order to faithfully build an energy spectrum. Of particular motivation
and application is the goal of the Project 8 experiment: to extract the absolute neutrino
mass value with final target sensitivity of 0.04 eV/c2 using the tritium endpoint method.
To reach this goal, the experiment must significantly increase its statistics, which is only
possible by performing CRES detection over volumes a few orders of magnitude larger
than those demonstrated in Phase II [11]. Accordingly, a considerable improvement in
event reconstruction efficiency is necessary.
In this work we have presented a ML-based reconstruction method for CRES
signals which uses a U-Net CNN architecture in tandem with a SVM to segment
and robustly select and build events in the presence of a great abundance of RF
noise acting as a background. Besides its relative ease of optimization (training) and
featuring a signal-profile agnostic architecture, the ML-method has shown comparable
performance in reconstruction accuracy of track parameters and a gain in both absolute
(+3.5%) and relative efficiency (+24.1%) in a proof of concept comparison to the
baseline approach. The tests of performance of both ML and baseline models were
carried out on data produced with an expanded Locust software package, upgraded
to simulate realistic CRES-like signals and spectrograms with little computational cost.
Future development of this ML-based reconstruction analysis will focus on replacing pre-
configured parameters (such as track trimming and first-track selection) for trainable
ML submodules and increasing test statistics to provide a precise comparison of true
underlying efficiency versus the baseline. The model presented here lays a groundwork
for future ML-based analyses in CRES, with the goal of providing a powerful and direct
bridge from antenna signal to reconstructed energy spectrum.

===== PAGE 25 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 25
8. Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the following sources: the U.S.
Department of Energy Office of Science, Office of Nuclear Physics, under Award
No. DE-SC0020433 to Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), under Award No. DE-
SC0011091 to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), under Field Work
Proposal Number 73006 at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), a
multiprogram national laboratory operated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of
Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-76RL01830, under Early Career Award No. DE-
SC0019088 to Pennsylvania State University, under Award No. DE-FG02-97ER41020 to
the University of Washington, and under Award No. DE-SC0012654 to Yale University;
the National Science Foundation under Award No. PHY-2209530 to Indiana University,
and under Award No. PHY-2110569 to MIT; the Cluster of Excellence “Precision
Physics, Fundamental Interactions, and Structure of Matter” (PRISMA+ EXC 2118/1)
funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the German Excellence
Strategy (Project ID 39083149); the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) Center
Elementary Particle and Astroparticle Physics (KCETA); Laboratory Directed Research
and Development (LDRD) 18-ERD-028 and 20-LW-056 at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory (LLNL), prepared by LLNL under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344, LLNL-
JRNL-840805; theLDRDProgramatPNNL;IndianaUniversity; andYaleUniversity. A
portion of the research was performed using the Grace Cluster at the Center for Research
Computing of Yale University. The isotope(s) used in this research were supplied by the
United States Department of Energy Office of Science by the Isotope Program in the
Office of Nuclear Physics.
References
[1] Bourilkov D 2019International Journal of Modern Physics A34 1930019 ISSN 1793-656X URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0217751X19300199
[2] Aurisano Aet al.2018 Nature 560 41–48 URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0361-2
[3] Boehnlein A et al. 2021 Artificial intelligence and machine learning in nuclear physics URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.02309
[4] Bhatt Det al.2021 Electronics 10 ISSN 2079-9292 URLhttps://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/
20/2470
[5] Monreal B and Formaggio J A 2009Phys. Rev. D 80(5) 051301 URL https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.80.051301
[6] Asner D Met al. (Project 8 Collaboration) 2015Phys. Rev. Lett. 114(16) 162501 URL https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.162501
[7] Byron Wet al.2022 First observation of cyclotron radiation from mev-scaleepm following nuclear
beta decay URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2209.02870
[8] Project 8 Collaboration Ashtari Esfahani A et al. 2023 Phys. Rev. Lett. 131(10) 102502 URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.131.102502
[9] Ashtari Esfahani Aet al.2019 Physical Review C99 ISSN 2469-9993 URLhttp://dx.doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevC.99.055501
[10] Project 8 Collaboration Ashtari Esfahani Aet al.2023 Cyclotron radiation emission spectroscopy

===== PAGE 26 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 26
of electrons from tritium beta decay and83mkr internal conversion URLhttps://arxiv.org/
abs/2303.12055
[11] Ashtari Esfahani Aet al. 2021 Phys. Rev. C 103(6) 065501 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevC.103.065501
[12] Formaggio J A, de Gouvêa A L C and Robertson R H 2021Physics Reports 914 1–54 URL
https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.physrep.2021.02.002
[13] Mo Y, Wu Y, Yang X, Liu F and Liao Y 2022Neurocomputing ISSN 0925-2312 URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231222000054
[14] Hickish J et al. 2016 Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation 05 URL https://doi.org/10.
1142/s2251171716410014
[15] Young A 2016 ROACH2 Digital Acquisition System for Project8 Phase II accessed: 2019-08-27
URL https://github.com/project8/phasmid
[16] Ashtari Esfahani Aet al. 2020 New Journal of Physics 22 033004 URL https://doi.org/10.
1088/1367-2630/ab71bd
[17] Ester M et al. 1996 A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases
with noise (AAAI Press) pp 226–231 URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3001460.
3001507
[18] Claessens C 2021Event detection in Project 8 : Detection efficiency and its implications for the
first tritiumβ-decay spectrum recorded with Cyclotron Radiation Emission SpectroscopyPh.D.
thesis URL https://openscience.ub.uni-mainz.de/handle/20.500.12030/5709
[19] Furse D 2015 Techniques for Direct Neutrino Mass Measurement Utilizing Tritium Beta-Decay
Ph.D. thesis URLhttps://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/99313
[20] Ronneberger O, Fischer P and Brox T 2015abs/1505.04597 URL https://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4_28
[21] Isbi challenge: Segmentation of neuronal structures in em stacks available athttp://brainiac2.
mit.edu/isbi_challenge/ URL http://brainiac2.mit.edu/isbi_challenge/
[22] Chen Y et al. 2019 Frontiers in Genetics 10 1110 ISSN 1664-8021 URL https://www.
frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fgene.2019.01110
[23] Özgün Ç et al. 2016 3d u-net: Learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2016 (Springer
International Publishing) pp 424–432 URLhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46723-8_
49
[24] Wagner F, Dalagnol R, Tarabalka Y, Segantine T, Thomé R and Hirye M 2020Remote Sensing
12 1544 URL https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12101544
[25] Goodfellow I, Bengio Y and Courville A 2016 Deep Learning (MIT Press) http://www.
deeplearningbook.org
[26] He K, Zhang X, Ren S and Sun J 2015 Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level
performanceonimagenetclassification 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) pp 1026–1034 URLhttps://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1502.01852
[27] Lin T Y, Goyal P, Girshick R, He K and Dollár P 2017 Focal loss for dense object detection
2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)pp 2999–3007 URLhttps:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8237586
[28] van der Walt S, Schönberger J L, Nunez-Iglesias J, Boulogne F, Warner J D, Yager N, Gouillart
E, Yu T and the scikit-image contributors 2014PeerJ 2 e453 ISSN 2167-8359 URL https:
//doi.org/10.7717/peerj.453
[29] Ashtari Esfahani Aet al. 2019 New Journal of Physics 21 113051 URL https://doi.org/10.
1088/1367-2630/ab550d
[30] Furse D et al. 2017 New Journal of Physics 19 053012 URL https://doi.org/10.1088/
1367-2630/aa6950
[31] Rudd M E 1991 Phys. Rev. A 44(3) 1644–1652 URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevA.44.1644

===== PAGE 27 =====
Deep Learning Based Event Reconstruction for CRES 27
[32] LXCAT available athttps://nl.lxcat.net/data/set_type.php URL https://nl.lxcat.net/
data/set_type.php
[33] Aseev V Net al. 2000 The European Physical Journal D10 39–52 URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/s100530050525
[34] SHAPIRO S S and WILK M B 1965Biometrika 52 591–611 URL https://doi.org/10.1093/
biomet/52.3-4.591
[35] Buzinsky N, Claessens C, Gladstone L, Guigue M, Huang J, Johnson B, Kofron J, LaRoque
B, Oblath N, Rysewyk D, Saldana L, Slocum P, Sun Y H and Zayas E 2019 Katydid
https://github.com/project8/katydid URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2621293
[36] Abadi Met al.2015 TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems software
available from tensorflow.org URLhttps://www.tensorflow.org/
[37] Zaharia Met al.2018 IEEE Data Eng. Bull.41 39–45 URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
3399579.3399867
[38] Dubourg V et al. 2011 Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 2825–2830 URL https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1953048.2078195
[39] Novitski E 2022 Project 8: Results and Prospects XXX International Conference on Neutrino
Physics and Astrophysics URLhttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6717773
[40] Jaccard P 1912New Phytologist 11 37–50 URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.1912.
tb05611.x
[41] Ashtari Esfahani Aet al. 2022 New Journal of Physics 24 053013 URL https://doi.org/10.
1088/1367-2630/ac66f6
