===== PAGE 1 =====
PROJECTIVE INFINITIES ANDb-CALCULUS
ANDREAS ˇCAP AND A. ROD GOVER
Abstract.For a manifold Mwith boundary∂Mand interiorM, we introduce
and study a weakening of the concept of projective compactness for torsion-free
linear connections onM, which we call projective pre-compactness. Via the
Levi-Civita connection, this concept applies to pseudo-Riemannian metrics on
M. This is motivated by applications to scattering theory and, especially, to
general relativity (GR), in view of asymptotic forms of metrics used in these
areas.
In the general setting of a projectively pre-compact connection∇we show
that, assuming weak conditions on the asymptotics of Ricci curvature, there
is an induced projective structure on the boundary. Under a slightly stronger
condition on the Ricci curvature, we show explicitly that the standard trac-
tor bundle and its normal tractor connection arise naturally on this boundary
structure. The key ingredient to this is that∇admits a smooth extension to the
boundary as a linear connection on the tensor product of Melrose’s b-tangent
bundle with an appropriate density bundle, which then restricts to the boundary
tractor bundle.
A projectively pre-compact pseudo-Riemannian metric (satisfying the condi-
tions on the asymptotics of Ricci curvature) is then shown to induce a holonomy
reduction of the boundary projective structure to an indefinite orthogonal group.
This endows the boundary with a decomposition into so-called curved orbits,
which are either open or embedded hypersurfaces, representing space-like, time-
like and light-like infinities in a GR context. We introduce and study a new
asymptotic form for such metrics which is available near any boundary point
and relate it to an asymptotic form used in general relativity. The latter is only
available near boundary points in the open curved orbits. We show that, in that
region, projective pre-compactness essentially is equivalent to this asymptotic
form from GR, and that projective compactness is equivalent to the vanishing
of the mass aspect function.
2020Mathematics Subject Classification.primary: 53C07; secondary: 83C30, 53B10, 53B21,
53C25, 53C50, 53Z05 .
Key words and phrases.geometric compactifications, projective infinity, mass aspect, asymp-
totic forms for pseudo-Riemannian metrics.
This work was funded in part by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): 10.55776/P33559. For
open access purposes, the authors have applied a CC BY public copyright license to any author-
accepted manuscript version arising from this submission. A.ˇC. thanks University of Auckland for
hospitality. Both authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Royal Society of New Zealand
via Marsden Grants 19-UOA-008 and 24-UOA-005 and from thematic program “Differential
Complexes: Theory, Discretization, and Applications” at the Erwin Schr¨ odinger Institute (ESI).
This article is based upon work from COST Action CaLISTA CA21109 supported by COST
(European Cooperation in Science and Technology). https://www.cost.eu.
1
arXiv:2606.17597v1  [math.DG]  16 Jun 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 ˇCap, Gover
1.Introduction
Conformal compactification was originally introduced by R. Penrose in the set-
ting of general relativity, and hence of Lorentzian metrics, with the aim to at-
tach a “boundary at infinity” to non-compact space-times, and remains extremely
important [13, 15, 22]. Formally, this means finding a conformal embedding of
the space-time into a compact pseudo-Riemannian manifold and then considering
the (compact) closure of the image. A major motivation for the concept is that
in pseudo-Riemannian geometry null geodesics are conformally invariant up to
parametrization, so one can study “where light rays meet infinity” in this picture.
The basic concept makes sense in any signature and in the nicest cases this leads
to a conformal embedding of the space as the interior of a pseudo-Riemannian
manifold with boundary that has a specific behavior of the metric towards infin-
ity. In particular, this happens in many cases for complete pseudo-Riemannian
manifolds which are asymptotically hyperbolic, in an appropriate sense, and the
metric then induces a conformal structure on the boundary (i.e., the “conformal
infinity”). Requiring the interior to be (Riemannian and negative) Einstein, one
arrives at the concept of Poincar´ e–Einstein manifolds which have become a major
research topic in geometric analysis over the last decades [1, 14, 17, 18, 20, 19].
Already the example of Minkowski space shows that things are complicated in
an asymptotically flat setting. Here the “boundary” is a union of hypersurface
components which represent light-like infinity and points glued to these, which
represent space-like and time-like infinities. While the behavior around light-like
infinities of a conformal compactification in this case is very satisfactory, dealing
with space-like and time-like infinities is subtle both from the GR point of view and
mathematically. In the GR literature attempts to find other compactifications at
space-like and time-like infinity were made early, see e.g. [3] and in particular [16],
where it is indicated that such an alternative compactification can be “almost”
compatible with the projective structure underlying the pseudo-Riemannian met-
ric. In these approaches, one obtains a boundary at infinity of hypersurface type
and there is the natural question of whether this inherits a projective structure,
making it into aprojective infinity.
The projective structure induced by a pseudo-Riemannian metric can be viewed
as the family of allgeodesic paths(or unparametrized geodesics) of the Levi-Civita
connection. More formally, one can view it as the equivalence class of all torsion-
free linear connections on the tangent bundle, which have the same geodesics as
the Levi-Civita connection up to parametrization. In the GR literature, these
geometric aspects remain in the background, the focus is on a certain asymptotic
form for the pseudo-Riemannian metrics, in such a compactification, near space-
like and time-like infinity [3, 2]. A special case of this asymptotic form is studied
as a “scattering metric” in geometric scattering theory, see Chapter 6 of [21].
One possibility to obtain a projective infinity comes from a general theory of pro-
jective compactifications, which was developed in [9, 10] in the setting of torsion-
free linear connections on the interior of a manifold with boundary. A change

===== PAGE 3 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 3
from a such a linear connection to a projectively related one is described by a one-
form. The basic definition of projective compactness is that using a local defining
function for the boundary to construct a one-form (that does not admit a smooth
extension to the boundary), the resulting projective modification of the given con-
nectiondoesadmit such an extension. So similarly to conformal compactness,
where one requires the metric to diverge in a specific way towards the boundary,
one here requires the connection to diverge in a specific way. In particular, since
projective modifications of the given connection admit a smooth extension to the
boundary, the projective structure determined by the connection admits a smooth
extension.
A new feature of projective compactness is that the concept allows for and
requires an additional parameterβ, called theorder of projective compactness,
which turns out to be related to volume growth. This is a positive real number,
assumed to be≤2 to ensure that the boundary is at infinity, see [9] for details.
Depending onβ, a projective compactification may induce different structures on
the boundary, the main cases interest (so far) areβ= 1 andβ= 2. Forβ= 2,
one obtains a conformal structure on the boundary and the resulting theory is
rather closely related to (but different from) conformal compactifications. The
relevant case for the current article isβ= 1. Assuming that the boundary is
totally geodesic, which amounts to asymptotic conditions on the Ricci curvature,
one here obtains an induced projective structure on the boundary.
In particular, one may apply this to the flat connection onR n+1, for which, via
central projection, the compactification can be viewed as a closed hemisphere in
Sn+1 with its standard (flat) projective structure and the equator as the boundary
at infinity. Adding the Minkowski metric into the picture gives rise to an additional
structure on the boundary, which can be formalized as a holonomy reduction in
the sense of [12] of the canonical Cartan connection, associated to the projective
structure on the boundary at infinity, to the groupSO(n,1)⊂SL(n+ 1,R). This
in particular decomposes the boundary sphere into five so-calledcurved orbits.
Two of these are isomorphic copies ofn-dimensional hyperbolic space, one is a
copy ofn-dimensional de-Sitter space, and a further two are copies of a conformal
Riemannian sphereS n−1.
One of the contributions of [9] is extending this picture to general Ricci-flat
connections and pseudo-Riemannian metrics, which are projectively compact of
order 1. In the case of metrics, the work [9] also studies the relation to asymptotic
forms
g= C
ρ4dρ2 + h
ρ2
for a local defining functionρfor the boundary. HereCis a smooth function that is
asymptotic to±1 to second order along the boundary, i.e. such thatC=±1+ρ 2f
for a functionfthat admits a smooth extension to the boundary. On the one hand,
it is shown in [9] that any metric that admits such a form is projectively compact of
order 1. For Ricci-flat metrics, [9] also proves a converse to this result, namely that
such an asymptotic form is always available (for appropriate defining functions)
locally around points of the open curved orbits from above. All the developments

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 ˇCap, Gover
in [9] heavily rely on tractor calculus for projective structures, which provides
an equivalent encoding of the canonical Cartan connection and emphasises the
analogy to conformal geometry.
While these are very satisfactory results, there is a significant drawback from
the point of view of general relativity. In the asymptotic forms considered in the
physics literature, see e.g. [3] and [2], one requires that the functionCmentioned
above has the form±1+ρfand the boundary value off(whose vanishing is equiv-
alent to the form required for projective compactness), called themass aspect, is
closely related to the total mass of the space-time. Thus true projective compact-
ness seems to be incompatible with non-zero mass. This was also emphasized in
the recent articles [5, 6, 7], which explicitly use the concept of projective com-
pactness from [9]. However, it was noted in these works that for the more general
asymptotic form one obtains most of the features of projective compactness.
The current article addresses and clarifies exactly this issue. We introduce a
weakening of the concept of projective compactness that we callprojective pre-
compactness. We consider the same projective modification as in the definition of
projective compactness, but do not require that the resulting connection extends
smoothly to the boundary. Rather we define and require a very slight weakening
of this condition. Of course, this means that the projective structure determined
by a projectively pre-compact connection doesnot(in general) admit a smooth
extension to the boundary. (This is required. Indeed, as shown in [9] a Ricci flat
connection is necessarily projectively compact of order one if its projective struc-
ture extends.) Hence the basic tools used for the study of projective compactness
so far are not available in our setting. Nevertheless we are able to prove that the
main features of projectively compact connections and metrics are still available
in this more general setting. Even in the projectively compact case, the results we
obtain are stronger than the existing ones while proofs are significantly simpler in
general.
The main technical tool we use to replace tractors is theb-tangent bundlein-
troduced by R. Melrose and used in his school of geometric analysis (see e.g. [21]).
Given a manifold Mwith boundary∂Mand interiorM, this is a vector bundle
TbM→ M, whose sheaf of smooth sections is the sheafX ∂ of vector fields on M
which are tangent to∂Malong∂M. The existence of such a bundle follows from
the fact thatX ∂ is a locally free sheaf. Once this vector bundle is available, one
can of course apply all the tools from differential geometry to it, and particular
the notion of a linear connection makes sense. Our key technical result is that a
projectively pre-compact linear connection on the interiorMof Mextends to a
linear connection onT bM(−1), the tensor product ofT bMwith an appropriate
density bundle. While we don’t use tractors at this stage, it should be emphasized
that the idea for this approach comes from tractors, see Section 2.10 for details.
An overview of the results we obtain is as follows. Section 2 studies projective
pre-compactness in the setting of connections. After introducing the concept, we
prove that, for M=M∪∂M, a projectively pre-compact linear connection∇
onMgives rise to a canonical weighted symmetric bilinear form Φ onT M|∂M×
T∂M, which restricts to a weighted second fundamental form onT∂M×T∂M,

===== PAGE 5 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 5
see Theorem 2.5. This form is closely related to the asymptotics of the Ricci
curvature of∇, see Theorem 2.9. The vanishing of this second fundamental form
characterises a totally geodesic boundary and, assuming this, we show in Theorem
2.9 that∇induces a projective structure on the boundary∂M, so this becomes
theprojective infinityof∇.
For the next step, we need a slightly stronger assumption, namely that the
canonical weighted form Φ onTM|∂M×T∂Mvanishes identically. This can also be
characterized in terms of the asymptotics of the Ricci curvature (or, equivalently,
the Schouten tensor) of∇and we refer to is as the boundary beingstrongly totally
geodesic. Under this assumption, Theorem 2.12 shows that∇extends to a linear
connection on the bundleT bM(−1) which, in spite of the simple proof, is the
main technical input for all further developments. Our main result in the general
setting of connections is Theorem 2.13, which shows that the standard tractor
bundle and tractor connection associated to the induced projective structure on
the boundary arise as restrictions from the weighted b-tangent bundle and its
induced connection.
Theorem.For M=M∪∂M, let∇be an affine connection onM, which is
projectively pre-compact and letPbe the Schouten tensor of∇. Suppose further
that for allξ,η∈X( M), the functionP(ξ,η)admits a smooth extension to the
boundary if at least one of the fields lies inX ∂(M)and its boundary value vanishes
if both fields lie inX ∂(M). Then the bundleT bM(−1)|∂M with the connection
induced by∇can be naturally identified with the projective standard tractor bundle
of the induced projective structure on∂Mand its normal tractor connection.
In Section 3, we study projective pre-compactness of Levi-Civita connections of
pseudo-Riemannian metrics. We start by considering metrics with an asymptotic
form
(3.2)g= h
ρ2 + C
ρ4dρ2,
whereC=±1 +ρfforf∈C ∞(M,R) andh∈Γ(S 2T∗M) is non-degenerate
along the boundary onT∂M×T∂M. Following ideas in [9], we prove in Theorem
3.1 thatg(i.e. its Levi-Civita connection) is projectively pre-compact and it is
projectively compact iff| ∂M≡0.
Conversely, we next assume thatgis a projectively pre-compact pseudo-Rieman-
nian metric, which is asymptotically tangentially Ricci flat in the sense that
Ric(ξ,η) admits a smooth extension to the boundary if one of its entries lies
inX ∂(M) and vanishes along the boundary if both of its entries have this prop-
erty. Under this assumption, we show that there is an induced projective structure
on the boundary, and we prove in Theorem 3.3 that, similarly as in the projec-
tively compact case (but even in that case under weaker assumptions),ggives
rise to a reduction of projective holonomy of the boundary structure to an indef-
inite orthogonal group. By general results on such reductions, this decomposes
∂M=∂M +⊔∂M 0⊔∂M− into so-called curved orbits, where∂M ± are open and
∂M0 (if non-empty) is an embedded closed hypersurface. This is the decomposition
of the boundary into time-like, light-like and space-like infinity. It is easy to see

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 ˇCap, Gover
that an asymptotic form (3.2) can only be available locally around points in∂M ±
and for special defining functions. Our second main result in Theorem 3.5 provides
an asymptotic form that is available everywhere together with strong additional in-
formation on the coefficients in the asymptotic form. In this result,∇ ρ denotes the
linear connection onT∂Minduced by a specific projective modification of∇de-
termined by the defining functionρand (λ⊙dρ)(ξ,η) := 1
2(λ(ξ)dρ(η)+λ(η)dρ(ξ)).
Theorem.For M=M∪∂M, letgbe a pseudo-Riemannian metric of signature
(p,q)onMwhich is projectively pre-compact and asymptotically tangentially Ricci
flat, and letρbe any defining function for∂M.
(1) There are a smooth functionC: M→R, a one-formλ∈Ω 1(M)and a
sectionh∈Γ(S 2T∗M)such that, overM, we have
(3.6)g= Cdρ 2
ρ4 + λ⊙dρ
ρ3 + h
ρ2.
(2) Given any asymptotic form as in(3.6), letC be the boundary value ofC, and
letλ ∈Ω 1(∂M)andh ∈Γ(S 2T∗∂M)the restrictions of the boundary values of
λandhto tangential entries. ThenC is a defining function for∂M 0 and the
symmetric bilinear form on the bundleT∂M⊕R, over∂M, defined by
((ξ,a),(η,b))7→C ab− 1
2aλ(η)− 1
2bλ(ξ) +h (ξ,η)
is non degenerate of signature(p,q). Moreover, denoting by∇ ρ the induced con-
nection onT∂Mand byP ρ its Schouten tensor, we get forξ,η,ζ∈X(∂M)
λ =−dC h (ξ,η) =− 1
2(∇ρ
ξλ)(η) +C Pρ(ξ,η)
(∇ρ
ξh)(η,ζ) = 1
2
 
Pρ(ξ,η)λ (ζ) +P ρ(ξ,ζ)λ (η)

.
This easily leads to a proof of existence of an asymptotic form (3.2) locally
around points at whichC̸= 0, see Corollary 3.7.
We conclude the article by proving characterizations of projective compactness
in terms of the asymptotic forms (3.2) and (3.6). For (3.6), Theorem 3.8 provides
an equivalent condition for projective compactness ofgin terms of asymptotic
differential equations on the coefficientsCandλin (3.6). In the case of (3.2),
it remains to show that forC=±1 +ρf, projective compactness ofgimplies
thatf| ∂M ≡0. This is done in Theorem 3.9 under the slightly stronger curva-
ture assumption that the Ricci curvature ofgadmits a smooth extension to the
boundary and its boundary value vanishes if one of its entries is tangent to the
boundary. The proof shows that this curvature assumption, which seems to be
always satisfied in GR applications, is necessary.
2.Projective pre-compactness for connections
In this Section, we define and study the concept of projective pre-compactness in
the general setting of torsion-free connections. The main focus is on the existence
of an induced projective structure on the boundary and an explicit description of
the projective standard tractor bundle determined by this structure.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 7
2.1.Setup and background.We consider a smooth manifold Mwith boundary
∂Mand interiorM. A local defining function for∂Mis then a smooth, real valued
functionρdefined on an open subsetU⊂ Msuch thatρ −1({0}) =U∩∂Mand
such thatdρ| U∩∂M is nowhere vanishing. A key feature of this concept is that a
smooth functionf:U→Rvanishes onU∩∂Mif and only if it can be written
asf=ρf 1 for some smooth functionf 1 :U→R. In this case we say that
f=O(ρ). Similarly, fork≥2, we say thatfvanishes tokth order along∂Mor
thatf=O(ρ k) if and only iff=ρ kf1 for a smooth functionf 1 :U→R.
For a functionf:U∩M→R, we will say thatf=O(ρ −1), if the smooth
functionρf:U∩M→Radmits a (necessarily unique) smooth extension to all of
U. Similarly fork≥2, we say thatf=O(ρ −k) ifρ kfadmits a smooth extension.
We will sometimes paraphrase this as “ρ kfis smooth up to the boundary”.
Ifρ:U→Ris a defining function than any other defining function onU
can be written as ˆρ=e αρfor some smooth functionα:U→R. This readily
implies that all the concepts introduced so far are independent of the choice of
defining function. Therefore, we will often not specify the domain of definition of
a defining function and say thatf=O(ρ ℓ) forℓ̸= 0 without specifyingρ. We
will also extend this terminology to other geometric objects like tensor fields and
differential forms.
Iff=O(ρ −k), thenρ kfhas a well defined boundary value, which is a smooth
functionU∩∂M→R. This boundary valuedoesdepend on the choice of defining
function, moving fromρto ˆρ=e αρit gets rescaled bye kα. So here one has to be
careful about the dependence on the defining function.
Definition 2.1.The sheaf of (local) vector fields onMwill be denoted byX. This
has a canonical sub-sheaf, that we denote byX ∂, withX ∂(U) consisting of those
ξ∈X(U) which are tangent to∂MalongU∩∂M. So explicitly, we must have
ξ(x)∈T x∂M⊂T xMfor anyx∈U∩∂M. For a defining functionρ:U→R,
this may be equivalently characterized asdρ(ξ) =O(ρ). Observe thatX ∂(U) is
a Lie subalgebra ofX(U). Indeed forξ,η∈X ∂(U), the fact that 0 =ddρ(ξ,η)
immediately implies thatdρ([ξ,η]) =ξ·dρ(η)−η·dρ(ξ). By assumptiondρ(η) =ρf
for a smooth functionf:U→R, soξ·dρ(η) =dρ(ξ)f+ρdf(ξ) =O(ρ) and likewise
for the second summand.
2.2.The definition of projective pre-compactness.LetNbe a smooth man-
ifold and let∇and ˆ∇be linear connections on the tangent bundleTN. Recall
that∇and ˆ∇are said to beprojectively equivalentif they have the same geodesics
up to parametrization. Since one can remove the torsion of a linear connection on
TNwithout changing the geodesics, one usually works in the setting of torsion
free connections. Then, the condition can be equivalently phrased as existence of
a one-form Υ∈Ω 1(N) such that
(2.1) ˆ∇ξη=∇ ξη+ Υ(ξ)η+ Υ(η)ξ.
We will sometimes write this formally as ˆ∇=∇+ Υ.
The concept of projective compactness was introduced in [9] as an analog of con-
formal compactness of (pseudo-)Riemannian metrics. In the setting M=M∪∂M

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 ˇCap, Gover
from Section 2.1, conformal compactness is a condition on metricsgonMrequir-
ing that for one or equivalently any local defining functionρfor∂Mthe metric
ρ2gadmits a smooth extension to the boundary with non-degenerate boundary
values.
Projective compactness of a linear connection∇onTMis defined in a similar
spirit by requiring that for certain one-forms Υ (that are not smooth up to the
boundary ) the projective modifications∇+ Υ admit a smooth extension to the
boundary. The appropriate one-forms turn to be dρ
βρ for local defining functionsρ
for∂Mand a constantβ∈(0,2] which is called theorderof projective compact-
ness. (Observe thatβcannot be absorbed into a constant rescaling ofρsince we
are dealing with a logarithmic derivative here.) In general, the casesβ= 1 and
β= 2 are the most interesting ones. While the basic idea of our extension could
also be applied for other values ofβwe restrict to the caseβ= 1 in this article.
As in [9], we will mainly study the case ofspeciallinear connections here, i.e.
connections that preserve a volume density. It is straightforward to see that any
projective class admits such connections, and in the following when we mention
a connection∇it may be assumed that is is special, unless we state otherwise.
So for a local defining functionρ:U→Rfor∂M, we consider the one-form
dρ
ρ ∈Ω 1(U∩M) and for a special linear connection∇onTM, we consider the
projectively modified linear connection∇ ρ :=∇+ dρ
ρ onU∩M. Observe that for
another defining function ˆρ=eαρwe getdˆρ= ˆρdα+eαdρand hence dˆρ
ˆρ = dρ
ρ +dα.
Hence the connections∇ ρ and∇ ˆρare projectively related by the one-formdα
that is smooth up to the boundary. This shows that if the conditions imposed
in the following definition hold for one defining function onUthen they hold for
any defining function. So, loosely speaking, they are independent of the choice of
defining function.
Definition 2.2.In our usual setting M=M∪∂M, consider a special linear con-
nection∇onTMand the associated modified connection∇ ρ =∇+ dρ
ρ determined
by any local defining functionρ:U→R.
(1) We say that∇isprojectively pre-compact(of order 1) if and only if the fol-
lowing conditions are satisfied for eachUandρ:
(i)dρ(∇ ρ
ξη) is smooth up to the boundary for allξ,η∈X(U).
(ii)ρ∇ ρ
ξηis smooth up to the boundary for allξ,η∈X(U).
(iii)∇ ρ
ξηis smooth up to the boundary if at least one of the vector fields lies in
X∂(U)⊂X(U).
(2) We say that∇isprojectively compact(of order 1) if∇ ρ
ξηis smooth up to the
boundary for allξ,η∈X(U).
A pseudo-Riemannian metricgonMis calledprojectively pre-compact, or, re-
spectively,projectively compact, (of order 1) if and only if its Levi-Civita connection
is.
Thus projective pre-compactness should be interpreted as the fact that∇ ρ “al-
most” admits a smooth extension to the boundary. Observe in particular, that we

===== PAGE 9 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 9
can restrict any linear connection to operationsX×X ∂→XandX ∂×X→Xand
projective modification makes sense in this setting. Condition (iii) then exactly
says that the projective modifications of these “restricted connections” are smooth
up to the boundary.
2.3.The canonical defining density.A major tool for the study of projectively
compact linear connections is projective tractor calculus. In the setting of projec-
tive compactness, this is automatically available, since for a projectively compact
linear connection∇, the projective structure onMdefined by∇by definition
admits a smooth extension to all of M. Hence all tools from projective differential
geometry are automatically available on all of Mand several results on smooth
extendability follows straight from projective invariance.
Things are not as straightforward in the projectively pre-compact case since one
cannot expect the projective structure to extend to M. For example, Theorem 3.3
of [9] analyzes the case of a Ricci-flat linear connection∇onTMwhich preserves
some volume form onM. It is shown there that if the projective structure deter-
mined by∇extends smoothly to M, but∇itself does not extend smoothly to a
neighborhood of any boundary point, then∇has to be projectively compact of
order 1.
The advantage we have here (compared with say conformal geometry) is that the
bundles involved in projective tractor calculus do not need a projective structure
to be defined. This is most easily seen by starting from the standard cotractor
bundleT ∗, which can be defined as the first jet prolongation of a certain density
bundleE(1) (that exists on any smooth manifold), see [4] and section 2.2 of [9] for
the definitions ofE(w) forw∈R.
If∇is a special linear connection, then any of the density bundlesE(w) admits
a non-zero section that is parallel for (the connection induced by)∇and hence
nowhere vanishing onMand this section is unique up to a constant multiple. The
first step in [9] is then to prove that if∇is projectively compact of order 1, then
any non-zero densityσ∈E(1) which is parallel for∇admits a smooth extension
by 0 to a defining density for∂M. That means that for any connection ˆ∇in the
projective class determined by∇and which is smooth up to the boundary, ˆ∇σis
nowhere vanishing on∂M. The jetj 1σthen defines a global smooth sectionL(σ)
ofT ∗ =J 1E(1), which is called thescale tractorassociated to∇.
Now we can prove that these facts extend to the case where∇is projectively pre-
compact, although the interpretation ofJ 1E(1) as a projective cotractor bundle is
lost.
Proposition 2.3.In our usual setting M=M∪∂Mlet∇be a special projectively
pre-compact connection onTMand letσ∈Γ(E(1))be a nonzero density that is
parallel for∇. Thenσsmoothly extends by0to a defining density for∂M. In
particular, it determines a global smooth nowhere vanishing sectionI:=j 1σ∈
Γ(J 1E(1))on M.
Proof.Our strategy is to construct, locally near∂M, a modification ˜∇of∇, which
is projectively compact of order 1 and such that ˜∇σ= 0. Then the claim follows

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 ˇCap, Gover
from applying Proposition 2.3 of [9] to ˜∇. So we fix an open subsetUthat meets
the boundary and a defining functionρ:U→Rfor∂Mand consider the projective
modification∇ ρ =∇+ dρ
ρ of∇. Choosing arbitrary vector fieldsξ,η∈X(U),
we know by definition thatρ∇ ρ
ξηadmits a smooth extension of the boundary.
Moreover, sincedρ(∇ρ
ξη) itself is smooth up to the boundary, the boundary value of
ρ∇ρ
ξηis a smooth section ofT∂M⊂T M|∂M . Now the expressionρ∇ ρ
ξηevidently
is linear over smooth functions inξand one immediately verifies that it is linear
over smooth functions inηup toO(ρ). Moreover, by definitionρ∇ ρ
ξηitself isO(ρ)
if eitherξorηlies inX ∂(U)⊂X(U) and hence in particular if one of them is
O(ρ).
Together, these facts imply that (ξ,η)7→ρ∇ ρ
ξη|∂M is induced by applying a
bundle mapT M|∂M×T M|∂M →T∂Mto the boundary values ofξandηand
we know in addition that this bundle map vanishes if one of its entries lies in
T∂M⊂T M|∂M . Since the quotient bundleT M|∂M/T∂Mis trivialized bydρ, we
conclude that there is a smooth sectionψofT∂M, such that the boundary value
ofρ∇ ρ
ξηequalsdρ(ξ)| ∂Mdρ(η)|∂Mψ.
Now we can extendψto a vector field ˜ψ∈X(U) such thatdρ( ˜ψ)≡0. Then
A:=dρ⊗dρ⊗ ˜ψis a smooth section of (S 2T∗M⊗T M) 0, where the subscript
indicates the trace-free part. Of course ˜∇ξη=∇ ξη− 1
ρA(ξ,η) is a well-defined
linear connection onU∩M, which is torsion-free sinceAis symmetric. Moreover,
sinceAis trace-free,σis parallel for the connection induced by ˜∇. Passing to
the projective modifications of the two connections determined byρ, we of course
get ˜∇ρ
ξη=∇ ρ
ξη− 1
ρA(ξ,η). By constructionρ ˜∇ρ
ξηadmits a smooth extension to
the boundary for anyξ,η∈X( M) and again by construction this has vanishing
boundary value. Thus ˜∇ρ
ξηadmits a smooth extension to the boundary, which by
definition implies that ˜∇is projectively compact of order one.□
Having the canonical defining densityσat hand, we can actually convert the vec-
tor fieldψobtained in the proof into a canonical weighted object, which expresses
the obstruction to∇being projectively compact. Knowing thatσis a defining
density for∂M, we conclude that for a linear connection ˆ∇onE(1), the derivative
ˆ∇σis independent of the choice of ˆ∇along the zero locus∂Mofσ. Sinceσis a
defining density, we also conclude that for any defining functionρfor the boundary,
σ
ρ admits a smooth extension to the boundary with nowhere vanishing boundary
value. This readily implies thatσ∇ ρ
ξηadmits a smooth extension to the boundary
for anyξ,η∈X( M). Then the considerations in the proof above can be rephrased
as the fact that there exists a sectionµofT∂M(−1) :=T∂M⊗E(−1) such that
the boundary value ofσ∇ ρ
ξηequals ( ˆ∇ξσ)|∂M ( ˆ∇ησ)|∂Mµfor anyξ,η. The only
dependence on a choice here is via the use of∇ ρ. But as observed above for any
other defining function ˆρ, the difference∇ρ
ξη−∇ ˆρ
ξηadmits a smooth extension to
the boundary, soµ∈Γ(T∂M(−1)) is canonically associated to∇.
2.4.Boundary structures.Let∇be a special linear connection onMand let
σ∈Γ(E(1)| M) be a nonzero density which is parallel for∇. In the case that

===== PAGE 11 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 11
∇is projectively compact of order 1, it was shown in Proposition 3.1 of [9] that
σPab is smooth up to the boundary and defines a second fundamental form along
the boundary. HereP ab is the projective Schouten tensor which for a special
connection is just a constant multiple of the Ricci curvature. In particular, this
implies that the boundary is totally geodesic provided that∇has the property
that its Ricci curvature admits a smooth extension to the boundary. In this case,
one then obtains an induced projective structure on the boundary, which, in the
case of Ricci-flat projectively compact metrics, is studied in detail in [9].
Thus we see that additional conditions will be necessary to obtain a boundary ge-
ometry induced by a connection∇onTMwhich is only projectively pre-compact.
Surprisingly, not much is lost compared to the projectively compact case. We first
discuss the connections on densities induced by the connections∇ ρ. Recall that
on a smooth manifoldNof dimensionn+ 1, one can define the bundle vol(N) of
volume densities as used in Section 2.2 of [9] as the square root of the trivial line
bundle (Λn+1T∗M)⊗(Λ n+1T∗M). The density bundleE(1) which is relevant for
our purposes is then defined as the (n+ 2) nd root of vol(N). In particular, in our
setting ofM=M∪∂M, any linear connection onTMinduces a linear connection
onE(1)| M, and it is natural to ask whether such a connection is smooth up to the
boundary.
Lemma 2.4.In our usual setting of M=M∪∂M, let∇be a special linear
connection onTM, which is projectively pre-compact. Letρ:U→Rbe a local
defining function for∂Mand∇ ρ the corresponding modified connection. Then the
induced connection∇ ρ onE(1)| U∩M smoothly extends to all ofU.
Proof.Fixing a non-zero sectionσ∈Γ(E(1)| U) which is parallel for∇, we know
from Proposition 2.3 thatσsmoothly extends by 0 to a defining density forU∩∂M.
By definition, this means that there is a smooth, nowhere vanishing sectionσ ρ∈
Γ(E(1)|U) such thatσcoincides withρσ ρ onU∩M. But overU∩M,∇ ρ is
obtained from∇via a smooth projective change, so we can use the usual formula
for the change of the induced connection on densities there. Hence for any vector
fieldξ∈X(U∩M), we get
0 =∇ ξ(ρσρ) =∇ ρ
ξ(ρσρ)− dρ(ξ)
ρ ρσρ =ρ∇ ρ
ξσρ.
Sinceρis nowhere vanishing onU∩M, we conclude that∇ ρ
ξσρ = 0 onU∩M.
But now any sectionτofE(1)| U can be written asfσ ρ for a functionf∈
C∞(U,R) and thus forξ∈X(U), we get∇ ρ
ξτ=df(ξ)σ ρ which is smooth up to
the boundary.□
This easily brings us to a canonical weighted second fundamental form and
indeed a bit further than that. Starting from∇, we can take the smooth section
σ∈Γ(E(1)) and then form∇ ρσwhich is a well defined smooth section ofT ∗M(1).
Theorem 2.5.The section∇ ρ∇ρσof⊗ 2T∗M(1)is symmetric and admits a
smooth extension to the boundary. Denoting the boundary value byΦ ρ,Φ ρ(ξ,η)
is independent ofρif at least one of the vector fieldsξ,ηlies inΓ(T∂M)⊂

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 ˇCap, Gover
Γ(TM| ∂M ), so we denote it byΦin this case. Ifξ∈X( M)andη∈X ∂(M), then
Φ(ξ|∂M,η|∂M )is the boundary value of dρ(ξ)dρ(η)
ρ −dρ(∇ρ
ξη). If alsoξ∈X ∂(M), then
the first summand vanishes along the boundary, soΦ| T∂M×T∂M defines a canonical
weighted second fundamental form for∂M.
Proof.Take vector fieldsξ,η∈X( M). Over the interior, we get∇ ρ∇ρσ(ξ,η) =
∇ρ
ξ∇ρ
ησ−∇ρ
∇ρ
ξησ. By Lemma 2.4, the first summand is smooth up to the boundary.
In the proof of this Lemma, we have seen that∇ ρσ=dρ⊗σ ρ, so the second
summand can be written asdρ(∇ ρ
ξη)σρ, which by definition is smooth up to the
boundary, too. This observation also shows that
(2.2)∇ ρ∇ρσ(ξ,η) = (ξ·dρ(η)−dρ(∇ ρ
ξη))σρ.
In the interior, this expression is visibly symmetric sinceddρ= 0 and since∇ ρ is
torsion-free as a projective modification of the torsion-free connection∇.
For a second defining function ˆρ=e fρ, we getdˆρ=e fdρ+ ˆρdfand inserting
this, we see that
(2.3)ξ·dˆρ(η) =e fdf(ξ)dρ(η) +efξ·dρ(η) +e fdρ(ξ)df(η) +O(ρ)
On the other hand,∇ ˆρ
ξη=∇ ρ
ξη+df(ξ)η+df(η)ξ, and hence−dˆρ(∇ ˆρ
ξη) can be
written as
(2.4)−e f 
dρ(∇ρ
ξη+df(ξ)η+df(η)ξ) +df(ρ∇ ρ
ξη)

+O(ρ).
Finally, sinceσ ρ is characterized byρσ ρ =σ, we see thatσ ˆρ=e −fσρ, so using
(2.2), we see that
∇ˆρ∇ˆρσ(ξ,η) =∇ ρ∇ρσ(ξ,η)−df(ρ∇ ρ
ξη)σρ +O(ρ).
If eitherξorηlies inX ∂(M), thenρ∇ ρ
ξη=O(ρ), hence in this caseρand ˆρ
lead to the same boundary value. Finally, ifηlies inX ∂(M), thenξ·dρ(η) =
dρ(ξ)dρ(η)
ρ +O(ρ) and if alsoξlies inX ∂(M), this itself isO(ρ), which completes
the proof.□
2.5.The case of totally geodesic boundary.We next study vanishing of (parts
of) the canonical bilinear form Φ from Theorem 2.5.
Proposition 2.6.For M=M∪∂Mlet∇be a special linear connection onTM
which is projectively pre-compact and has the property that the weighted second
fundamental formΦ| T∂M×T∂M from Theorem 2.5 vanishes identically.
Then for any local defining functionρ, the connection∇ ρ restricts to give a
torsion-free linear connection onT∂M→∂Mand any other defining functionˆρ
leads to a projectively equivalent connection. Hence the boundary∂Minherits a
projective structure from∇.
Proof.By Theorem 2.5 vanishing of Φ onT∂M×T∂Mis equivalent to the fact that
forξ,η∈X ∂(M),dρ(∇ ρ
ξη) vanishes along the boundary, so∇ ρ mapsX ∂(M)×
X∂(M) toX ∂(M). Given vector fieldsξ andη on∂M, we can choose smooth
extensions toξ,η∈X ∂(M) and then consider the boundary value of∇ ρ
ξηwhich

===== PAGE 13 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 13
lies inX(∂M). One immediately verifies that this depends only onξ andη and
not on the choice of the extensions. Thus we obtain a well defined operation
X(∂M)×X(∂M)→X(∂M), which clearly defines a linear connection onT∂M.
Torsion-freeness of∇ ρ then immediately implies torsion-freeness of the induced
connection. Finally, we have seen already that for ˆρ=e fρ, we get∇ ˆρ
ξη=∇ ρ
ξη+
df(ξ)η+df(η)ξ. Since the functionfis smooth up to the boundary, so isdfand
the restriction ofdftoT∂Mdefines an element of Ω 1(∂M), which describes a
projective equivalence between the induced connections on the boundary.□
Of course, there is a natural strengthening of this condition, which will turn out
to be of crucial importance in what follows, namely that Φ vanishes identically
on all ofT M|∂M×T∂M. By Theorem 2.5, this is the case if and only if for any
ξ∈X( M) andη∈X ∂(M),dρ(∇ ρ
ξη) and dρ(ξ)dρ(η)
ρ have the same boundary value.
Definition 2.7.(1) If∇is projectively pre-compact and is such that the weighted
second fundamental form Φ|T∂M×T∂M from Theorem 2.5 vanishes, then we say that
∇isprojectively pre-compact with totally geodesic boundary.
(2) In the situation of (1) for any of the connections∇ ρ, we will denote the
induced linear connection on the boundary also by∇ ρ.
(3) If∇is projectively pre-compact and such that the bilinear form Φ from
Theorem 2.5 vanishes onTM| ∂M×T∂M, then we say that∇isprojectively pre-
compact with strongly totally geodesic boundary.
2.6.Ricci curvature and second fundamental form.We next analyze the
curvature asymptotics of the modified connections∇ ρ. Recall that for a smooth
manifoldNand a general linear connection onTN, there is a Ricci-type contrac-
tion of the curvature, which defines a section of⊗ 2T∗N. This is symmetric if and
only if the connection preserves a volume density.
Lemma 2.8.For M=M∪∂Mconsider a special linear connection∇onTM
which is projectively pre-compact. For a local defining functionρfor∂M, consider
the modified connection∇ ρ onTMand letR ρ be its curvature andRic ρ its Ricci
curvature.
(1) Forξ,η,ζ∈X( M)the vector fieldρR ρ(ξ,η)(ζ)admits a smooth extension
to the boundary. Moreover,R ρ(ξ,η)(ζ)itself admits a smooth extension to the
boundary if bothξandηare inX ∂(M).
(2) Forξ,η∈X( M), the functionρRic ρ(ξ,η)admits a smooth extension to the
boundary. Moreover,Ric ρ(ξ,η)admits a smooth extension to the boundary if both
ξandηlie inX ∂(M).
(3) Suppose that∇is projectively pre-compact with totally geodesic boundary.
ThenR ρ(ξ,η)(ζ)admits a smooth extension to the boundary ifζlies inX ∂(M)
andRic ρ(ξ,η)also admits a smooth extension to the boundary if one of its entries
lies inX ∂(M).
Proof.We directly use the defining equation
(2.5)R ρ(ξ,η)(ζ) =∇ ρ
ξ∇ρ
ηζ−∇ ρ
η∇ρ
ξζ−∇ ρ
[ξ,η]ζ.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 ˇCap, Gover
Observe that by skew symmetry ofR ρ inξandη, we may always assume that one
of the two fields, sayη, satisfiesdρ(η)≡0. (Locally fix a vector fieldξ 0 such that
dρ(ξ0)≡1 and then expandξ=dρ(ξ)ξ 0 + (ξ−dρ(ξ)ξ 0) and like-wise forη.)
In the interior, we haveρR ρ(ξ,η)(ζ) =R ρ(ξ,η)(ρζ) and sinceρζlies inX ∂(M),
replacingζbyρζin (2.5), the last summand in the right hand side admits a
smooth extension to the boundary. Likewise,∇ ρ
ξρζadmits a smooth extension
and sinceη∈X ∂(M), we see that∇ ρ
η∇ρ
ξρζadmits a smooth extension to the
boundary. Finally, by our assumption onη, we have∇ ρ
ηρζ=ρ∇ ρ
ηζand since
this is inX ∂(M),∇ ρ
ξ∇ρ
ηρζalso is smooth up to the boundary. HenceρR ρ(ξ,η)(ζ)
always admits a smooth extension to the boundary.
If bothξandηlie inX ∂(M), then so does [ξ,η], and hence∇ ρ
ξζ,∇ ρ
ξζand∇ ρ
[ξ,η]ζ
all admit smooth extensions. This in turn shows that also∇ ρ
ξ∇ρ
ηζand∇ ρ
η∇ρ
ξζ
extend smoothly, and this completes the proof of (1).
In the setting of (3), assume thatζand without loss of generalityηlie inX ∂(M).
Then the last two summands in (2.5) cause no problems while the assumptions im-
ply that∇ ρ
ηζlies inX ∂(M) so∇ ρ
ξ∇ρ
ηζadmits a smooth extension to the boundary,
too.
Switching to the Ricci curvature, the fact thatρRic ρ admits a smooth extension
to the boundary follows immediately from (1) since Ric ρ is a contraction ofR ρ.
For the second part, this is not as easy, since when computing Ricρ(ξ,η) as a trace,
ξandηare not both inserted into the form slots ofR ρ. As in (1), we locally choose
ξ0∈X( M) such thatdρ(ξ 0)≡1 and extend this to a local frame byξ i∈X( M),
i= 1,...,nsuch thatdρ(ξ i)≡0 fori≥1. Then the dual coframe has the form
dρ,α i fori= 1,...,n, and by definition we get (onM)
(2.6) Ric ρ(ξ,η) =dρ(R ρ(ξ,ξ 0)(η)) +P
i≥1αi(Rρ(ξ,ξi)(η)).
Sinceξ,ξ i∈X ∂(M) each term in the sum in the right hand side admits a smooth
extension to the boundary. For the first term in the right hand side, we have to go
back to the defining equation (2.5). But by construction∇ [ξ,ξ0]η,∇ ξ0ηand hence
∇ξ∇ξ0η, and∇ ξηadmit smooth extension to the boundary. But this implies that
alsodρ(∇ ξ0∇ξη) admits a smooth extension, so the result follows.
Under the stronger assumption of (3), we know from above that all curvature
terms in the right hand side of (2.6) admit a smooth extension to the boundary if
ηlies inX ∂(M). By symmetry of Ric ρ in the interior, this implies the last part of
(3).□
Recall that the Schouten tensor of a linear connection on the tangent bundle
TNof a smooth manifoldNis an equivalent encoding of the Ricci curvature,
which mixes the symmetric and skew symmetric parts with different factors. In
particular, for a special connection, it is just 1
dim(N)−1 times the Ricci curvature.
Thus we see that the analog of the statements on Ric ρ from Lemma 2.8 also hold
for the Schouten tensorP ρ of∇ ρ.
Theorem 2.9.Consider M=M∪∂Mand a special connection∇onTMwhich
is projectively pre-compact. Letσ∈Γ(E(1)| M)be a nonzero section that is parallel

===== PAGE 15 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 15
for∇and letPbe the Schouten tensor of∇. Then the sectionσPofS 2T∗M(1)
admits a smooth extension to the boundary and its boundary value restricts on
T∂M×T∂Mto the canonical weighted second fundamental formΦfrom Theorem
2.5. Moreover, the formΦvanishes onT M|∂M×T∂Mif and only if the boundary
value ofσPhas the same property.
Proof.OnM, we can writeσP=∇∇σ+σPand it is well known that the
right hand side defines a projectively invariant second order differential opera-
tor Γ(E(1))→Γ(S 2T∗M(1)), see [4]. Hence we may as well express it in terms of
the projectively equivalent connection∇ ρ, whence
(2.7)σP=∇ ρ∇ρσ+σP ρ.
Now the two terms on the right hand side admit a smooth extension to the bound-
ary. For the first term this follows from Theorem 2.5 and for the second term
this follows from Lemma 2.8, taking into account thatσ=ρσ ρ. This proves the
first claim. For the second claim, we know that forξ,η∈X ∂(M), the function
Pρ(ξ,η) admits a smooth extension to the boundary (again using Lemma 2.8),
soσP ρ(ξ,η) vanishes along the boundary. ThusσP(ξ,η) =∇ ρ∇ρσ(ξ,η) and the
boundary value of this is the canonical weighted second fundamental form from
Theorem 2.5. Hence ifσPvanishes onT∂M×T∂M, then we are in the case of
totally geodesic boundary, so by part (3) of Lemma 2.8,P ρ(ξ,η) admits a smooth
extension the boundary if one of its entries lies inX ∂(M). Hence we see that, in
this situation, the boundary value ofσPagain coincides with Φ.□
Corollary 2.10.For M=M∪∂M, let∇be a linear connection onMthat is
projectively pre-compact and letPbe its Schouten tensor. Then the boundary is
totally geodesic if and only ifP(ξ,η)admits a smooth extension to the boundary
wheneverξ,η∈X ∂(M)and strongly totally geodesic if and only if this holds if one
of the two fields lies inX ∂(M).
Moreover, if∇is projectively pre-compact with strongly geodesic boundary, then
for anyξ,η∈X( M), we get
(2.8)dρ(∇ ρ
ξη) =ξ·dρ(η) +ρP ρ(ξ,η)−ρP(ξ,η).
Proof.The first part follows immediately from Theorem 2.9, while (2.8) follows
readily from combining (2.2) with (2.7).□
2.7.Some b-calculus.For the next step we use the description of the sheafX ∂
onMdeveloped by the Melrose school in geometric analysis. SinceX ∂ is a locally
free sheaf, there is a smooth vector bundleT bM→ M, called theb-tangent bundle,
whose sheaf of smooth sections coincides withX ∂. So by definition, a sectionξ
ofT bMis a special vector field, but one has to carefully distinguish between the
two points of view, in particular if boundary values are concerned. As a vector
field,ξhas a boundary value which is a vector field on∂M, i.e. a smooth section
ofT∂M. Butξalso has a boundary value as a section ofT bM, which is a section
ofT bM|∂M , a bundle whose rank is one larger than the one ofT∂M. Indeed,
mappingξ∈Γ(T bM) to its boundary value as a vector field defines a surjective
bundle mapT bM|∂M→T∂M. A neat way to express things is that forξ∈X(M),

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 ˇCap, Gover
we haveξ∈Γ(T bM) if and only ifdρ(ξ)| ∂M = 0 for one or equivalently any local
defining functionρi.e. iffdρ(ξ) =O(ρ). And the boundary value ofξas a section
ofT bMvanishes iffξ=ρξ 1 for someξ 1∈Γ(T bM) and hence iffdρ(ξ) =O(ρ 2).
Lemma 2.11.There is a short exact sequence
(2.9) 0→∂M×R→T bM|∂M→T∂M→0.
A canonical trivializing section of the first bundle can be realized as the boundary
value ofρν∈Γ(T bM), whereρis a local defining function for the boundary and
ν∈X( M)is a vector field such thatdρ(ν)| ∂M≡1.
Proof.By construction, the vector fieldρνvanishes along∂M, soρν∈Γ(T bM).
Sincedρ(ρν) =ρ+O(ρ 2) and this is notO(ρ 2), we conclude that the boundary
value ofρνas a section ofT bMspans the kernel ofT bM|∂M →T∂M, and it
remains to show that this boundary value is independent of the choice ofρandν.
Any other choice forνis of the form ˆν=ν+η, whereη∈X( M) is such that
dρ(η)|∂M ≡0. But thenη∈Γ(T bM) and henceρˆν=ρν+ρηhas the same
boundary value asρν. Any other defining function is of the form ˆρ=e fρand then
dˆρ|∂M =e fdρ|∂M . Hence given a choiceνforρ, we can put ˆν=e −fνand then
ˆρˆν=ρν, which completes the proof.□
Once the vector bundleT bMis at hand, we can apply all the standard tools
from differential geometry to it. This immediately allows us to form the weighted
b-tangent bundle of weightw∈Rby puttingT bM(w) :=T bM⊗E(w). We can
also apply vector bundle constructions, e.g. form the dual bundle (T bM)∗, the
symmetric squareS 2TbMor the symmetric squareS 2(TbM)∗ of the dual. For the
bundles constructed fromT bM(without dualization) the interpretation of sections
is rather easy starting from tensor products of sections ofT bM, which locally span
the space of all sections. For example, a sectionbofS 2TbMis a section ofS 2TM,
which contracted withdρgives a section ofT bMthat isO(ρ) and hence contracting
bwith two copies ofdρthe result is a function that isO(ρ 2).
Things are a bit more subtle for the dual. As we have seen above, locally around
a boundary point, we can form a local frame forT bMconsisting ofρνand vector
fieldsζ 1,...,ζ n such thatdρ(ζ i)≡0. Now we can chooseα i∈Ω 1(M) such that
αi(ν) = 0 andα i(ξj) =δ ij and add to this the formdρ
ρ onM. Since forξ∈Γ(T bM),
dρ(ξ) =O(ρ), the function dρ(ξ)
ρ admits a smooth extension to the boundary. Thus
dρ
ρ defines a smooth section of (T bM)∗ over all of Mand clearly theα i also define
such sections, so together these form the dual of the frame{ρν,ζ 1,...,ζ n}. This
leads to a neat description of sections of (T bM)∗: A section of this bundle is a
one-formφonMsuch thatρφadmits a smooth extension to the boundary and
such thatφ(ξ) admits a smooth extension to the boundary ifξ∈X ∂(M).
In particular, we have Ω 1(M)⊂Γ((T bM)∗) corresponding to the inclusion
T∗M ,→(T bM)∗ dual to the projectionT bM→T M. The elements in this
subspace can be easily characterized. Choose a (local) defining functionρand
a vector fieldνsuch thatdρ(ν)| ∂M ≡1. Thenρν∈Γ(T bM) and we claim
that ifφ∈Γ(T bM)∗ satisfiesφ(ρν)| ∂M = 0 thenφ∈Ω 1(M). Indeed, we know

===== PAGE 17 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 17
thatρφ∈Ω 1(M), so it suffices to prove that this vanishes along the boundary.
Butξ∈X(M) can be written asξ 1 +dρ(ξ)νwhereξ 1 :=ξ−dρ(ξ)νsatisfies
dρ(ξ1) =O(ρ) and henceξ 1 ∈X ∂(M). Thusφ(ξ 1) admits a smooth exten-
sion to the boundary soρφ(ξ 1) vanishes along the boundary. On the other hand
ρφ(dρ(ξ)ν) =dρ(ξ)φ(ρν), so this isO(ρ) by assumption.
Having these descriptions at hand, the passage to the results of tensorial con-
structions is easy starting from tensor products of sections. For example, a section
bofS 2(TbM)∗ is a section ofS 2T∗Msuch thatρ 2badmits a smooth extension to
the boundary and forξ∈X ∂(M),ρb(ξ, ) admits a smooth extension to the bound-
ary as a section of (T bM)∗. Hence in particular forη∈X ∂(M),b(ξ,η) admits a
smooth extension to the boundary. As above, we have Γ(S 2T∗M)⊂Γ(S 2(TbM)∗)
and one immediately shows that a sectionblies in this subspace if forρandνas
above andξ∈X ∂(M), we haveb(ρν,ξ) =O(ρ) andb(ρν,ρν) =O(ρ 2).
2.8.A canonical connection.We can consider linear connections on bundles
constructed fromT bM, to which all the general results about linear connections
can be applied. In particular, starting from a projectively pre-compact linear
connection∇onM⊂ M, we have an induced connection on any density bundle
E(w) by Proposition 2.3. Hence overM, we have an induced linear connection
on any weighted tangent bundle, which we also denote by∇, and we obtain the
following result.
Theorem 2.12.For M=M∪∂M, let∇be a projectively pre-compact linear
connection onTM. Then forξ∈X( M)andη∈Γ(T bM(−1))⊂Γ(T M(−1)), the
weighted vector field∇ ξηdefined onMadmits a smooth extension to the boundary.
If the boundary is strongly totally geodesic, then this extension lies inX ∂(M).
Hence, under this assumption,∇extends smoothly to a linear connection on the
vector bundleT bM(−1)→ M.
Proof.The usual formula for projective changes in [4] shows that, overM, we can
write∇ ξη=∇ ρ
ξη− dρ(η)
ρ ξ(and the weight−1 is essential for the term containing
dρ(ξ) to drop out). Sinceηis tangent to the boundary along the boundary, both
summands admit a smooth extension to the boundary. Applyingdρto the right
hand side, we getdρ(∇ρ
ξη)− dρ(ξ)dρ(η)
ρ which, in the case of strongly totally geodesic
boundary, vanishes along the boundary (see Theorem 2.5).□
Hence we have obtained a vector bundleT bM(−1)→ Mof rankn+ 1, which is
endowed with a linear connection that we still denote by∇. This bundle can be
restricted to∂Mwithout problems, and it follows from the general theory of linear
connections that one can also restrict the connection to the boundary. Indeed for
ξ∈X(∂M) andη∈Γ(T bM(−1)|∂M ) one chooses (local) extensions to ˜ξ∈X ∂(M)
and ˜η∈Γ(TbM(−1)) and then considers∇ ˜ξ ˜η|∂M . It is clear that this depends only
on ˜ξ|∂M =ξ, while forη, the freedom is to add aρ˜η 1 forη 1∈Γ(T bM(−1)), and
one immediately concludes that this leads to the same restriction to the boundary.

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 ˇCap, Gover
2.9.Relation to boundary tractors.Starting from a projectively pre-compact
connection∇with strongly totally geodesic boundary, we get an induced pro-
jective structure on the boundary∂Mas well as the rankn+ 1 vector bundle
TbM(−1)|∂M →∂Mwhich is endowed with a linear connection induced by∇.
One may hope that this is related to the projective standard tractor bundle of
the boundary projective structure. There is a relation without additional assump-
tions, but the main result is that under a slightly stronger condition, the restriction
indeed coincides with the standard tractor bundle and its normal tractor connec-
tion. We want to stress here that this conceptual description of the boundary
tractors is new even in the case of projectively compact connections, the results in
[9] apply only in the case that∇is Ricci flat in a neighborhood of the boundary.
In contrast, we only require asymptotic Ricci-flatness in directions tangent to the
boundary here.
Let us briefly recall the standard approach to projective tractors on a manifold
Nof dimensionnendowed with a projective class of affine connections, see [4] for
more details and explicit formulae. One usually starts from the standard cotractor
bundle, which can be simply defined as a first jet prolongation of a line bundle
T∗N:=J 1E(1). HereE(1)→Nis the bundle of (projective) 1-densities, a trivial
line bundle characterized by the fact thatE(1) ⊗2n+2∼= (ΛnTN)⊗2
. The jet exact
sequence for this bundle has the form
0→T ∗N(1)→T ∗N→E(1)→0.
Any linear connection onE(1) defines a splitting of this short exact sequence, and in
particular, one can apply this to the connections induced by the affine connections
in the projective class. Hence any connection in the projective class gives rise to
an identificationT ∗N∼=E(1)⊕T ∗N(1) and one can use the connection defining
the identification, its Schouten tensor and algebraic ingredients to define a linear
connection onT ∗Nin the given splitting and then verify that the construction
is independent of the choice of connection. Hence it gives rise to a canonical
connection onT ∗Ncalled thestandard cotractor connection.
The standard tractor bundleTN→Nis then defined as the dual bundle to
T∗N, which implies that one gets an exact sequence
(2.10) 0→E(−1)→TN→TN(−1)→0
and any connection in the projective class determines a a splitting of this sequence.
The standard tractor connection onTNis then obtained from dualizing the stan-
dard cotractor connection and it is easy to derive the formula for the standard
tractor connection in such a splitting, see [4].
Theorem 2.13.For M=M∪∂M, let∇be an affine connection onM, which
is projectively pre-compact and letPbe the Schouten tensor of∇. Suppose further
that for allξ,η∈X( M), the functionP(ξ,η)admits a smooth extension to the
boundary if at least one of the fields lies inX ∂(M)and its boundary value vanishes
if both fields lie inX ∂(M). Then the bundleT bM(−1)|∂M with the connection
induced by∇can be naturally identified with the projective standard tractor bundle
of the induced projective structure on∂Mand its normal tractor connection.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 19
Proof.First note that our assumptions imply that∇has strongly totally geodesic
boundary, so we indeed get a linear connection onT bM(−1)|∂M induced by∇. We
next observe that by expression (2.9) from Lemma 2.11, the bundleT bM(−1)|∂M
fits into an exact sequence which looks like the sequence (2.10) for the standard
tractor bundle. The only difference is that the (−1)-density bundle of∂Mis
replaced by the restrictionE(−1)| ∂M of the (−1)-density bundle of M. (Note that
the power in the definition of (−1)-densities as a root of the bundle of volume
forms depends on the dimension). So we first prove that there is a natural way to
identify these two bundles.
Fix a non-zero densityσ∈Γ(E(1)| M) which is parallel for∇. By Proposition
2.3, this extends by 0 to a smooth section ofE(1)→ Mwhich is a defining
density for∂M. Taking any linear connection ˜∇onE(1), the derivative ˜∇σ|∂M is
a nowhere vanishing section ofT ∗∂M⊗E(1)| ∂M . This is independent of the choice
of ˜∇and its kernel in a pointx∈∂Mcoincides withT x∂M⊂T xM. Putting
n:= dim(∂M), taking the wedge product with this weighted one form induces
an isomorphism Λ nT∗∂M→Λ n+1T∗M⊗E(1), and hence between the squares
of this line bundles. But the square of the first bundle is the (intrinsic) density
bundleE ∂M (−2n−2) while square of the second bundle is the restriction to∂M
ofE(−2n−4)⊗E(2) =E(−2n−2). Since this extends to powers, roots and duals,
we can in particular identifyE(1)| ∂M with theE ∂M (1), so we drop the subscript.
Thus we have an exact sequence of the right form. In order to obtain the usual
formula for the standard tractor connection, we have to make a small change,
however. We define the inclusionE(−1),→T bM(−1)|∂M by sending a densityτ
to the boundary value of−τρνwheredρ(ν)| ∂M≡1. From the proof of Lemma 2.11
we also see how a choice of local defining functionρgives rise to a splitting of the
exact sequence. Given ˜η∈Γ(T bM(−1)) the (−1)-density− dρ(˜η)
ρ admits a smooth
extension to the boundary and its boundary value depends only on the boundary
value of ˜η, which is a section ofTbM(−1)|∂M . Hence we have constructed a bundle
mapT bM(−1)|∂M→E(−1) (depending on the choice ofρ), which evidently splits
the inclusion defined above.
So it remains to compute the connection induced by∇in such a splitting and
we fix the defining functionρto determine the splitting. Then we take ˜η∈
Γ(TbM(−1)) and ˜ξ∈X ∂(M) and denote byξ∈X(∂M) the boundary value of the
vector field ˜ξ. Then we know that, in the splitting determined byρ, the boundary
values of ˜ηcorresponds to (η,τ), whereηis the boundary value of the vector field
˜ηandτis the boundary value of− dρ(˜η)
ρ . Now we compute
(2.11)∇ ˜ξ ˜η=∇ρ
˜ξ ˜η−dρ(˜η)
ρ
˜ξ,
and we have to determine the boundary value of this section ofT bM(−1) in the
splitting determined byρ. In the first component, this simply is the boundary value
as a vector field, which is just∇ ρ
ξη+τξ, where∇ ρ also denotes the connection on
T∂M(−1) induced by the connection∇ ρ in the projective class. This agrees with
the formula for the standard tractor connection in Section 3.2 of [4].

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 ˇCap, Gover
To deal with the other component, we need one more observation. For ˜ξand
another vector field ˜ζ∈X ∂(M), we can apply the formula (2.8), taking into
account thatP( ˜ξ,˜η) =O(ρ) by assumption, to conclude that
dρ(∇ρ
˜ξ
˜ζ) = ˜ξ·dρ( ˜ζ) +ρP ρ(˜ξ, ˜ζ) +O(ρ 2).
This equation can be twisted by a density without problems, one only has to
replace the derivative in the first term of the right hand side by∇ ρ
˜ξ, so
dρ(∇ρ
˜ξ ˜η) =∇˜ξdρ(˜η) +ρPρ(˜ξ,˜η) +O(ρ2).
Taking this into account, we see that applying −dρ
ρ to (2.11) and ignoring terms
that areO(ρ), we obtain
−1
ρ∇ρ
˜ξdρ(˜η)−Pρ(˜ξ,˜η) + 1
ρ2dρ(˜ξ)dρ(˜η),
for the right hand side. The first and last terms here add up to−∇ ρ
˜ξ
dρ(˜η)
ρ , so
the boundary value of the whole expression is∇ ξτ−P ρ(ξ,η). This matches the
second component of the formula for the tractor connection in [4], apart from the
fact thatP ρ is the boundary value of the Schouten tensor of the connection∇ ρ on
Mrather then the Schouten tensor of the induced connection on the boundary, so
it remains to show that these agree.
Since the boundary is totally geodesic, the curvature of the restriction of∇ ρ
to∂Mis obtained by inserting vector fields inX ∂(M) into the curvature of∇ ρ
and then taking boundary values. However, passing to the Ricci curvature, one
has to take traces over different spaces. Fixingρ, we choose a local vector field
νsuch thatdρ(ν)≡1. Then we choose a local frame forT∂Malong∂Mand
extend the elements to vector fields which insert trivially intodρto obtain a local
smooth frame forT M. This has the property that the dual coframe consists ofdρ
and of forms that restrict to the dual coframe of the initial frame forT∂M. For
vector fields ˜ξ, ˜ζ∈X ∂(M) we denote byξ,ζ∈X(∂M) their restrictions to∂M.
Denoting by Ricρ
∂ the Ricci curvature of the boundary connection and by Ricρ the
boundary value of the Ricci curvature of the interior connection, the difference
Ricρ(ξ,ζ)−Ric ρ
∂(ξ,ζ) clearly is the boundary value ofdρ(R(ν, ˜ξ)( ˜ζ)).
Now we can applydρto the defining equation forR(ν, ˜ξ)( ˜ζ), then use (2.8) and
drop terms that areO(ρ) to get
ν·dρ(∇ ρ
˜ξ
˜ζ)− ˜ξ·dρ(∇ ρ
ν ˜ζ)−[ν, ˜ξ]·dρ( ˜ζ).
Next, for the first two summands, we can again use (2.8), but have to carry out
the differentiation before droppingO(ρ)-terms. Up to terms that are obviously
O(ρ), this gives
ν· ˜ξ·dρ( ˜ζ) +dρ(ν)(P ρ(˜ξ, ˜ζ)−P( ˜ξ, ˜ζ))
− ˜ξ·ν·dρ( ˜ζ)−dρ( ˜ξ)(Pρ(ν, ˜ζ)−P(ν, ˜ζ))−[ν, ˜ξ]·dρ( ˜ζ).

===== PAGE 21 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 21
Of course the three derivative terms cancel by definition of the Lie bracket, and
dρ(˜ξ) isO(ρ), so this part can be dropped, too. Sincedρ(ν)≡1 and by our
assumptionP( ˜ξ, ˜ζ) vanishes along the boundary, we conclude that
Ricρ(ξ,ζ)−Ric ρ
∂(ξ,ζ) =P ρ(ξ,ζ) = 1
n Ricρ(ξ,ζ)
and hence Ric ρ
∂(ξ,ζ) = n−1
n Ricρ(ξ,ζ) which exactly implies that the resulting
Schouten tensors agree.□
2.10.Relation to interior tractors.While considerations about tractors in-
spired many of the developments in this article, it turned out that technically the
weighted b-tangent bundle offers a much simpler approach that leads to stronger
results. Thus we will keep the discussion of tractors rather short, but we believe
that the relation of tractors to the b-tangent bundle is of independent interest.
ForM=M∪∂M, a projectively pre-compact affine connection∇onMdefines
a projective structure onM, which makes tools like tractor bundles and tractor
connections available. As mentioned in Section 2.3, one cannot expect that this
projective structure admits a smooth extension to all of M. However, we have
already seen there that some of these toolsdoextend to the boundary. In par-
ticular, the standard cotractor bundle can be defined asJ 1E(1) on all of Mand
the jet exact sequence shows that it has the right composition structure on all
of M. Moreover, by Lemma 2.4, for the linear connection∇ ρ onTMassociated
to a defining functionρ, the induced connection onE(1) extends smoothly to the
boundary. Since such a connection splits the jet exact sequence, also the splittings
of the standard cotractor bundle coming from a defining function are smooth up
to the boundary.
Since general tractor bundles can be obtained by tensorial constructions from
the standard cotractor bundle, all these bundles and their composition series and
splittings extend to all of M. In particular, we obtain an analog of the standard
tractor bundle on all of MasT M:= (J 1E(1))∗ and this comes with a short exact
sequence
0→E(−1)→T M→T M(−1)→0
and a splitting of this sequence associated to any defining functionρ. In particular,
any section ofT Mprojects to a weighted vector field of weight−1. Hence we can
define a subsheaf Γ∂(TM)⊂Γ(T M) as by requiring that this projection is tangent
to∂Malong∂M. As for the tangent bundle, this gives rise to a b-tractor bundle
T bM, which comes with an exact sequence as above, but withT bM(−1) replacing
TM(−1).
Next, we can consider the formula for the standard tractor connection∇ T in
the splittings determined by a defining function, which is mentioned in the proof
of Theorem 2.13, see [4] for details. Apart from tensorial operations, this only
involves the connection∇ ρ and its Schouten tensorP ρ. Assuming that∇has
totally geodesic boundary, we can apply this formula overM, to conclude that for
ξ∈X( M) ands∈Γ(T M), the section∇ T
ξsofT M|M admits a smooth extension
to the boundary ifξ∈X ∂(M) ors∈Γ(T bM). Hence the tractor connection
restricts to well defined operations onX ∂(M)×Γ(T M) andX( M)×Γ(T bM).

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 ˇCap, Gover
However, for the second operation, the values do not lie in Γ(T bM), so it seems
that one doesnotget a connection onT bM.
As we have seen in Proposition 2.3, a nonzero sectionσ∈Γ(E(1)| M) that is
parallel for∇extends by zero to a defining density for∂Mand hence determines
a global, nowhere vanishing sectionI=j 1σofJ 1(E(1)). This spans a smooth line
subbundle inJ 1(E), whose annihilator is a smooth hyperplane bundleI ⊥⊂T M.
Sinceσis a defining density, it follows readily that any section ofI ⊥ projects onto
a weighted vector field that is tangent to∂Malong∂M. This shows that we can
actually viewI ⊥ as a subbundle ofT bM.
The applications of tractors in [9] (where the projective structure admits a
smooth extension to the boundary), which are relevant here, require thatIis
parallel for the tractor connection. This is equivalent to∇being Ricci flat, so in
particular, the boundary is strongly totally geodesic. SinceIis parallel, also the
subbundleI ⊥ is parallel and hence inherits a connection, and it turns out thatI ⊥
and this connection restrict to the projective standard tractor bundle on∂Mand
its normal tractor connection. This approach can be generalized directly to the
projectively pre-compact case via the operatorX ∂(M)×Γ(J 1E(1))→Γ(J 1E(1))
obtained by dualizing the corresponding operation onT M.
However, this can also be easily deduced from Theorem 2.13 (which works un-
der much weaker assumptions) as follows. One easily verifies that the projection
T bM→T bM(−1) restricts to an isomorphismI ⊥→T bM(−1), which overMis
just the inverse of the splitting induced by the connection∇. Moreover, if∇is
Ricci-flat then, in this splitting, the normal tractor connection is simply given by
∇, which completes the argument.
3.Projectively pre-compact metrics
We now turn to the case of projectively pre-compact pseudo-Riemannian met-
rics, which is of interest for applications to general relativity. The main topic here
is the relation of projective pre-compactness to asymptotic forms of the metric.
One of these forms is only available locally around boundary points in a dense open
subset and plays an important role in general relativity. The second asymptotic
form is available everywhere and to our knowledge is new.
3.1.An asymptotic form.In our usual setting M=M∪∂M, we want to
study a certain asymptotic form for a pseudo-Riemannian metricgonM. The
basic setup is that for some functionC, with properties to be specified later, and
an appropriately chosen local defining functionρ, we assume that
(3.1)h:=ρ 2(g− C
ρ2dρ2)
admits a smooth extension to the boundary such that the restriction of the bound-
ary value toT∂M×T∂Mis non-degenerate. This means that thenghas the
asymptotic form
(3.2)g= C
ρ4dρ2 + h
ρ2.

===== PAGE 23 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 23
Observe that such a formdoesdepend on the choice of the defining functionρ.
Forρ=e −f ˆρwe getdρ=e −f(dˆρ−ρdf) and inserting this, we see that we will
get terms involving the symmetric product ofdˆρanddf, which areO(ρ −3) and
cannot be absorbed intoCunlessdf=dˆρ+O(ρ). On the other hand, a constant
rescaling ofρleads to a constant rescaling ofhandC, so one may absorb constant
multiples ofCinto a change of defining function.
The basic assumption will be thatCequals a non-zero constant along the bound-
ary, and this constant can be assumed to be±1. Moreover, it has been shown in
[9] that ifC=±1 +O(ρ 2) and the asymptotic form (3.2) is available locally
around each boundary point, thengis projectively compact of order 1. It has also
been shown in [9] that for any pseudo-Riemannian metricgwhich is projectively
compact of order 1, such an asymptotic form is available locally around appropri-
ate parts of the boundary, which form a dense open subset of the boundary. For
applications in general relativity it turns out to be of fundamental importance to
allow thatC=±1 +O(ρ) in order to allow for a non-trivial mass aspect, see [3].
We now show that such weaker fall-off conditions on the non-constant part ofC
imply projective pre-compactness.
Theorem 3.1.For M=M∪∂M, suppose thatgis a pseudo-Riemannian metric
onMsuch that locally around eachx∈∂M, there is a defining functionρand
a nowhere vanishing functionCsuch that the sectionhdefined in(3.1)admits
a smooth extension to the boundary, whose boundary value is non-degenerate on
T∂M×T∂M. Suppose further that the functionChas the property that for each
vector fieldζthat is smooth up to the boundary and such thatdρ(ζ)≡0, we have
ζ·C=O(ρ). Thengis projectively pre-compact with totally geodesic boundary.
If we even haveζ·C=O(ρ 2)for anyζas above, thengis projectively compact
(of order1).
Proof.Apart from the part asserting that the boundary is totally geodesic, this fol-
lows the analogous proof of Theorem 2.6 of [9], which, in particular, proves the last
statement and actually implies parts of our more general result. Nevertheless, we
repeat parts of that proof to ensure that the stronger assumptions onCimposed
in [9] were not used implicitly. First observe that it suffices to verify the defining
conditions for projective pre-compactness for the connection∇ ρ associated to the
defining function for which the asymptotic form is available. In particular, we have
the tensor fieldhat our disposal, and restricting to a sufficiently small neighbor-
hood of the boundary, we may assume thathis non-degenerate on ker(dρ)×ker(dρ)
everywhere. As in [9], this implies that there is an analog of a Reeb field, i.e. a
vector fieldζ 0 such thatdρ(ζ 0)≡1 and such thath(ζ 0,ζ)≡0 forζ∈ker(dρ).
We can extendζ 0 to a local frame by vector fieldsζi in ker(dρ) and then consider
the frame ˜ζi for ker(dρ) dual to{ζ i}with respect toh| ker(dρ). For a vector field
ξ, we then getξ=dρ(ξ)ζ 0 +P
ih(ξ, ˜ζi)ζi, so to prove thatξadmits a smooth
extension to the boundary, it suffices to prove that the functionsdρ(ξ) andh(ξ,ζ)
forζ∈ker(dρ) admit smooth extensions.

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 ˇCap, Gover
Now the asymptotic form (3.2) readily implies that onM, we get
g(η,ζ 0) =dρ(η)
C
ρ4 + h(ζ0,ζ 0)
ρ2

,
so to show thatdρ(ξ) admits a smooth extension, it suffices to prove thatρ 4g(ξ,ζ 0)
is smooth up to the boundary. Likewise, ifζlies in ker(dρ), the asymptotic form
shows that in the interiorg(ξ,ζ) = 1
ρ2h(ξ,ζ), so to show thath(ξ,ζ) is smooth up
to the boundary, it suffices to prove thatρ 2g(ξ,ζ) has this property.
To apply this to a vector field of the form∇ ρ
ξη, one uses the Koszul formula
to express∇ ξηto conclude that, onM, 2g(∇ ρ
ξη,ζ) can, for any vector fieldζ, be
written as
(3.3)
ξ·g(η,ζ)−ζ·g(ξ,η) +η·g(ξ,ζ)
+g([ξ,η],ζ)−g([ξ,ζ],η)−g([η,ζ],ξ)
+ 2
ρdρ(ξ)g(η,ζ) + 2
ρdρ(η)g(ξ,ζ).
Now the asymptotic form forgreadily implies that we can writeξ·g(η,ζ) as
−4ρ−5Cdρ(ξ)dρ(η)dρ(ζ) +ρ −4ξ·(Cdρ(η)dρ(ζ)) +O(ρ −3).
Puttingζ=ζ 0 and applying this to all three terms in the first line in (3.3), the
ρ−5-terms cancel with the last line of (3.3) and we can write (3.3) in this case as
(3.4)
ρ−4 (ξ·(Cdρ(η))−ζ 0·(Cdρ(ξ)dρ(η) +η·(Cdρ(ξ))) +
+g([ξ,η],ζ)−g([ξ,ζ],η)−g([η,ζ],ξ) +O(ρ −3).
Obviously, all terms in this formula areO(ρ −4), so we concludedρ(∇ ρ
ξη) always
admits a smooth extension to the boundary (regardless of any fall off conditions
on derivatives ofC).
Assuming, in addition, thatξ,η∈X ∂(M), we haveCdρ(η) =O(ρ) and this
remains true after differentiation byξand similarly for the last term in the first
line of (3.4). Likewise,Cdρ(ξ)dρ(η) =O(ρ 2) and differentiating in the direction
ζ0, the result isO(ρ), so the whole first line of (3.4) isO(ρ −3) in this case. For
ξ,η∈X ∂(M), we get [ξ,η]∈X ∂(M) and so, in each of the terms in the second
line of (3.4), one of the vector fields that is inserted intoglies inX ∂(M). By the
asymptotic form ofg, all these terms thus also areO(ρ −3), so forξ,η∈X ∂(M) we
see thatdρ(∇ ρ
ξη) isO(ρ), so the boundary is totally geodesic.
We next analyze (3.3) in the case thatdρ(ζ)≡0. Theng(η,ζ) = 1
ρ2h(η,ζ) for
anyζ∈X( M) and differentiating this in the directionξ, we obtain
−2ρ−3dρ(ξ)h(η,ζ) +O(ρ −2).
Applying this to the first and the last term in the first line of (3.3), there is again a
cancellation with the terms in the last line, while the first summand in the second
line isO(ρ −2). Overall, we conclude that, for the case ofdρ(ζ)≡0, (3.3) can be
written as
(3.5)−ζ·g(ξ,η)−g([ξ,ζ],η)−g([η,ζ],ξ) +O(ρ −2).

===== PAGE 25 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 25
Nowg([ξ,ζ],η) = C
ρ4dρ([ξ,ζ])dρ(η) +O(ρ −2), andddρ(ξ,ζ) = 0 anddρ(ζ) = 0
implydρ([ξ,ζ]) =−ζ·dρ(ξ), and like-wise for the term withξandηexchanged.
On the other hand, the first term in (3.5) gives
−ζ·
 
ρ−4Cdρ(ξ)dρ(η) +O(ρ −2)

.
By assumptionζ·ρ≡0, so we may pull out the factorρ −4 in the first summand,
while the second summand will remain to beO(ρ −2) after differentiation byζ.
Moreover, the the terms in whichζdifferentiatesdρ(ξ) respectivelydρ(η) cancel
with the contributions from above. Hence we conclude that ifdρ(ζ)≡0, then
without any assumption onξandη, (3.5) equals
−ρ−4(ζ·C)dρ(ξ)dρ(η) +O(ρ −2).
Now by assumptionζ·C=O(ρ), so this sum is alwaysO(ρ −3) and it isO(ρ −2)
if eitherξorηlies inX ∂(M). Henceh(ρ∇ ρ
ξη,ζ) =ρh(∇ ρ
ξη,ζ) is smooth up to the
boundary and if eitherξorηlies inX ∂(M) thenh(∇ ρ
ξη,ζ) is smooth up to the
boundary, which completes the proof that∇ ρ is projectively pre-compact.
If we even haveζ·C=O(ρ 2), then the whole expression isO(ρ−2) for anyξand
η, which shows thath(∇ ρ
ξη,ζ) is always smooth up to the boundary and henceg
is projectively compact.□
3.2.The boundary structure.For M=M∪∂Mconsider a pseudo-Riemannian
metricgonMwhich admits an asymptotic form (3.2) and let Ric be the Ricci
curvature ofg, which is just a constant multiple of the Schouten tensor of the
Levi-Civita connection∇ofg. Then by Theorems 3.1 and 2.9 and Corollary 2.10,
we know thatρRic admits a smooth extension to the boundary and Ric(ξ,η) itself
extends smoothly if bothξandηlie inX ∂(M).
To proceed towards a converse of Theorem 3.1, we have to impose a slightly
stronger assumption on the Ricci curvature ofgto be able to apply the results
form Section 2. Our standing assumption from now on will be the following.
Definition 3.2.For M=M∪∂M, we call a projectively pre-compact pseudo-
Riemannian metricgonMwith Ricci curvature Ricasymptotically tangentially
Ricci flatif and only if Ric(ξ,η) admits a smooth extension to the boundary if
one of the fields lies inX ∂(M) and vanishes along the boundary if both fields lie
inX ∂(M).
Observe that this property implies that the boundary is strongly totally geodesic,
so we can apply all the developments of Section 2 to the Levi-Civita connection
∇ofg. Our first result provides a strong additional geometric structure on the
boundary, which, even in the projectively compact case, was only known under
the assumption thatgis Ricci-flat. Note that as a densityσ∈Γ(E(1)) that is
parallel for∇overM, we can take the appropriate power of the volume density
ofghere. We call this thevolume scale.
Theorem 3.3.For M=M∪∂Mletgbe a projectively pre-compact pseudo-
Riemannian metric of signature(p,q)onM, which is asymptotically tangentially
Ricci flat, and letσ∈Γ(E(1))denote the volume scale. Then the smooth section

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 ˇCap, Gover
σ2g∈Γ(S 2T∗M(2))admits a smooth extension to a section ofS 2(TbM)∗(2)over
all of M.
Moreover, the boundary value of this extension is parallel for the connection
induced by∇and non-degenerate as a bundle metric onT bM(−1)|∂M . Hence it
provides a reduction of the projective holonomy of the projective structure on∂M
obtained in Proposition 2.6 to the groupSO(p,q)⊂SL(n+ 1,R).
Proof.Sinceg∈Γ(S 2T∗M) andσ∈Γ(E(1)) are parallel for the connection in-
duced by∇, so isσ 2g∈Γ(S 2T∗M(2)). But we can view this as a section of
S2(TbM)∗(2) defined overM. By Theorem 2.12,∇smoothly extends to a linear
connection onT bM(−1) which which in turn induces a linear connection on the
symmetric square of the dual, i.e. onS 2(TbM)∗(2). Of course,σ 2gis parallel for
this connection overM, so it extends by parallel transport to a smooth section of
S2(TbM)∗(2) over all of M.
Since our connection is induced by a linear connection onT bM(−1), the non-
degeneracy ofσ 2gas a bundle metric onT bM(−1) continues to hold for the ex-
tension. (View the section as a bundle mapT bM(−1)→(T bM(−1))∗. If the
extension would be non-injective in some boundary point, one could parallely
transport a non-zero element in the kernel to obtain a contradiction to injectiv-
ity in the interior. Indeed the signature is also preserved.) Hence the boundary
value is a non-degenerate bundle metric onT bM(−1)|∂M , which is parallel for the
connection induced by∇. Under the identification from Theorem 2.13, this cor-
responds to a bundle metric on the projective standard tractor bundle which is
parallel for the normal tractor connection and hence provides the claimed holo-
nomy reduction.□
Via the general theory of holonomy reductions of Cartan connections developed
in [12], this has remarkable consequences. The case at hand has been discussed in
detail in the literature, see Section 3.1 of [12], Section 3.2 of [11] and Section 3.5
of [9]. The holonomy reduction decomposes∂Minto a disjoint union as∂M=
∂M+⊔∂M 0⊔∂M− of so-calledcurved orbits. Here∂M ± are open subsets of∂M,
while∂M 0 (if non-empty) is an embedded hypersurface which separates these two
open subsets. On∂M ± the holonomy reduction determines pseudo-Riemannian
Einstein metrics of signature (p−1,q) and (p,q−1) and positive and negative
scalar curvature, respectively, whose Levi-Civita connections lie in (the restrictions
of) the projective class. On∂M 0, one obtains a conformal structure of signature
(p−1,q−1) for which the restriction of the tractor bundle provides the conformal
standard tractor bundle. Making the decomposition into curved orbits explicit in
our situation is easy.
Corollary 3.4.For M=M∪∂M, letgbe a pseudo-Riemannian metric onM,
which is projectively pre-compact and asymptotically tangentially Ricci-flat. For
a defining functionρ, choose a vector fieldνsuch thatdρ(ν)| ∂M ≡1. Then the
2-densityρ 2σ2g(ν,ν)defined overMadmits a smooth extension to the boundary.
The boundary value ˜Cof this density is a smooth section of the oriented line
bundleE(2)→∂M, which depends only ongand not on the choice ofρ. Moreover,

===== PAGE 27 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 27
the decomposition∂M=∂M +⊔∂M 0⊔∂M− is according to the strict sign of ˜C
so in particular,∂M 0 is the zero locus for ˜C. Finally, ˜Cis a defining density for
∂M0.
Proof.As we have seen in Section 2.7, the boundary value ofρν∈Γ(T bM) is
independent of the choice ofρand spans the kernel of the projectionT bM|∂M→
T∂M. It also defines the inclusionE(−1)| ∂M→T bM(−1)|∂M which corresponds
to the inclusion of the canonical line bundle into the standard tractor bundle, see
Theorem 2.13. Hence the density ˜Cexactly corresponds to the restriction of the
tractor metric toS 2E(−1)⊂S 2T∂M. Now the result follows from Theorem 3.1
of [12].□
3.3.Necessity of asymptotic forms.Now we are ready to prove that projec-
tively pre-compact metrics which are asymptotically tangentially Ricci flat always
admit specific asymptotic forms. We first provide an asymptotic form that is valid
locally around any boundary point and for any defining function for the boundary.
This is new even in the case of Ricci-flat metrics that are projectively compact of
order one. We also derive a relation between the boundary values of the coeffi-
cients in the expansion. Finally, we prove that locally around boundary points that
lie in∂M ±, one can choose specific defining functions for which the asymptotic
form specializes to (3.2). To formulate this, we need a notation for the symmetric
product of one-forms, so we put (φ 1⊙φ 2)(ξ,η) := 1
2(φ1(ξ)φ2(η) +φ 1(η)φ2(ξ)).
Theorem 3.5.For M=M∪∂M, letgbe a pseudo-Riemannian metric of signa-
ture(p,q)onMwhich is projectively pre-compact and asymptotically tangentially
Ricci flat, and letρbe any defining function for∂M.
(1) There is a smooth functionC: M→R, a one-formλ∈Ω 1(M)and a
sectionh∈Γ(S 2T∗M)such that, overM, we have
(3.6)g= Cdρ 2
ρ4 + λ⊙dρ
ρ3 + h
ρ2.
(2) Given any asymptotic form as in(3.6), letC be the boundary value ofC,
and letλ ∈Ω 1(∂M)andh ∈Γ(S 2T∗∂M)the restrictions of the boundary values
ofλandhto tangential entries. ThenC is a defining function for∂M 0 and the
symmetric bilinear form on the bundleT∂M⊕R, over∂M, defined by
(3.7) ((ξ,a),(η,b))7→C ab− 1
2aλ(η)− 1
2bλ(ξ) +h (ξ,η)
is non degenerate of signature(p,q). Moreover, denoting by∇ ρ the induced con-
nection onT∂Mand byP ρ its Schouten tensor, we get forξ,η,ζ∈X(∂M)
λ =−dC h (ξ,η) =− 1
2(∇ρ
ξλ)(η) +C Pρ(ξ,η)
(∇ρ
ξh)(η,ζ) = 1
2
 
Pρ(ξ,η)λ (ζ) +P ρ(ξ,ζ)λ (η)

.
Proof.We treat (1) first. Fix a vector fieldνwithdρ(ν)≡1 and take the density
˜C=ρ 2σ2g(ν,ν) from Corollary 3.4, which extends smoothly to all of M. Since
dρ
ρ ∈Γ((T bM)∗), we see that
˜C
ρ2dρ2∈Γ(S 2(TbM)∗(2)), so alsok:=σ 2g−
˜C
ρ2dρ2 is
a smooth section of this bundle. By construction we getk(ρν,ρν)≡0. Putting

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 ˇCap, Gover
˜λ(ξ) := 2k(ξ,ρν) forξ∈X ∂(M) defines a smooth section ˜λ∈Γ((T bM)∗(2))
such that ˜λ(ρν)≡0. Hence from Section 2.7 we know that ˜λactually lies in the
subspace Γ(T∗M(2)). Then,
˜λ⊙dρ
ρ defines a smooth section ofS 2(TbM)∗(2), hence
also
(3.8) ˜h:=k−
˜λ⊙dρ
ρ =σ 2g−
˜C
ρ2dρ2− 1
ρ
˜λ⊙dρ
is a smooth section ofS 2(TbM)∗(2). The first (defining) equation shows that
for ˜ξ∈X ∂(M), we get ˜h(ξ,ρν) = 0 and using Section 2.8 we conclude that
˜h∈Γ(S 2T∗M(2)).
Puttingσ ρ = σ
ρ, we obtain a section ofE(1) which is nowhere vanishing and
we defineC:= 1
(σρ)2
˜C,λ= 1
(σρ)2
˜λandh:= 1
(σρ)2
˜h. Of course,C∈C ∞(M,R),
λ∈Ω 1(M) andh∈Γ(S 2T∗M) and multiplying (3.8) by 1
σ2 = 1
ρ2(σρ)2 , we exactly
get (3.6).
For part (2), we suppose now that we have any expression of the form (3.6),
say with coefficients ˆC, ˆλand ˆhand multiply it byσ 2 =ρ 2(σρ)2. Inserting two
copies ofρνinto the result, the last two terms areO(ρ) andO(ρ 2), respectively.
This shows that (σρ)2 ˆC+O(ρ) = ˜Cand hence ˆC=C+O(ρ). In particular, the
boundary value of ˆCequalsC . This also shows that (σρ)2
ρ
ˆλ⊙dρ+(σρ)2˜h=k+O(ρ).
Insertingρνandξ∈X ∂(M) into this, we conclude that ˆλ(ξ) +O(ρ) =λ(ξ), so
the boundary values of ˆλandλagree on vectors tangent to the boundary. In the
same way, one concludes that the boundary values of ˆhandhagree if both their
entries are tangent to the boundary.
Hence it suffices to verify the remaining properties for the the asymptotic form
we have constructed. SinceC= 1
(σρ)2
˜C, andσ ρ is nowhere vanishing, Corollary
3.4 readily implies thatC is a defining function for∂M 0. For the form we have
constructed, (3.7) simply encodes the boundary value of σ2
(σρ)2gonT bM|∂M in the
splitting determined byρ, so non-degeneracy follows readily.
To prove the relations between the coefficients in the asymptotic form, we work
in more generality than needed here for later use. Puttingτ ρ := 1
σρ∈E(−1), we
observe thatC= ˜C(τρ)2 =σ 2g(τρρν,τ ρρν) and the right hand side is a contraction
between a smooth section ofS 2(TbM)∗(2) and two sections ofT bM(−1). Hence
we may differentiate the right hand side using the connection∇, which admits a
smooth extension to the boundary, and use thatσ 2gis parallel for this connection.
Hence for any vector field ˜ξ∈X( M), we get
˜ξ·C= 2σ 2g(τρρν,∇ ˜ξτρρν).
Now overM, we can write
(3.9)∇ ˜ξτρρν=∇ ρ
˜ξτρρν−τ ρ ˜ξ=τ ρ(ρ∇ρ
˜ξν+dρ( ˜ξ)ν− ˜ξ),
where we used that∇ρτρ=0, and observe that the sum of the last two terms inserts
trivially indρ. Plugging this into the above formula for ˜ξ·Cand using thatν

===== PAGE 29 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 29
inserts trivially intoλandh, we see that
(3.10) ˜ξ·C= 2Cdρ(∇ ρ
˜ξν) +λ(ρ∇ ρ
˜ξν)−λ( ˜ξ).
Observe that all terms in the right hand side indeed admit a smooth extension to
the boundary. Now given a vector fieldξ∈X(∂M), we can extend to ˜ξ∈X ∂(M)
such thatdρ( ˜ξ)≡0 and then obtainξ·C as the boundary value of ˜ξ·C. But in
this case,∇ ρ
˜ξνis smooth up to the boundary, so the middle term in the right hand
side of (3.10) isO(ρ). Moreover,ρ(ν) is constant andP( ˜ξ,ν) and (by Lemma 2.8)
Pρ(˜ξ,ν) admit a smooth extension to the boundary, so (2.8) shows that the first
term in the right hand side isO(ρ), too. Hence we getξ·C =−λ (ξ), which shows
thatλ =−dC .
For the second identity, we start from a vector fieldη∈X(∂M) and extend
it smoothly to ˜η∈X ∂(M) such thatdρ(˜η)≡0. Together with the fact thatν
inserts trivially intoλandh, this shows thatσ 2g(τρρν,τ ρ˜η) =1
2λ(˜η). As above,
we conclude that for any ˜ξ∈X( M) we get
˜ξ·λ(˜η) = 2σ 2g(∇ ˜ξτρρν,τ ρ˜η) + 2σ2g(τρρν,∇ ˜ξτρ˜η).
Now in the first term we can insert (3.9) while in the second termdρ(˜η)≡0 implies
we can replace∇by∇ ρ and then takeτ ρ out of the derivative. This shows that
(3.11) ˜ξ·λ(˜η) =dρ(∇ ρ
˜ξν)λ(˜η) + 2h(ρ∇ρ
˜ξν,˜η)−2h( ˜ξ,˜η) + 2C
ρdρ(∇ρ
˜ξ ˜η) +λ(∇ρ
˜ξ ˜η).
By (2.8), since ˜η∈X ∂(M), anddρ(˜η)≡0,dρ(∇ ρ
˜ξ ˜η) =O(ρ) so all terms in the
right hand side admit a smooth extension to the boundary.
As before, we need the formula here only in the case that ˜ξ∈X ∂(M) is an
extension ofξ∈X(∂M) such thatdρ( ˜ξ)≡0. In this case, the first term in the
right hand side of (3.11) isO(ρ) by (2.8), and the second term isO(ρ) since∇ ρ
˜ξν
admits a smooth extension to the boundary. Finally, (2.8) together withdρ(˜η)≡0
and the fact thatP( ˜ξ,˜η) =O(ρ) implies thatdρ(∇ ρ
˜ξ ˜η) =ρPρ(˜ξ,˜η) +O(ρ). Hence
(3.11) implies that
h(˜ξ,˜η) =− 1
2
˜ξ·λ(η) + 1
2λ(∇ρ
˜ξ ˜η) +CPρ(˜ξ,˜η).
Passing to boundary values, we obtain the claimed equation forh(taking into
account that, from the proof of Theorem 2.13, we know that the boundary value
ofP ρ is the Schouten tensor of the boundary connection).
For the last identity, we takeη,ζ∈X(∂M) and extend to ˜η, ˜ζ∈X ∂(M) which
insert trivially intodρ. Then we immediately see thatσ 2g(τρ˜η,τρ˜ζ) =h(˜η, ˜ζ), and
as before we conclude that for ˜ξ∈X( M), we get
(3.12) ˜ξ·h(˜η, ˜ζ) =σ 2g(τρ∇ρ
˜ξ ˜η,˜ζ) +σ 2g(τρ˜η,τρ∇ρ
˜ξ
˜ζ),
where we replaced∇by∇ ρ as above. Expanding the first term in the right hand
side, we obtain
1
2ρdρ(∇ρ
˜ξ ˜η)λ(˜ζ) +h(∇ ρ
˜ξ ˜η,˜ζ).

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 ˇCap, Gover
and by (2.8), we can rewrite the first term as 1
2(Pρ(˜ξ,˜η)−P( ˜ξ,˜η))λ(˜ζ). Bringing
the second term to the other side and adding the corresponding term from the
other summand in the right hand side of (3.12), the left hand side becomes
˜ξ·h(˜η, ˜ζ)−h(∇ ρ
˜ξ ˜η,˜ζ)−h(˜η,∇ ρ
˜ξ
˜ζ).
Now if we specialize to the case that ˜ξis an extension ofξ∈X(∂M) which inserts
trivially intodρ, then the boundary value of this of course is (∇ ρ
ξh)(η,ζ). On
the other hand, this implies thatP( ˜ξ,˜η) =O(ρ), and the last claimed identity
follows.□
Remark3.6.Observe that even fixing the defining functionρ, the coefficientsC,
λandhin the asymptotic form (3.6) are not uniquely determined beyond the
(restricted) boundary valuesC ,λ andh . For example, the expression remains
unchanged if we replaceλbyλ+fdρ+ραforf∈C ∞(M,R) andα∈Ω 1(M)
and at the same time replaceCbyC−ρfandhbyh−α⊙dρ. One way to fix
the coefficients, which we have used implicitly in the proof already, is to choose a
vector fieldν∈X( M) such thatdρ(ν)≡1 and then require thatλ(ν)≡0 and
h(ν,)≡0.
In particular, this can be applied to the form (3.2), where we see that the
question of whetherC∓1 isO(ρ) orO(ρ 2) only makes sense once requires that
the cross term 1
ρ3λ⊙dρvanishes identically. So this pins down the coefficients
here.
In particular, Theorem 3.5 shows that, for projectively pre-compact metrics, the
form (3.2) can only be available on open subsets whose intersection with∂Mis
either contained in∂M + or in∂M− (corresponding toC= 1+O(ρ) or−1+O(ρ)).
On such subsets, one can easily obtain the form (3.2) (for an appropriate defining
function) from Theorem 3.5 using the ideas in Remark 3.6.
Corollary 3.7.For M=M∪∂M, letgbe a pseudo-Riemannian metric onM
which is projectively pre-compact and asymptotically tangentially Ricci flat.
Then locally around each point of∂M±, there is a defining functionˆρwith respect
to whichgcan be expressed as in(3.2)withC=±1 +O(ρ).
Proof.Let us start from an expression (3.6) forgfor a defining functionρ. Then
for the defining function ˆρ=e fρwe getdˆρ= ˆρdf+e fdρand insertingρ=e −f ˆρ
anddρ=e −f(dˆρ−ˆρdf) into (3.6), we see that we get an asymptotic form (3.6)
forgwith respect to ˆρ, which starts with e2fC
ˆρ4 dˆρ2. Now on the subset whereCis
non-vanishing, we can choosef:=− 1
2 log(|C|) and so we get an expression of the
form
(3.13) ±1
ˆρ4 dˆρ2 + 1
ˆρ3 (ˆλ⊙dˆρ) + 1
ˆρ2
ˆh.
Moreover, by Theorem 3.5, the boundary valued of ˆλvanishes in tangential direc-
tions, so there areφ∈C ∞(M,R) andα∈Ω 1(M) such that ˆλ=φdˆρ+ ˆρα. This

===== PAGE 31 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 31
means that (3.13) equals
±1 +ρφ
ˆρ4 dˆρ2 + 1
ˆρ2 (ˆh+α⊙dˆρ),
so this has the claimed form.□
3.4.Obstructions to projective compactness.We have already identified a
complete obstruction to projective compactness in the general setting of connec-
tions in Section 2.3 via the boundary values ofρ∇ ρ
ξηforξ,η∈X( M). As we have
seen there, it is of the formdρ(ξ)| ∂Mdρ(η)|∂Mψfor a vector fieldψ∈X(∂M). Now
for general asymptotic forms (3.6) we can use the computations from the proof of
Theorem 3.5 to deduce an equivalent characterization of projective compactness
for metrics.
Theorem 3.8.For M=M∪∂M, letgbe a projectively pre-compact pseudo-
Riemannian metric and assume that for some defining functionρand vector field
ν∈X( M)such thatdρ(ν)≡1, we are given an expression(3.6)such thatλ(ν)≡0
andh(ν,)≡0. (In particular the asymptotic form constructed in the proof of
Theorem 3.5 has this property.)
Thengis projectively compact if and only if
(3.14)ν·C−2Cdρ(∇ ρ
νν) =O(ρ)
and for any ˜ζ∈X( M)such thatdρ( ˜ζ)≡0, we get
(3.15)−ν·λ( ˜ζ) +λ(∇ ρ
ν ˜ζ) +dρ(∇ ρ
νν)λ( ˜ζ) + 2C
ρdρ(∇ρ
ν ˜ζ) =O(ρ).
Observe that the first two terms in (3.15) can be written as−(∇ρ
νλ)(˜ζ) since∇ ρ
νλ
makes sense as acting onX ∂(M). Likewise, using (2.8), we see thatdρ(∇ ρ
νν) =
ρPρ(ν,ν)−ρP(ν,ν) and 1
ρdρ(∇ρ
ν ˜ζ) =P ρ(ν, ˜ζ)−P(ν, ˜ζ). Correspondingly, we can
interpret (3.14) and (3.15) as a system of “asymptotic ODE” onC∈C ∞(M,R)
andλ∈Γ((T bM)∗) of the form
ν·C= 2fC+O(ρ)∇ ρ
νλ=fλ+ 2Cφ+O(ρ),
wheref:=ρP ρ(ν,ν)−ρP(ν,ν) andφ( ˜ζ) =P ρ(ν, ˜ζ)−P(ν, ˜ζ).
Proof.The metricgis projectively compact if and only if the boundary value
ψ∈Γ(T∂M) ofdρ(ρ∇ ρ
νν) vanishes identically. By the non-degeneracy statement
in Theorem 3.5 this is equivalent to vanishing ofλ (ψ) and ofh (ψ,ζ) for any vector
fieldζ∈X(∂M). Now we can use formula (3.10) from the proof of Theorem 3.5
(which is valid for anyξ∈X( M)) in the caseξ=νto obtain
λ(∇ρ
νν) =ν·C−2Cdρ(∇ ρ
νν),
which immediately shows that (3.14) is equivalent to vanishing ofλ (ψ).
For (3.15), we extendζto a vector field ˜ζ∈X( M) such thatdρ( ˜ζ)≡0. Then we
use formula (3.11) from the proof of Theorem 3.5 (which is valid for anyξ∈X( M))
in the caseξ=νto obtain
−h(ρ∇ρ
νν, ˜ζ) =− 1
2ν·λ( ˜ζ) + 1
2λ(∇ρ
ν ˜ζ) + 1
2dρ(∇ρ
νν)λ( ˜ζ) + C
ρdρ(∇ρ
ν ˜ζ).

===== PAGE 32 =====
32 ˇCap, Gover
Passing to boundary values, (3.15) is evidently equivalent to vanishing ofh (ψ,ζ)
for anyζ∈X(∂M).□
So let us pass to the question of projective compactness of a metric of the
form (3.2). As originally proved in [9] and reproved in Theorem 3.1 above,C=
±1 +O(ρ 2) is sufficient for projective compactness. The asymptotic form (3.2)
plays a prominent role in general relativity, going back at least to [3]. There the
O(ρ)-term ofC∓1 is referred to as the mass aspect and it plays a crucial role in the
applications to GR. So in that sense, projective compactness is incompatible with
mass, which has also been pointed out in [5, 6, 7]. From this point of view, it would
be desirable to prove that for a metric of the form (3.2) projective compactness
forcesC=±1+O(ρ 2). Our last result shows that this is indeed true under slightly
stronger assumptions on the asymptotics of the Ricci curvature ofg(which should
be satisfied in the cases relevant for GR which mostly deal with Ricci-flat metrics).
Theorem 3.9.For M=M∪∂M, letgbe a projectively pre-compact pseudo-
Riemannian metric with an asymptotic form(3.2). Assume further that its Ricci
curvature admits a smooth extension to the boundary and the boundary value of
this curvature vanishes if one of the entries is tangent to the boundary.
Thengis projectively compact if and only ifC=±1 +O(ρ 2).
Proof.It remains to show that projective compactness ofgforcesC=±1 +
O(ρ2), so we assume thatgis projectively compact. We cannot directly use the
computations from Theorem 3.5 here, since in the case of (3.2), we cannot say
anything abouth(ν,) for a vector fieldν∈X( M) such thatdρ(ν)≡1. It would
be easy to redo these computations in the current setting, but we can also modify
the asymptotic form along the lines of Remark 3.6 and then use Theorem 3.8.
Starting from (3.2) for a defining functionρ, we fixν∈X( M) such thatdρ(ν)≡
1. Defineφ:=h(ν,ν)∈C ∞(M,R) and forξ∈X( M) considerα(ξ) := 2(h(ν,ξ)−
dρ(ξ)φ). This clearly definesα∈Ω 1(M) such thatα(ν)≡0 and we define ˆh∈
Γ(S2T∗M) by ˆh:=h−α⊙dρ−φdρ 2. Then ˆh(ν,η) =h(η,ν)−φdρ(η)+ 1
2α(η) = 0.
Thus (3.2) can be rewritten as
g= C+ρ2φ
ρ4 dρ2 + 1
ρ3 (ρα)⊙dρ+ ˆh,
and by constructionνinserts trivially intoραand into ˆh. By Theorem 3.8, pro-
jective compactness implies that
ν·(C+ρ 2φ) = 2Cdρ(∇ρ
νν) +O(ρ),
and of course the left hand side equalsν·C+O(ρ). As we have noted after
Theorem 3.5,dρ(∇ ρ
νν) =ρP ρ(ν,ν)−ρP(ν,ν). By projective compactness∇ ρ
admits a smooth extension to the boundary and hence so does its Schouten-tensor
soρP ρ(ν,ν) =O(ρ). But by our stronger curvature assumptions alsoP(ν,ν)
admits a smooth extension to the boundary and henceν·C=O(ρ). Since for
C=±1 +ρf, we getν·C=f+O(ρ), this completes the proof.□
Data availability statement.Data availability is not applicable to this article
as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Projective infinities andb-calculus 33
References
[1] O. Aharony, S.S. Gubser, J.M. Maldacenaet al.. LargeNfield theories, string theory and
gravity. Phys. Rept.323(2000), 183-386.
[2] M.M. Ali Mohamed, and J.A. Valiente Kroon A comparison of Ashtekar’s and Friedrich’s
formalisms of spatial infinity. Classical Quantum Gravity38(2021) paper 165015 (39 pp.)
[3] A. Ashtekar, and J.D. Romano. Spatial infinity as a boundary of spacetime. Classical Quan-
tum Gravity9(1992) 1069–1100.
[4] T.N. Bailey, M.G. Eastwood, and A.R. Gover. Thomas’s structure bundle for conformal,
projective and related structures. Rocky Mountain J.24(1994), 1191–1217.
[5] J. Borthwick, and Y. Herfray. Asymptotic symmetries of projectively compact order one
Einstein manifolds. Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A382(2024), no. 2267, paper 20230042, 34
pp.
[6] J. Borthwick, and Y. Herfray. Projective and Carrollian geometry at time/space-like infinity
on projectively compact Ricci flat Einstein manifolds. Geom. Dedicata219(2025), no. 1,
Paper 12, 35 pp.
[7] J. Borthwick, M. Chantreau, and Y. Herfray. Ti and Spi, Carrollian extended boundaries at
timelike and spatial infinity. Classical Quantum Gravity42(2025), no. 20, Paper 205012,
37 pp.
[8] A. ˇCap, and A.R. Gover. Tractor calculi for parabolic geometries. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
354(2002), 1511–1548.
[9] A. ˇCap, and A.R. Gover. Projective compactifications and Einstein metrics. J. Reine Angew.
Math.717(2016) 47–75.
[10] A. ˇCap, and A.R. Gover. Projective compactness and conformal boundaries. Math. Ann.
366(2016) 1587–1620.
[11] A. ˇCap, A. R. Gover, and M. Hammerl. Projective BGG equations, algebraic sets, and
compactifications of Einstein geometries. J. London Math. Soc.86no. 2 (2012) 433–454.
[12] A. ˇCap, A.R. Gover, and M. Hammerl. Holonomy reductions of Cartan geometries and
curved orbit decompositions. Duke Math. J.163(2014) 1035–1070.
[13] P. Chru´ sciel, E. Delay, J.M. Lee, D.N. Skinner. Boundary regularity of conformally compact
Einstein metrics. J. Differential Geom.69(2005), 111–136.
[14] C. Fefferman, and C.R. Graham.The Ambient Metric.Annals of Mathematics Studies,178.
Princeton University Press 2012.
[15] J¨ org Frauendiener. Conformal Infinity. Living Rev. Relativ.,7(2004), 2004-1, 82 pp.
[16] H. Friedrich. Gravitational fields near space-like and null infinitiy J. Geom. Phys.24(1998)
83–163.
[17] C.R. Graham, and M. Zworski. Scattering matrix in conformal geometry. Invent. Math.152
(2003), 89–118.
[18] C. Guillarmou, and A. S´ a Barreto. Inverse problems for Einstein manifolds. Inverse Probl.
Imaging,3(2009), 1–15.
[19] C.R. LeBrun. H-space with a cosmological constant. Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser.A 380
(1982), 171–185.
[20] R. Mazzeo. The Hodge cohomology of a conformally compact metric. J. Differential Geom.,
28(1988), 309–339.
[21] R.B. Melrose.Geometric scattering theory. Stanford Lectures.Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1995.
[22] R. Penrose. Zero rest-mass fields including gravitation: asymptotic behaviour, R. Soc. Lon-
don, Ser. A,284(1965), 159–203.

===== PAGE 34 =====
34 ˇCap, Gover
A.ˇC.: Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Oskar–Morgenstern–
Platz 1, 1090 Wien, Austria, A.R.G.:Department of Mathematics, The University
of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
Email address:Andreas.Cap@univie.ac.at
Email address:r.gover@auckland.ac.nz
