===== PAGE 1 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS
DANIEL S. FREED
Abstract. In this expository paper we introduce extended topological quantum ﬁeld theories and
the cobordism hypothesis.
1. Introduction
The cobordism hypothesis was conjectured by Baez-Dolan [ BD] in the mid 1990s. It has now
been proved by Hopkins-Lurie in dimension two and by Lurie in higher dimensions. There are many
complicated foundational issues which lie behind the deﬁni tions and the proof, and only a detailed
sketch [ L1] has appeared so far. 1 The history of the Baez-Dolan conjecture goes most directly
through quantum ﬁeld theory and its adaptation to low-dimen sional topology. Yet in retrospect it
is a theorem about the structure of manifolds in all dimensio ns, and at the core of the proof lies
Morse theory. Hence there are two routes to the cobordism hyp othesis: algebraic topology and
quantum ﬁeld theory.
Consider the abelian group Ω SO
0 generated by compact oriented 0-dimensional manifolds, th at is,
ﬁnite sets Y of points each labeled with + or −. The group operation is disjoint union. We deem Y0
equivalent to Y1 if there is a compact oriented 1-manifold X with oriented boundary Y1 ∐ −Y0.
Then a basic theorem in diﬀerential topology [ Mi1, Appendix] asserts that Ω SO
0 is the free abelian
group with a single generator, the positively oriented poin t pt +.2 This result is the cornerstone of
smooth intersection theory. From the point of view of algebr aic topology the cobordism hypothesis
is a similar statement about a more ornate structure built fr om smooth manifolds. The simplest
version is for framed manifolds. The language is oﬀ-putting if unfamiliar, and it will be explained
in due course.
Theorem 1.1 (Cobordism hypothesis: heuristic algebro-topological ve rsion). For n ≥ 1, Bordfr
n is
the free symmetric monoidal (∞, n)-category with duals generated by pt+.
Received by the editors November 15, 2011; revised version S eptember 14, 2012.
The work of D.S.F. is supported by the National Science Found ation under grant DMS-0603964.
1Nonetheless, we use ‘theorem’ and its synonyms in this manus cript. The foundations are rapidly being ﬁlled in
and alternative proofs have also been carried out, though no ne has yet appeared in print.
2Two important remarks: (1) we can replace orientations with framings; (2) for unoriented manifolds the group Ω O
0
is not free on one generator, but rather there is a relation an d Ω O
0 ∼= Z/2Z.
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 D. S. FREED
The ‘Bord’ in Bord fr
n stands for ‘bordism’, 3 and pt + is now the point with the standard framing.
Bordfr
n is an elaborate algebraic gadget which encodes n-framed manifolds with corners of dimen-
sions ≤ n and tracks gluings and disjoint unions. One of our goals is to motivate this elaborate
algebraic structure.
An extended topological ﬁeld theory is a representation of the bordism category, i.e., a homomor -
phism F : Bord fr
n → C . The codomain C is a symmetric monoidal ( ∞, n)-category, typically linear
in nature. In important examples F assigns a complex number to every closed n-manifold and a
complex vector space to every closed ( n − 1)-manifold.
Theorem 1.2 (Cobordism hypothesis: weak quantum ﬁeld theory version) . A homomorphism
F : Bord fr
n → C is determined by F (pt+).
The object F (pt+) ∈ C satisﬁes stringent ﬁniteness conditions expressed in term s of dualities, and
the real power of the cobordism hypothesis is an existence st atement: if x ∈ C is n-dualizable, then
there exists a topological ﬁeld theory F with F (pt+) = x. Precise statements of the cobordism
hypothesis appear in §6.
Our plan is to build up gradually to the categorical complexi ties inherent in extended ﬁeld
theories and the cobordism hypothesis. So in the next two sec tions we take strolls along the
two routes to the cobordism hypothesis: algebraic topology (§2) and quantum ﬁeld theory ( §3).
Section 4 is an extended introduction to non-extended topological ﬁe ld theory. The simple examples
discussed there only hint at the power of this circle of ideas . In §5 we turn to extended ﬁeld theories
and so also to higher categories. The cobordism hypothesis i s the subject of §6, where we state
a complete version in Theorem 6.8. The cobordism hypothesis connects in exciting ways to othe r
parts of topology, geometry, and representation theory as w ell as to some contemporary ideas in
quantum ﬁeld theory. A few of these are highlighted in §7.
The manuscript [ L1] has leisurely introductions to higher categorical ideas a nd to the setting of
the cobordism hypothesis, in addition to a detailed sketch o f the proof and applications. The original
paper [ BD] is another excellent source of expository material. Addit ional recent expositions are
available in [L3], [Te1]. We have endeavored to complement these expositions rathe r than duplicate
them. I warmly thank David Ben-Zvi, Andrew Blumberg, Lee Coh n, Tim Perutz, Ulrike Tillmann,
and the referee for their comments and suggestions.
2. Algebraic topology
The most basic maneuvers in algebraic topology extract alge bra from spaces. For example,
to a topological space X we associate a sequence of abelian groups
{
Hq(X)
}
. There are several
constructions of these homology groups , but for nice spaces they are all equivalent [ Sp]. The
homology construction begins to have teeth only when we tell how homology varies with X. One
elementary assertion is that if X ≃ Y are homeomorphic spaces, then the homology groups are
isomorphic. Thus numerical invariants of homology groups, such as the rank, are homeomorphism
3‘Bordism’ replaces the older ‘cobordism’, as bordism is par t of homology whereas cobordism is part of cohomol-
ogy [ A1].

===== PAGE 3 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 3
invariants of topological spaces: Betti numbers. But it is m uch more powerful to remember the
isomorphisms of homology groups associated to homeomorphi sms, and indeed the homomorphisms
associated to arbitrary continuous maps. This is naturally encoded in the algebraic structure of a
category. Here is an informal deﬁnition; see standard texts (e.g. [ Mc]) for details.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A category C consists of a set 4 C0 of objects {x}, a set C1 of morphisms {f : x → y},
identity elements {idx : x → x}, and an associative composition law f, g ↦− →g ◦ f for morphisms
x
f
− →y and y
g
− →z. If C, D are categories then a homomorphism5 F : C → D is a pair ( F0, F1) of
maps of sets Fi : Ci → D i which preserves compositions.
More formally, there are source and target maps C1 → C0, identity elements are deﬁned by a map
C0 → C1, and composition is a map from a subset of C1 × C1 to C1—the subset consists of pairs of
morphisms for which the target of the ﬁrst equals the source o f the second. A homomorphism also
preserves the source and target maps. Topological spaces co mprise the objects of a category Top
whose morphisms are continuous maps; abelian groups compri se the objects of a category Ab whose
morphisms are group homomorphisms. Some basic properties o f homology groups are summarized
by the statement that
(2.2) Hq : (Top, ∐) − →(Ab, ⊕)
is a homomorphism. We explain the ‘ ∐’ and ‘ ⊕’ in the next paragraph.
The homomorphism property does not nearly characterize hom ology, and we can encode many
more properties via extra structure on Top and Ab. We single o ut one here, an additional operation
on objects and morphisms. If X1, X2 are topological spaces there is a new space X1∐X2, the disjoint
union. The operation X1, X2 ↦→X1 ∐ X2 has properties analogous to a commutative, associative
composition law on a set. For example, the empty set ∅ is an identity for disjoint union in the sense
that ∅ ∐ X is canonically identiﬁed with X for all topological spaces X. Furthermore, if fi : Xi →
Yi, i = 1, 2 are continuous maps, there is an induced continuous map f1 ∐ f2 : X1 ∐ X2 → Y1 ∐ Y2
on the disjoint union. An operation on a category with these p roperties is called a symmetric
monoidal structure, in this case on the category Top. Similarly, the category Ab of abelian groups
has a symmetric monoidal structure given by direct sum: A1, A2 → A1 ⊕ A2. The homology
maps (2.2) are homomorphisms of symmetric monoidal categories: ther e is a canonical identiﬁcation
of Hq(X1 ∐ X2) with Hq(X1) ⊕ Hq(X2).
Remark 2.3. Homology is classical in that disjoint unions map to direct sums . We will see that
a characteristic property of quantum systems is that disjoint unions map to tensor products. The
passage from classical to quantum is (poetically) a passage from addition to multiplication, a kind
of exponentiation.
Our interest here is not in all topological spaces, but rathe r in smooth manifolds. Fix a positive
integer n.
4We do not worry about technicalities of set theory in this exp ository paper.
5The word ‘functor’ is usually employed here, but ’homomorph ism’ is more consistent with standard usage else-
where in algebra.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 D. S. FREED
Deﬁnition 2.4. Let Y0, Y1 be smooth compact ( n − 1)-dimensional manifolds without boundary.
A bordism from Y0 to Y1 is a compact n-dimensional manifold X with boundary, a decomposition
∂X = ∂X0 ∐ ∂X1, and diﬀeomorphisms Yi → ∂Xi, i = 1, 2.
X
Y0
Y1
Figure 1. A bordism X : Y0 → Y1
Figure 1 depicts an example which emphasizes that manifolds need not be connected. The empty
set ∅ is a manifold of any dimension. So a closed n-manifold—that is, a compact manifold without
boundary—is a bordism from ∅n−1 to ∅n−1. Note also that the disjoint union of smooth manifolds
is a smooth manifold, and the disjoint union of bordisms is a b ordism.
To turn bordism into algebra we observe that bordism deﬁnes a n equivalence relation: closed
(n − 1)-manifolds Y0, Y1 are bordant if there exists a bordism from Y0 to Y1. (Observe that to
prove transitivity it is convenient to modify Deﬁnition 2.4 so that boundary identiﬁcations are
between the manifolds [0 , 1) × Y0, ( −1, 0] × Y1 and open collar neighborhoods of ∂X0, ∂X1: smooth
functions glue nicely on open sets.) Disjoint union deﬁnes a n abelian group structure on the
set Ω O
n−1 of equivalence classes. For example, Ω O
0 ∼= Z/2Z is generated by a single point. Twice
a point is the disjoint union of two points, and as two points b ound a closed interval, two points
are bordant to the empty 0-manifold. Life is more interestin g when we consider manifolds with
extra topological structure. For example, there are bordis m groups Ω SO
q of oriented manifolds. An
orientation on a 0-manifold consisting of a single point is a choice of + or −. Then Ω SO
0 ∼= Z by the
map which sends a ﬁnite set of oriented points to the number of positive points minus the number
of negative points. This is a foundational result in diﬀeren tial topology which enables oriented
counts in intersection theory [ Mi1]. Another interesting structure is a stable framing . It arises in
the Pontrjagin-Thom construction. Let f : Sq+N → SN be a smooth map. By Sard’s theorem there
is a regular value p ∈ SN , whence M := f −1(p) ⊂ Sq+N is a smooth q-dimensional submanifold.
Also, a basis of TpSN pulls back under f to a global framing of the normal bundle to M in SN .
If we deform p to another regular value, then the framed manifold M undergoes a bordism. The
same is true if f deforms to a smoothly homotopic map. The precise correspond ence works in the
stable limit N → ∞ : the stably framed bordism group Ω fr
q is isomorphic to the stable homotopy
group of the sphere lim
N →∞
πq+N (SN ). This is the most basic link between bordism and homotopy
theory.

===== PAGE 5 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 5
M
f
S
q+N
SN
p
Figure 2. The Pontrjagin-Thom construction
Bordism has a long history in algebraic topology. By 1950 it a ppears6 that Pontrjagin had
deﬁned abelian groups based on the notion of a bordism, thoug h it was Thom [ T] who made
the ﬁrst systematic computations of bordism groups using ho motopy theory. There are many
variations according to the type of manifold: oriented, spi n, framed, etc. Theory and computation
of bordism groups were an important part of algebraic topolo gy in the 1950s and 1960s, and they
found applications in other parts of topology and geometry. For example, Hirzebruch’s 1954 proof
of the Riemann-Roch theorem was based on bordism computatio ns, as was the ﬁrst proof of the
Atiyah-Singer index theorem [ Pa] in 1963.
The bordism group of d-dimensional manifolds arises when ( d+1)-dimensional bordisms are used
to deﬁne an equivalence relation. Disjoint union of d-manifolds gives the abelian group structure.
One lesson from classical algebraic topology is that the pas sage from Betti numbers to homology
groups is very fruitful. The analog here is to track bordisms between closed manifold, not merely to
observe their existence—in our “categoriﬁed” world we encode the bordism as a map. Segal [ Se2]
introduced a bordism category of Riemann surfaces in his axi omatization of 2-dimensional conformal
ﬁeld theory, which inspired Atiyah [ A2] to axiomatize topological ﬁeld theories in any dimensions
using bordism categories of smooth manifolds with no contin uous geometric structure (such as a
metric or conformal structure). Tillmann [ Til1, Til2] observed that the classifying space of the
bordism category, which has the abelian group-like operati on of disjoint union, is a spectrum in
the sense of stable homotopy theory. Together with Madsen [ MT] they conjecturally identify
the classifying spectrum of an enriched bordism category—a step towards the ∞-categories we
meet in §5—and show that their conjecture implies Mumford’s conjectu re [ Mu] about the rational
cohomology of the mapping class group. The Madsen-Tillmann conjecture was subsequently proved
in [ MW] and is now known as the Madsen-Weiss theorem. The relation w ith the spectra Thom
used to compute bordism groups is elucidated in [ GMTW, §3], where another proof is given.
For now we restrict to manifolds with boundary—no corners—a nd so organize closed ( n − 1)-
manifolds into a symmetric monoidal category which reﬁnes t he abelian group Ω n−1.
Deﬁnition 2.5. Bord⟨n−1,n⟩ is the symmetric monoidal category whose objects are compac t (n−1)-
manifolds and in which a morphism X : Y0 → Y1 is a bordism from Y0 to Y1, up to diﬀeomorphism.
The monoidal structure is disjoint union.
6According to [ May, §6] a 1950 Russian paper of Pontrjagin contains bordism group s; see [ P] for a later account.
Thom [ T] also cites work of Rohlin relevant to computations of bordi sm in low dimensions, but I do not know if
Rohlin phrased them in terms of bordism groups.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 D. S. FREED
So now a bordism is a map—a morphism in a category—and the boun dary is divided into incoming
(domain) boundary components and outgoing (codomain) boun dary components. Heuristically, we
say there is an “arrow of time”, at least at the boundary; in pi ctures we draw a global arrow of
time. Composition (Figure 3) is deﬁned by gluing bordisms. We identify diﬀeomorphic bor disms—
time 
X X
Y2
Y1
Y0
Figure 3. Composition of bordisms
the diﬀeomorphism must commute with the boundary identiﬁca tions—and so obtain a strictly
associative composition law. The identity morphism Y → Y is the cylinder [0 , 1] × Y with obvious
boundary identiﬁcations. There are variants Bord SO
⟨n−1,n⟩ and Bord fr
⟨n−1,n⟩ for oriented and framed
manifolds, but with one important change: in Bord fr
⟨n−1,n⟩ the morphisms X carry framings of the
tangent bundle (not stabilized) and the objects Y carry framings of (1) ⊕ T Y , where ‘(1)’ here
denotes the trivial real line bundle of rank one. Notice the c ontrast: traditional Pontrjagin-Thom
theory has stable framings of the normal bundle, whereas Bord fr
⟨n−1,n⟩ has unstable framings of the
tangent bundle.
By analogy to the homology homomorphism ( 2.2) we are led to the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.6 ([A2]). An n-dimensional topological ﬁeld theory is a homomorphism
(2.7) F : Bord ⟨n−1,n⟩ − →(Ab, ⊗)
of symmetric monoidal categories.
As telegraphed in Remark 2.3, in a quantum ﬁeld theory disjoint unions map to tensor products,
not direct sums. There are many variations on this deﬁnition . The domain can be a bordism
category of smooth manifolds with extra structure, or even o f singular manifolds. The codomain
may be replaced by any symmetric monoidal category, algebra ic or not. We introduce a more
drastic variant of Deﬁnition 2.6 in §5. A typical choice for the codomain is (Vect C, ⊗), the category
of complex vector spaces under tensor product. A topologica l ﬁeld theory with values in Vect C is
a linearization—a linear representation—of manifolds.
We have been led naturally to Deﬁnition 2.6 by combining basic ideas in homology and bordism.
But this is hardly the historical path! For that we turn in the next section to notions in quantum
ﬁeld theory. Before leaving bordism, though, we pause to rem ind the reader of the connection with
Morse theory.

===== PAGE 7 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 7
Intuitively, a Morse function reﬁnes the arrow of time to a pa rticular time function. Let X : Y0 →
Y1 be an n-dimensional bordism. A function f : X → R is compatible with the bordism structure
if there exist t0 < t 1 such that t0, t1 are regular values of f , the image of f is contained in [ t0, t1],
and Yi = f −1(ti). Furthermore, f is a Morse function if it has ﬁnitely many isolated nondegenerate
critical points. The main theorems in Morse theory [ Mi2] assert that slices f −1(t) and f −1(t′)
are diﬀeomorphic if there are no critical values between t and t′, and at an isolated critical point
there is a topology change which is described by a standard su rgery. For example, in Figure 4 the
time 
Figure 4. An elementary bordism
local slice evolves from the two parallel line segments at th e bottom to the two curves at the top;
the saddle depicts the elementary bordism which connects the two local slices. Figure 5 displays
f
R I
Figure 5. A Morse function
the standard example of a Morse function on the torus—the hei ght function—and embeds the
elementary bordism of Figure 4 into a neighborhood of one of the critical points of index 1.
Remark 2.8. The local description of the topology change at a critical po int uses a manifold with
corners, as in Figure 4. Manifolds with boundary and no corners do not suﬃce. The add itional
locality aﬀorded by admitting corners—and eventually high er codimensional corners—is a crucial
idea for the cobordism hypothesis; see §5.
Morse functions exist, as a consequence of Sard’s theorem. T his means that any bordism can be
decomposed as a composition of elementary bordisms, one for each critical point. Manipulations
with Morse functions are a key ingredient in Milnor’s presen tation [ Mi3] of Smale’s h-cobordism
theorem [ Sm]. The space of Morse functions on a ﬁxed bordism has many comp onents: Morse
functions in diﬀerent components induce qualitatively diﬀ erent decompositions into elementary
bordisms. Cerf [ C] relaxed the Morse condition to construct a connected space of functions. This
enables a systematic study of transitions between decompos itions. For example, Cerf theory is the
basis for Kirby calculus [ K], which describes links in 3-manifolds and 4-manifolds. As we shall see
it is also a crucial tool for constructing topological ﬁeld t heories.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 D. S. FREED
An elementary illustrative example of a Cerf transition is t he family of functions
(2.9) ft(x) = x3
3 − tx, x, t ∈ R.
For t > 0 this is a Morse function with nondegenerate critical point s at x = ±
√
t. For t < 0 it
is a Morse function with no critical points. At t = 0 the function fails to be Morse: x = 0 is a
degenerate critical point. So as t increases from negative to positive two critical points are born
on the x-line, and they separate at birth. In the other direction, as t decreases from positive to
negative the two critical points collide and annihilate. Th is simple “birth-death transition” is all
that is needed to connect diﬀerent components of Morse funct ions.
3. Quantum ﬁeld theory
For much of its history quantum ﬁeld theory was tied to four sp acetime dimensions and a handful
of physically realistic examples. As opposed to quantum mec hanics, where the underlying theory
of Hilbert spaces and operator theory has been fully develop ed, the analytic underpinnings of
quantum ﬁeld theory remain unsettled. Still, there has been a huge transformation over the past
three decades. Quantum ﬁeld theorists now study a large set o f examples in a variety of dimensions,
not all of which are meant to be physically relevant. A deeper engagement with mathematicians and
mathematics has led physicists to study models whose conseq uences are more relevant to geometry
than to accelerators. Topological and algebraic aspects of quantum ﬁeld theories have come to the
fore. From another direction string theory has illuminated the subject, and there are new ties to
condensed matter theory as well.
In this section we brieﬂy sketch how Deﬁnition 2.6 of a topological quantum ﬁeld theory emerges
from physics. Our exposition is purely formal, extracting t he structural elements which most
directly lead to our goal. Let’s begin with quantum mechanic s, which is a 1-dimensional quantum
ﬁeld theory. (The dimension of a theory refers to spacetime, and at least in mainstream theories
there is a single time dimension. Thus a 1-dimensional theor y only has time; space is treated
externally.) The basic ingredients are a complex separable Hilbert space H and for each time
interval of length t a unitary operator
(3.1) Ut = e−itH/ℏ .
Here H : H → H is the self-adjoint Hamiltonian which describes the quantum system, and ℏ is
Planck’s constant. The pure states of the system are vectors (really complex lines of vectors) i n H,
and the unitary operators ( 3.1) describe the evolution of a state in time. Self-adjoint ope rators O
on H act on the system—they are the observables—and the physics is encoded in expectation values
(3.2) ⟨Ω, UtnOn · · ·Ut2O2Ut1O1Ut0Ω⟩.

===== PAGE 9 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 9
x x x
O1 O2 On
Ω Ωt0 t1 tn
Figure 6. Vacuum expectation value in quantum mechanics
In this expression the state Ω evolves for time t0, is acted on by the operator O1, then evolves for
time t1, then is acted on by the operator O2, etc. See Figure 6 for a pictorial representation. We
recommend [ Ma, Fa] for structural expositions of mechanics which elucidate t he pairing of states
and observables.
It is convenient and powerful to analytically continue time t from the real line to the complex line
with the restriction Im t < 0. Real times are now at the boundary of allowed complex times . If the
Hamiltonian H is nonnegative, and Im t < 0, then the evolution operator e−itH/ℏ is a contracting
operator. Wick rotation to imaginary time is the further restriction to purely imagi nary t =
τ /√−1, where the Euclidean time τ is strictly positive. We associate the Euclidean contracti ng
evolution Fτ = e−τ H/ℏ to an interval of length τ , that is, to a compact, connected Riemannian
1-manifold with boundary whose total length is τ . The evolution obeys a semigroup law
(3.3) Fτ2+τ1 = Fτ2 ◦ Fτ1 ,
as illustrated in Figure 7. This is already reminiscent of bordism. We can imagine a bor dism
τ1 τ2
τ1 +  τ2
Figure 7. Composition of 1-dimensional bordisms
category Bord Riem
⟨0,1⟩ whose objects are compact oriented 0-manifolds and whose mo rphisms are com-
pact Riemannian oriented 1-manifolds with boundary. The se migroup law for the evolution of a
quantum mechanical system is encoded in the statement that
(3.4) F : Bord Riem
⟨0,1⟩ − →Hilb
is a homomorphism to the category of Hilbert spaces and contr acting linear maps. Notice that
F encodes more than evolution. For example, we demand that F be a homomorphism of symmetric
monoidal categories mapping disjoint unions to tensor products, whi ch encodes the idea that the
state space of the union of quantum mechanical systems is a te nsor product. Exotic “evolutions”
are now possible; see Figure 8. In a more careful axiomatization [ Se1] one takes the codomain to be
a category of topological vector spaces; then the Hilbert sp ace structure emerges more organically
from the geometry, as do the operator insertions in ( 3.2).

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 D. S. FREED
τ
τ τ
Figure 8. Exotic evolutions in quantum mechanics
It is a small step now to pass from the formal description ( 3.4) of a quantum mechanical system
to the assertion that an n-dimensional quantum ﬁeld theory is a homomorphism
(3.5) F : Bord Riem
⟨n−1,n⟩ − →Hilb
from the bordism category of Riemannian n-dimensional bordisms (“Riemannian spacetimes”) to
the category of Hilbert spaces (better: topological vector spaces). If X is such a bordism, and x ∈ X
a point not on the boundary, then the boundary sphere of the ge odesic ball of suﬃciently small
radius r maps under F to a topological vector space Hr, and the limit as r → 0 is a topological
vector space of operators associated to the point x. We can approximate it by the topological
vector space at some small ﬁnite radius r0. Remove an open ball of radius r0 about x. Choose
the arrow of time so that the new boundary component—the sphe re of radius r0 about x—is
incoming. For example, the bordism in Figure 9 has incoming boundary Y0 union the spheres
X
Y0 Y1
x1
x2
x3
time 
Figure 9. Operator insertions
about x1, x2, and x3 and outgoing boundary Y1. A ﬁeld theory F determines topological vector
spaces F (Y0), F(Y1) for the boundary components and then topological vector sp aces V1, V2, V3
associated to the points x1, x2, x3. The bordism X goes over to a linear map
(3.6) F (X) : V1 ⊗ V2 ⊗ V3 − →Hom
(
F (Y0), F(Y1)
)
.
This is the sense in which the topological vector spaces Vi attach a space of operators to xi,
analogously to the operators which appear in ( 3.2) as illustrated in Figure 6. In case Y0 = Y1 = ∅n−1,

===== PAGE 11 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 11
then F (X) is called a correlation function between “operators” at the points xi. If in addition there
are no points xi, then F (X) is a complex number, the partition function of the closed manifold X.
This geometric formulation of quantum ﬁeld theory develope d in the 1980s out of the interac-
tion between mathematicians and physicists centered aroun d 2-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory.
Graeme Segal’s samizdat manuscript The deﬁnition of conformal ﬁeld theory , now published [ Se2],
was widely distributed and very inﬂuential among both mathe maticians and physicists. Segal’s re-
cent series of lectures [ Se1] explores and expands on these ideas in the context of genera l quantum
ﬁeld theories. More traditional mathematical treatments o f quantum ﬁeld theory [ SW], [ H], [ GJ]
are set in four-dimensional Minkowski spacetime and focus o n analytic aspects. The geometric for-
mulation set the stage for the advent of topological ﬁeld theories. In 1988 Witten [ W1] introduced
twistings of supersymmetric quantum ﬁeld theories on Minko wski spacetime which allow them to
be formulated on arbitrary oriented Riemannian manifolds. Special correlation functions in twisted
theories are topological invariants. Witten’s ﬁrst applic ation was to a supersymmetric gauge theory
in four dimensions—a theory whose principal ﬁeld is a connec tion on a principal bundle—where
he showed that Donaldson’s polynomial invariants of 4-mani folds [ D] are correlation functions in
that twisted supersymmetric gauge theory. Two-dimensiona l supersymmetric σ-models—whose
principal ﬁeld is a map Σ → M from a 2-manifold into a Riemannian target manifold—also ad mit
topological twistings in case there is enough supersymmetr y (which constrains the target mani-
fold to be K¨ ahler in the basic case). These 2-dimensional to pological ﬁeld theories [ W2] have had
profound consequences for algebraic geometry in the form of Gromov-Witten invariants and mir-
ror symmetry. By late 1988 Witten realized [ W3] that the Jones polynomials of knots and links
in S3 are encoded in a 3-dimensional ﬁeld theory—called Chern-Simons theory after the classi-
cal action functional of connections which deﬁnes it—and he used it to introduce new invariants
of 3-manifolds. This theory, as opposed to the topologicall y twisted supersymmetric models, is
topological at the classical level and has an immediate conn ection to combinatorially accessible
invariants. For many mathematicians it served as an accessi ble entr´ ee into quantum ﬁeld theory.
In early 1989 Atiyah [ A2] introduced a set of axioms for topological quantum ﬁeld the ory which
essentially amount to Deﬁnition 2.6.
4. T opological quantum ﬁeld theory
In this section we ﬂesh out Deﬁnition 2.6 for simple 1-dimensional and 2-dimensional theories.
The constructions and theorems give a taste of what is possib le in more complicated and interesting
situations. We include a rigorous ﬁnite version of the Feynm an path integral; the nonrigorous
inﬁnite version is one of the main tools in a quantum ﬁeld theo rists’ arsenal.
1-dimensional theories
Let us begin our exploration of Deﬁnition 2.6 with a 1-dimensional topological ﬁeld theory of
oriented manifolds. Recall that the domain of such a theory i s the bordism category Bord SO
⟨0,1⟩ in
which an object is a compact oriented 0-manifold—a ﬁnite set of points, each with a ‘+’ or ‘ −’

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 D. S. FREED
attached—and a morphism is an oriented 1-dimensional bordi sm. In more detail, if X : Y0 → Y1 is
an oriented bordism, then X is a manifold with boundary and so at x ∈ ∂X we have a short exact
sequence of real vector spaces
(4.1) 0 − →Tx∂X − →TxX − →TxX/Tx∂X − →0
The normal bundle carries a canonical orientation: vectors which exponentiate to curves leaving
the manifold are positively oriented. However, when interp reted as a bordism we use the arrow
of time to orient the normal bundle. Namely, outgoing bounda ry components have the canonical
orientation and incoming boundary components the opposite to the canonical orientation. Then
using ( 4.1) an orientation of X induces one on ∂X , and we require that the diﬀeomorphisms
Yi → ∂Xi in Deﬁnition 2.4 preserve the induced orientation. There is a time-reversal operation
which reverses the arrow of time (swaps incoming and outgoin g), hence the orientation of the
normal bundle at the boundary and so too the induced boundary orientation.
There are two basic objects in Bord SO
⟨0,1⟩: the + point and the − point. Any other object is
a tensor product (disjoint union) of these. Some basic morph isms are illustrated in Figure 10.
The arrow of time points to the right, whereas the orientatio n is notated by an arrow on each
time 
id id coev ev 
+ + +
+
_ _
_
_
Figure 10. Elementary oriented 1-dimensional bordisms
component of the bordism. Notice that there is a correlation between the orientation, the arrow
of time, and the boundary orientation. The ﬁrst two morphism s are identities. The third is called
coevaluation and the fourth evaluation. The second bordism is obtained from the ﬁrst by time-
reversal, and the same holds for the third and fourth bordism s. In this case time reversal is a duality
operation: the − point is the dual of the + point and the evaluation is dual to th e coevaluation.
The coevaluation and evaluation are evolutions in 1-dimens ional topological ﬁeld theory which go
beyond the standard evolutions in quantum mechanics (Figur e 8). Also, in quantum mechanics
the closed intervals are Riemannian, so have a length τ , whereas in the topological theory all
closed intervals are diﬀeomorphic and lead to the identity e volution. Comparison with ( 3.1) shows
that the Hamiltonian vanishes in a topological ﬁeld theory. There is no local evolution: all of the
non-identity behavior comes from topology.
Now suppose F is a 1-dimensional oriented topological ﬁeld theory ( 2.7) with values in complex
vector spaces:
(4.2) F :
(
BordSO
⟨0,1⟩, ∐
)
− →
(
VectC, ⊗
)
.

===== PAGE 13 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 13
The notation recalls that F is a homomorphism of symmetric monoidal categories, so maps disjoint
unions to tensor products. The homomorphism F assigns a vector space F (pt+) = V+ to the
+ point and a vector space F (pt−) = V− to the − point. This determines the value of F on all
compact oriented 0-manifolds as they are disjoint unions of + and − points. Also, since the empty
0-manifold ∅0 is the tensor unit for disjoint union, it maps under the homom orphism F to the
tensor unit for complex vector spaces under tensor product, which is the complex line C. Next,
consider F evaluated on the bordisms in Figure 10. As F is a homomorphism it sends identities
to identities, so the ﬁrst two bordisms map to id V+ and id V−, respectively. The last two bordisms
map under F to linear maps
(4.3)
V+
c : C − → ⊗
V−
V−
e : ⊗ − → C
V+
where we have written the tensor product vertically to match the ﬁgure. The sense in which
time 
+ +
+ +
+
+
_
++__
_ _
_ _ _
Figure 11. The S-diagrams
coevaluation and evaluation give rise to duality is illustr ated in Figure 11. The left ﬁgure is the
composition of two 1-dimensional bordisms, each with two co mponents. The ﬁrst maps a single
+ point to the tensor product (disjoint union) of 3 points: +, −, +. The second maps these 3 points
back to the + point. The composition is computed by gluing at t he 3 points in the middle. The
result is diﬀeomorphic to the identity map on the + point. Rec all that morphisms in Bord SO
⟨0,1⟩
are 1-dimensional bordisms up to diﬀeomorphisms which pres erve the boundary identiﬁcations.
Comparing the ﬁrst composition in Figure 11 with the ﬁrst bordism in Figure 10 we see that the
composition is the identity. To see the relation to duality w e apply the homomorphism F . Now
the homomorphism property has two consequences: (1) F sends a disjoint union of bordisms to the
tensor product of the corresponding linear maps, and (2) F sends a composition of bordisms to the
corresponding composition of linear maps. Using these rule s we see that F sends the compositions
in Figure 11 to compositions of linear maps
(4.4)
V+
idV+
− − − − − − →
⊗
c
V+
⊗
V−
⊗
V+
e
⊗
idV+
− − − − − − − →V+
V−
idV−
− − − − − − →
⊗
c
V−
⊗
V+
⊗
V−
e
⊗
idV+
− − − − − − − →V−

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 D. S. FREED
(Note that we have used the symmetry in the ﬁrst diagram to exc hange the order of the tensor
product in the maps c, e from ( 4.3).)
Lemma 4.5. If the compositions (4.4) are identity maps, then V+, V− are ﬁnite dimensional vector
spaces and e is a nondegenerate duality pairing.
Proof. Set c(1) =
N∑
i=1
vi
+ ⊗ vi
− for some vi
± ∈ V± and some positive integer N . Then the ﬁrst
composition in ( 4.4) is the map ξ ↦→∑ e(vi
−, ξ)vi
+. Since this is the identity map, it follows
that {vi
+}N
i=1 spans V+, whence V+ is ﬁnite dimensional. The same argument with the second
composition proves that V− is ﬁnite dimensional. If ξ ∈ V+ satisﬁes e(v−, ξ) = 0 for all v− ∈ V−,
then ξ = ∑ e(vi
−, ξ)vi
+ = 0. Similarly, using the second composition in ( 4.4) we deduce that if
η ∈ V− satisﬁes e(η, v+) = 0 for all v+ ∈ V+, then η = 0. Hence e is a nondegenerate pairing. □
Remark 4.6. A similar argument for a ﬁeld theory F :
(
BordSO
⟨0,1⟩, ∐
)
− →
(
Ab, ⊗
)
with values in
abelian groups proves that F (pt+) is ﬁnitely generated and free.
Lemma 4.5 illustrates an important ﬁniteness principle in topological ﬁeld theories: the vector
space attached to an ( n − 1)-manifold in an n-dimensional topological ﬁeld theory with values
in VectC is ﬁnite dimensional. We derived this ﬁniteness from dualit y: the + point and − point are
duals, and that duality is expressed as the existence of coev aluation and evaluation maps. Notice
that any vector space V has a dual space, deﬁned algebraically as the space of linear maps V → C,
which comes with a canonical evaluation map. However, the co evaluation map exists if and only if
V is ﬁnite dimensional.
This notion of ﬁniteness generalizes to any symmetric monoi dal category.
Deﬁnition 4.7. Let C be a symmetric monoidal category and x ∈ C . Then duality data for x is a
triple (x′, c, e) consisting of an object x′ ∈ C , a coevaluation c : 1 → x⊗ x′, and an evaluation e : x′ ⊗
x → 1 such that the compositions
(4.8) x c⊗idx
− − − →x ⊗ x′ ⊗ x idx ⊗e− − − − →x x ′ idx′ ⊗c
− − − − →x′ ⊗ x ⊗ x′ e⊗idx′
− − − − →x′
are identity maps. We say x is dualizable if there exists duality data for x.
The argument in Lemma 4.5 with the S-diagrams in Figure 11 applies in any n-dimensional ﬁeld
theory—take the Cartesian product of the S-diagrams with a ﬁ xed ( n − 1)-manifold—which shows
that objects in the image of a ﬁeld theory F are always dualizable. In the next section we deﬁne
an extension of the notion of a ﬁeld theory and there is a corre sponding extension of dualizability,
which we take up in §6.
At this point we can state and prove a very simple special case of the cobordism hypothesis.
Theorem 4.9. Let V be a ﬁnite dimensional complex vector space. Then there is a h omomor-
phism F as in (4.2) such that F (pt+) = V .
Proof. If Y is an oriented compact 0-manifold set
(4.10) F (Y ) =
⨂
y∈Y :y=pt+
V ⊗
⨂
y∈Y :y=pt−
V ∗.

===== PAGE 15 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 15
Referring to the third and fourth bordisms in Figure 10 deﬁne F (coev) as the map C → V ⊗ V ∗
which takes 1 ∈ C to the identity map id V ∈ End(V ) ∼= V ∗ ⊗ V and F (ev) as the duality pairing
V ∗ ⊗ V → C. A Morse function on a 1-dimensional bordism decomposes it a s a composition of
the elementary bordisms coev and ev: a nondegenerate critic al point of a real-valued function on a
1-manifold is either a local maximum or a local minimum. The o nly Cerf move (Figure 12) cancels
a local maximum against a local minimum, and the proof that th is does not change the value of F
is the statement that the S-diagrams in Figure 11 map to the identity. □
Figure 12. Cerf move in dimension one
2-dimensional theories
Next, consider a 2-dimensional oriented topological ﬁeld t heory
(4.11) F :
(
BordSO
⟨1,2⟩, ∐
)
− →
(
VectC, ⊗
)
.
There is only one compact connected oriented 1-manifold up t o diﬀeomorphism: a circle has
orientation-reversing diﬀeomorphisms (reﬂection). Let V = F (S1). Elementary 2-dimensional
m 1 τ
Figure 13. Some elementary oriented 2-dimensional bordisms
bordisms, as depicted in Figure 13, give extra structure on V , namely linear maps
(4.12) m : V ⊗ V V
1 : C V
τ : V C
The multiplication m gives V an algebra structure with respect to which the image of 1 ∈ C under
the linear map 1 is an identity element. The linear map τ is a trace on V .7 Standard arguments with
oriented surfaces and their diﬀeomorphisms prove that m is associative and commutative and that
the trace is nondegenerate in the sense that the pairing v1, v2 ↦→(τ ◦ m)(v1, v2) is a nondegenerate
pairing on V . For example, the composition of the bordisms labeled m and τ in Figure 13 is the
7Note that the bordism τ is the time-reversal of 1. There is also a time-reversal of m, which may be expressed as
a composition of the maps in ( 4.12) together with the inverse to the nondegenerate bilinear pa iring τ ◦ m.

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 D. S. FREED
product of the circle with the bordism labeled ev in Figure 10; then the argument of Lemma 4.5
with the S-diagram proves that the pairing τ ◦ m is nondegenerate. Thus an oriented 2-dimensional
topological ﬁeld theory determines a commutative Frobenius algebra, a commutative algebra with
a nondegenerate trace. The converse is also true.
Theorem 4.13. Let V be a commutative Frobenius algebra. Then there is a homomorp hism
(4.14) F :
(
BordSO
⟨1,2⟩, ∐
)
− →
(
VectC, ⊗
)
with F (S1) = V .
This is one of the oldest theorems in the subject. In the physi cs literature the statement dates at
least to Dijkgraaf’s thesis [ Di]. There are several proofs in the mathematics literature, f or example
in [ Ab, Ko]. The appendix to [ MS] contains a proof of Theorem 4.13 as well as several important
variations. As in the proof of Theorem 4.9 we ﬁrst extend F to all closed oriented 1-manifolds via
tensor products. The data ( 4.12) which deﬁnes the Frobenius structure on V tells what to attach to
elementary 2-dimensional bordisms arising from critical p oints of a Morse function of index 1,0,2.
It remains to verify that diﬀerent Morse functions lead to th e same linear map. That check, for
which we refer to the reader to [ MS], uses the basic properties of a commutative Frobenius alge bra.
These explicit arguments with Morse functions quickly beco me tedious and diﬃcult to execute.
The situation simpliﬁes for extended ﬁeld theories ( §5) which are more local. They are the province
of the cobordism hypothesis. The cobordism hypothesis is pr oved using on the one hand more
powerful results about spaces of Morse functions and on the o ther more sophisticated algebra to
organize the argument.
One example of a commutative Frobenius algebra is the cohomo logy algebra H •(M ; C) of a com-
pact oriented n-manifold M . The trace is pairing with the fundamental class [ M ] ∈ Hn(M ). If
there is odd cohomology, then it is commutative in the graded sense because of signs in the com-
mutation rule for cup products. For example, if M = S2 then we obtain the truncated polynomial
algebra C[x]/(x2). The corresponding 2-dimensional topological ﬁeld theor y plays a role in the
construction of Khovanov homology for links [ Kh, B-N]. If the Frobenius algebra V is semisimple,
then we can simultaneously diagonalize the multiplication operators Ma(b) = ab, a, b ∈ V and so
ﬁnd a basis of commuting idempotents e1, e2, . . . , en ∈ V : thus eiei = ei and eiej = 0 if i ⁄= j. The
Frobenius algebra is determined up to isomorphism by nonzer o complex numbers λ1, λ2, . . . , λn de-
ﬁned by τ (ei) = λi. In this case everything in the ﬁeld theory F with F (S1) = V is easily computed
in terms of the basis {ei} and the numbers λi. For example the 2-holed torus in Figure 14 maps
to the endomorphism ei ↦→λ−1
i ei of V and a closed surface Xg of genus g maps to the complex
number
(4.15) F (Xg) =
∑
λ1−g
i .
These computations are made by chopping the surfaces into th e elementary bordisms in Figure 13
and their time-reversals.

===== PAGE 17 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 17
time 
Figure 14. Torus with incoming and outgoing boundary circles
Let G be a ﬁnite group and A = Map(G, C) the vector space of complex-valued functions on G.
Then A is an associative algebra under the convolution product
(4.16) ( f1 ∗ f2)(g) =
∑
g1g2=g
f1(g1)f2(g2), g, g 1, g2 ∈ G, f 1, f2 : G → C.
We also deﬁne the trace
(4.17) τ (f ) = f (e)
#G ,
where e ∈ G is the identity element. The product is not commutative if G is not abelian. Let V be
the center of A, the space of class functions on G; it is a commutative Frobenius algebra which can
be identiﬁed with the complexiﬁcation R(G) ⊗ C of the representation ring of G. Let FG denote the
2-dimensional oriented topological ﬁeld theory with FG(S1) = V guaranteed by Theorem 4.13. The
complexiﬁed representation ring is semisimple. Classical orthogonality formulas of Schur show that
the characters χi of the irreducible complex representations of G are, up to scale, the commuting
idempotents ei =
(
χi(1)/#G
)
χi. Then we easily compute that λi = ∑ χi(1)2/#G and from ( 4.15)
the partition function of a closed connected oriented surfa ce is
(4.18) FG(X) =
∑
χ irreducible
character of G
( χ(e)
#G
)Euler(X)
,
where Euler( X) is the Euler characteristic of X.
The construction of FG which relies on Theorem 4.13 takes as input the complexiﬁed represen-
tation ring and uses Morse theory to produce a topological ﬁe ld theory. There is also a direct
geometric construction of this simple ﬁnite theory. For any manifold M let FM denote the collec-
tion of principal G-bundles P → M . So P is a manifold with a free right G-action and quotient M .
In other terms P → M is a covering space which is regular (Galois), but note that P need not be
connected. For example, if M = S1 and G = Z/nZ for some positive integer n, then there are
n distinct isomorphism classes of principal G-bundles over M ; the connectivity of the total space of
a cover depends on the prime factorization of n. For any manifold FM is a category: a morphism
(P ′ → M ) − →(P → M ) is a smooth map ϕ : P ′ → P which commutes with the G-action and

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 D. S. FREED
covers the identity map of M . This category is a groupoid since all morphisms are invertible. For
M = pt there is only one G-bundle up to isomorphism, the trivial bundle P = G with G acting
by right multiplication, and the group of automorphisms is G acting by left multiplication on P .
Figure 15 depicts a groupoid equivalent to Fpt. There is a single object, the set of arrows is G,
g
Figure 15. G-bundles over pt
and composition of arrows is given by the group law. For M = S1 if we introduce a basepoint
p ∈ P on a G-bundle P → S1, then we can compute the holonomy, or monodromy, around the
circle (after choosing an orientation), which is an element of G. The bundle with basepoint is rigid:
any automorphism which ﬁxes the basepoint is the identity. T he group G acts simply transitively
on the set of basepoints over a ﬁxed point of S1, and it conjugates the holonomy. In this way we
see that FS1 is equivalent to the groupoid G/ /Gof G acting on itself by conjugation. It is depicted
in Figure 16. The set of isomorphism classes π0(FS1) is the set of conjugacy classes in G and the
e x
g
gxg -1 
Figure 16. G-bundles over S1
automorphism group π1(FS1, P ) at a G-bundle with holonomy x is the centralizer group of x in G.
Principal G-bundles are local and contravariant. Consider a bordism, a s in Figure 1 with the
arrow of time pointing to the right. The inclusions of the inc oming and outgoing boundary induce
restriction maps of bundles, which are homomorphisms of gro upoids:
(4.19) FX
s t
FY0 FY1
A diagram of the form ( 4.19) is a correspondence, which is a generalization of a homomorphism
from FY0 to FY1. Namely, if s is invertible, then s × t embeds FX into FY0 × FY1 as the graph

===== PAGE 19 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 19
of t ◦ s−1. A composition of bordisms (Figure 3) induces a composition of correspondences
(4.20) FX′′◦X′
r′ r′′
FX′
s′ t′
FX′′
s′′ t′′
FY0 FY1 FY2
The locality of principal G-bundles is hidden in this statement: the groupoid FX′′◦X′ of G-bundles
on the composition X ′′ ◦ X ′ is the ﬁber product of t′ and s′′; that is, a G-bundle P → X ′′ ◦ X ′ is
a triple ( P ′, P ′′, θ) consisting of G-bundles P ′ → X ′, P ′′ → X ′′, and an isomorphism θ : P ′ ⏐⏐
Y1
→
P ′′⏐⏐
Y1
of their restrictions to Y1.
Correspondence diagrams can often be “linearized” into hon est maps. For the ﬁeld theory FG we
use closed oriented 1-manifolds Y and compact oriented 2-dimensional bordisms X. On 1-manifolds
we deﬁne
(4.21) FG(Y ) = Hom
(
FY , C
)
.
Here we view C as a groupoid with only identity morphisms. Then homomorphi sms FY → C
assign complex numbers to objects in FY so that the numbers at each end of a morphism are
equal. In other words, Hom( FY , C) is the vector space of invariant functions on FY , so can be
identiﬁed with Map
(
π0(FY ), C
)
, the space of functions on equivalence classes of G-bundles. Then
to a correspondence ( 4.19) we deﬁne
(4.22) FG(X) = t∗ ◦ s∗ : FG(Y0) − →FG(Y1)
as pullback followed by pushforward. The ﬁbers of t are (equivalent to) groupoids with ﬁnitely
many objects, each with a ﬁnite stabilizer group. The pushfo rward t∗ of a function φ on FX is the
sum
(4.23) t∗(φ)(y) =
∑
x
φ(x)
# Aut(x) , y ∈ FY1,
over the equivalence classes x in the ﬁber t−1(y) of the value of φ divided by the order of the
automorphism group. (This formula makes clear that FG may be deﬁned on rational vector spaces.)
Key point: the fact that ( 4.20) is a ﬁber product implies that the push-pull construction t akes
compositions of bordisms to compositions of linear maps. In other words, there is an a priori proof
that the push-pull construction produces a homomorphism FG : Bord SO
⟨1,2⟩ → VectC of symmetric
monoidal categories. The enterprising reader can now compute that FG(S1) is the vector space of
central functions on G, and that the basic bordisms in Figure 13 map to the convolution product,
the character of the identity representation, and the trace (4.17).

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 D. S. FREED
Now suppose X is a closed oriented 2-manifold. It is interpreted as a bordi sm X : ∅1 → ∅ 1.
In grand Bourbaki style the groupoid of G-bundles F∅1 has a single object with only the identity
morphism. (After all, F maps disjoint unions to Cartesian products, and ∅1 is the tensor unit for
disjoint union.) In this case ( 4.22) specializes to the sum of the constant function 1 over FX: it
counts (with automorphisms) the G-bundles over X. If X is connected then that count of bundles
is
(4.24) FG(X) = # Hom
(
π1(X, x), G
)
#G ;
the numerator counts G-bundles with a basepoint over x and the group G acts simply transitively
on the basepoints.
Theorem 4.25. Let X be a compact oriented connected 2-manifold and G a ﬁnite group. Then
(4.26) # Hom
(
π1(X, x), G
)
= (#G)
∑
χ irreducible
character of G
( χ(1)
#G
)Euler(X)
,
where Euler(X) is the Euler characteristic of X.
The theorem follows immediately by comparing ( 4.24) and ( 4.18). It was known to Frobenius and
Schur from the character theory of ﬁnite groups, with no quan tum ﬁelds in sight. The proof given
here is representative of how topological ﬁeld theory is use d in more complicated situations. The
invariant on the left hand side of ( 4.26), initially deﬁned for closed 2-manifolds, is extended to a n
invariant for compact 2-manifolds with boundary which obey s a gluing law. So it is computed by
chopping X into elementary pieces (as in Figure 13 together with the time-reversal of m).
Remark 4.27. The appearance of the Euler characteristic in ( 4.26) suggests an extension of FG which
includes 0-manifolds. They would appear as corners of 2-man ifolds and boundaries of 1-manifolds.
Then in a triangulation of X, the count of vertices, edges, and triangles in the triangul ation should
combine to give the Euler characteristic Euler( X) and a new proof of ( 4.26). In such an extended
ﬁeld theory we have more locality, so more decompositions an d hence more computational ﬂexibility.
We take up extended theories in §5 and pursue this idea in Example 5.7.
Remark 4.28. There is a variation on ( 4.22) in which FX in ( 4.19) carries an integral kernel. In
that case the pull-push formula ( 4.22) is modiﬁed to pull-multiply-push. The integral kernel mus t
be local in that it multiplies in the ﬁber product ( 4.20). In this 2-dimensional theory we can obtain
such an integral kernel by starting with a cocycle for a class in the group cohomology H 2(G; C/Z).
The theory FG was introduced by Dijkgraaf and Witten [ DW]. See [ FQ],[F] for more details
about deﬁning FG by counting principal G-bundles. The lecture notes [ Q] contain elaborations and
many more examples.
The push-pull construction is a ﬁnite version of the Feynman functional integral in quantum
ﬁeld theory. The groupoid FM consists of gauge ﬁelds for a ﬁnite group G; if G is a Lie group,
then gauge ﬁelds form the groupoid of G-connections on M . The integral kernel described in

===== PAGE 21 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 21
Remark 4.28 is the exponential of the classical action of the ﬁeld theory. The pushforward t∗ is
the Feynman integral or functional integral or path integral over the space of ﬁelds (with ﬁxed
boundary condition). In almost all physically interesting examples the space, or stack, of ﬁelds
is not ﬁnite, but rather is inﬁnite dimensional. One way to de ﬁne pushforward t∗ on functions
is via integration theory, which of course requires a measur e on the space of ﬁelds. (There are
alternatives, at least for some topological theories; see [ FHT] for one example.) Furthermore, the
measures must be consistent with the ﬁber product ( 4.20) under composition of bordisms. Such
measures have not been constructed rigorously in most examp les of physical interest. The example
of ﬁnite gauge theories, while it nicely illustrates many to pological and algebraic aspects, misses
completely the central analytical issues in quantum ﬁeld th eory.
5. n-categories and extended topological quantum ﬁeld theory
In this section we extend the deﬁnition of an n-dimensional topological ﬁeld theories in two
directions: (i) to invariants of manifolds of all dimension s ≤ n and (ii) to invariants of families of
manifolds. These extensions go beyond what was traditional ly done in quantum ﬁeld theory.
Standard topological ﬁeld theories, as in Deﬁnition 2.6, are local in that invariants of n-manifolds
are computed by cutting along closed codimension 1 submanif olds. We saw after Theorem 4.25, and
even in the description of classical Morse theory (Remark 2.8), that it is desirable to go further and
cut along codimension 2 submanifolds as well, so have n-manifolds with corners. Once we take that
plunge we may as well continue cutting in higher and higher co dimension until we are cutting along
0-manifolds. In other words, we end up considering n-manifolds with corners of all codimension.
The local model for the maximal corner is a corner in real aﬃne space: {(x1, x2, . . . , xn) ∈ An :
xi ≥ 0} near (0 , 0, . . . ,0).
In a bottom up view, rather than a top down view, we build highe r dimensional manifolds by time
evolution of lower dimensional manifolds. This is illustra ted in Figure 10 by the time evolution of 0-
manifolds to produce 1-manifolds. Now we evolve again, intr oducing a second time as in Figure 17.
Let t1, t2 ∈ [0, 1] denote the times, so the space of times is the square [0 , 1] × [0, 1]. At each of
t1
t2
Figure 17. Two-time evolution of two points
the four corners t1, t2 ∈ { 0, 1} lies the 0-manifold Y consisting of two points. At time t2 = 0 they
evolve in t1 via the identity bordism, whereas at time t2 = 1 they evolve as the evaluation followed
by the coevaluation. (These 1-dimensional bordisms are pic tured in Figure 10). The evolution in t2

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 D. S. FREED
is a 2-dimensional bordism W between these two 1-dimensional bordisms X0, X1. As a manifold
it is a 2-dimensional manifold with corners, but as a bordism we remember the time evolutions.
Morally, as in §2 it is only the arrows of time which matter—and these only near the boundaries
and corners—but it is convenient both heuristically and tec hnically to think in terms of actual time
functions. An algebraic representation of this two-time ev olution is:
(5.1) Y
X1
X0
W Y
The algebraic structure which includes ( 5.1) is a 2-category. In addition to objects x, y and
morphisms f, g : x → y mapping between them, there are now 2-morphisms η : f ⇒ g which
map between morphisms. For clarity ‘morphisms’ are now term ed ‘1-morphisms’. In the 2-
category Bord ⟨0,1,2⟩ the objects are compact 0-manifolds, the 1-morphisms are 1- dimensional bor-
disms, and the 2-morphisms are 2-dimensional bordisms. A 2- category has two associative compo-
sition laws, easily seen pictorially in Bord ⟨0,1,2⟩. Namely, we can compose horizontally in the ﬁrst
time t1 or vertically in the second time t2. Disjoint union is an extra algebraic structure—still call ed
a symmetric monoidal structure—and the empty manifolds are identity elements for disjoint union.
So, for example, a closed 2-manifold W is interpreted as a 2-morphism W : ∅1 ⇒ ∅ 1 in Bord ⟨0,1,2⟩.
For now we leave unspeciﬁed what sort of extra topological da ta (orientation, framing, . . . ) we
assume present.
The saddle in Figure 17 is the elementary bordism in Morse theory depicted in Figure 4. In
other words, it is the 2-manifold D1 × D1 which implements the surgery beginning with S0 × D1
and ending with D1 × S0. Here D1 is the standard closed 1-ball. The general surgery
(5.2) Dp × Dq : Sp−1 × Dq − →Dp × Sq−1,
can be written algebraically in a diagram similar to ( 5.1) with Y = Sp−1 × Sq−1. Morse theory
tells that a manifold has a handlebody decomposition into el ementary bordisms ( 5.2). We might
conclude that 2-categories go far enough, and that nothing i s to be gained by chopping further.
We could, after all, make a 2-category whose objects are clos ed ( n − 2)-manifolds and with 1-
morphisms and 2-morphisms their time evolutions. But the st ructure simpliﬁes if we don’t stop
there and rather go all the way down to points.
Therefore, to study manifolds of dimension ≤ n, or equivalently to study topological ﬁeld theories
of dimension n, we are led to the n-category Bord⟨0···n⟩ whose objects are compact 0-manifolds and
whose k-morphisms (1 ≤ k ≤ n) are k-time evolutions of objects. There are k composition laws for
k-morphisms, and they satisfy various compatibilities. Dis joint union gives a symmetric monoidal
structure. It is a complicated combinatorial problem to tra ck all of this data. The relevance of
higher categories to topological ﬁeld theory was understoo d in the early 1990s, but at that time
rigorous foundations were not available. In the intervenin g years several approaches and deﬁnitions
have been advanced. We will not attempt a formal deﬁnition he re, but refer the reader to [ BD, L1]
for more detailed exposition and references.

===== PAGE 23 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 23
The n-category Bord ⟨0···n⟩ is the ﬁrst extension we envisioned at the beginning of this s ection.
The second is to families of manifolds. It turns out that this can be encoded by extending the
n-category Bord ⟨0···n⟩ higher up: we adjoin ( n + 1)-morphisms, ( n + 2)-morphisms, etc. Namely,
if W0, W1 are n-dimensional bordisms we deﬁne an ( n + 1)-morphism ϕ : W0 → W1 to be a dif-
feomorphism which preserves all of the “boundary data”. An n-morphism is a map between two
(n − 1)-morphisms, each of which is a map between two ( n − 2)-morphisms, and on down. The
diﬀeomorphism ϕ must preserve the implicit identiﬁcations. In terms of the n-time evolution,
ϕ must be compatible with the data at each of the 2 n extreme times ti ∈ { 0, 1}. Since ϕ is a
diﬀeomorphism, it is invertible. We continue and deﬁne an ( n + 2)-morphism ϕ0 → ϕ1 to be an
isotopy between the diﬀeomorphisms ϕ0 and ϕ1, again preserving the boundary data. Isotopies are
also invertible, up to a higher isotopy. Continuing in this w ay we have k-morphisms for all k, so an
∞-category. But it has the property that every k-morphism for k > n is invertible.
Deﬁnition 5.3. Let n ∈ Z>0. An ( ∞, n)-category is an ∞-category in which every k-morphism is
invertible for k > n .
‘Deﬁnition’ is not really appropriate as we have not deﬁned ∞-categories! There are complete
deﬁnitions for ( ∞, n)-categories, in fact several [ Ba, R, Be] with others on the way, and also a
study [ BS] of all homotopy theories of ( ∞, n)-categories.
Remark 5.4. A higher category in which every morphism is invertible—i.e., an ( ∞, 0)-category—
is a combinatorial model for a space. Since every morphism is invertible, this is also called an
∞-groupoid. So whereas an n-category has sets of n-morphisms, an ( ∞, n)-category has spaces
of n-morphisms. An n-category may be extended to a discrete (∞, n)-category in which all k-
morphisms for k > n are identity maps.
Deﬁnition 5.5. Bordn is the (∞, n)-category whose objects are compact 0-manifolds, k-morphisms
for 1 ≤ k ≤ n are k-time evolutions of objects, and k-morphisms for k > n are (k − n)-fold iterated
isotopies of diﬀeomorphisms. It is symmetric monoidal unde r disjoint union.
Again this is only a descriptive deﬁnition.
The manifolds in Bord n typically carry extra data. For example, there is an ( ∞, n)-category
BordSO
n of oriented bordisms. There is also a bordism category of bor disms with tangential framing,
but in an unstable 8 sense. Namely, an n-framing on a k-bordism W in Bord fr
n is a trivialization
of T W ⊕ (n − k), where ( n − k) is the trivial bundle of the indicated rank. The ( ∞, n)-category
of unoriented manifolds is denoted Bord O
n . We use ‘Bord n’ generically to denote any of these and
many other similar possibilities.
Analogous to Deﬁnition 2.6 we consider representations of Bordn. We allow an arbitrary codomain.
Deﬁnition 5.6. Let C be a symmetric monoidal ( ∞, n)-category. An extended topological ﬁeld
theory with values in C is a homomorphism F : Bord n → C .
The homomorphism property means that F respects the n composition laws as well as the symmetric
monoidal structures. The cobordism hypothesis, which we ta ke up in the next section, determines
the space of homomorphisms F in terms of C.
8Framings on manifolds used to deﬁne framed bordism groups—i somorphic by the Pontrjagin-Thom construction
to stable homotopy groups of spheres—are stable framings of the normal bundle.

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 D. S. FREED
For the remainder of this section we indicate some examples w hich illuminate the idea of an
extended ﬁeld theory and the ﬂexibility of Deﬁnition 5.6.
Example 5.7. Let G be a ﬁnite group. Recall from §4 the 2-dimensional topological ﬁeld theory
FG : Bord SO
⟨1,2⟩ → VectC. In ( 4.16) we introduced the algebra A = Map( G, C) of functions on G
under convolution, but only its center made an appearance in FG—as FG(S1). There is an extended
ﬁeld theory ˆFG of 0-, 1-, and 2-manifolds which has ˆFG(pt+) = A. The codomain ( ∞, 2)-category C
of any extension has the property that the ( ∞, 1)-category Hom C(1, 1) of endomorphisms of the
tensor unit 1 is identiﬁed with Vect C. In fact, Vect C is discrete: objects are complex vector spaces,
1-morphisms are linear maps, and there are no non-identity h igher morphisms. So we might hope
that C is also discrete, an ordinary 2-category. Furthermore, if ˆFG(pt+) is to be A, then objects
of C are algebras. Thus let C = AlgC be the 2-category whose objects are complex algebras. If
A0, A1 ∈ AlgC, then we deﬁne a 1-morphism B : A0 → A1 to be an ( A1, A0)-bimodule B, a complex
vector space B with a left action of A1 and a right action of A0. Composition is by tensor product
over algebras: if B : A0 → A1 and B′ : A1 → A2, then B′ ◦ B : A0 → A2 is the ( A2, A0)-bimodule
B′ ⊗A1 B. The symmetric monoidal structure is given by tensor produc t over C. The algebra C is
the tensor unit 1 and Hom AlgC(1, 1) is the collection of ( C, C)-bimodules, which is canonically Vect C,
as desired. A 2-morphism between bimodules is a linear map wh ich intertwines the algebra actions.
To put this construction in context, we observe that an isomorphism in the 2-category AlgC of
algebras is a Morita equivalence of algebras.
We pause to remark that we have climbed to the next categorica l level—from 1-categories to
2-categories—by endowing objects in a 1-category with an as sociative unital composition law.
Complex vector spaces form a 1-category, whereas complex ve ctor spaces which are algebras form
a 2-category. This is an important general idea, which can be implemented at all categorical levels
and also can be iterated. For example, if we consider complex vector spaces with 2 composition
laws we obtain a 3-category (of commutative algebras). We wi ll meet more examples below. We
can embed AlgC into the more familiar 2-category of C-linear categories Cat C: an algebra A maps
to the linear category of left A-modules. It is usually easier to scale categorical heights by looking
at “algebra objects” in an existing category, rather than by introducing new and more elaborate
constructs.
Returning to
(5.8) ˆFG : Bord SO
2 − →AlgC,
once we posit ˆFG(pt+) = A = Map( G, C), we can compute ˆFG(S1) as follows. We know that
ˆFG(pt−) is the dual to ˆFG(pt+), since pt + and pt − are dual in Bord SO
2 , and it turns out that the
dual algebra is the opposite algebra Ao. The coevaluation in Figure 10 is the left ( A⊗Ao)-module A,
and the evaluation is the right ( Ao ⊗ A)-module A. After permuting the two boundary points of
the evaluation, we compose coevaluation and evaluation to c ompute
(5.9) ˆFG(S1) = A ⊗A⊗Ao A.
This tensor product is the Hochschild homology of the algebra A. We can easily compute it explicitly.
Tensoring over A gives the tensor product A⊗AA of the right A-module A with the left A-module A,

===== PAGE 25 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 25
which is canonically A by multiplication. Then the Ao-action is by left and right multiplication, so
letting [ A, A] ⊂ A denote the subspace spanned by elements of the form a1a2 − a2a1, a 1, a2 ∈ A,
we conclude ˆFG(S1) = A/[A, A]. This is not the center of A, which is what we expect from
the text after ( 4.23). To identify the vector space A/[A, A] with the center of A we need one
more piece of data, a nondegenerate trace τ : A → C on A. Nondegeneracy means that a1, a2 ↦→
τ (a1a2) is a nondegenerate pairing, and then we identify the quotie nt A/[A, A] with the orthogonal
subspace [A, A]⊥ ⊂ A, which is easily identiﬁed with the center of A. The pair ( A, τ) is a Frobenius
algebra. For A = Map(G, C) we use the trace ( 4.17).
The cobordism hypothesis, stated for framed manifolds in Th eorem 1.2, asserts that ˆFG is de-
termined by its value on pt +. This is true here, but ‘value on pt +’ must be interpreted as the
pair ( A, τ). The extra datum τ is necessary as ˆFG is an oriented theory, not simply a framed
theory; see Theorem 6.11 and Example 6.13.
In §4 we described an approach to the non-extended theory FG using a ﬁnite version of the
path integral in physics, which amounts to counting princip al G-bundles. The ﬁnite path integral
extends to give an a priori construction of ˆFG in which ˆFG(pt+) = A is the result of a computation;
see [ F, FHLT] for details.
Example 5.10. Historically, 3-dimensional Chern-Simons theory [ W3] was the example which
most pointed the way towards extended topological ﬁeld theo ries. The approach of Reshetikhin-
Turaev [RT1, RT2] to the resulting invariants of 3-manifolds and links begin s with a quantum group,
in the form of a complex linear category with extra structure , a modular tensor category [MSei].
By contrast, Witten begins with the Chern-Simons functiona l and uses the path integral. The
relationship between the approaches, worked out in [ F] for ﬁnite gauge groups, is that Chern-
Simons is a (partially) extended theory of 1-, 2-, and 3-mani folds whose value on S1 is the modular
tensor category. A complete construction of this 1-2-3 theo ry beginning from quantum group data
was given in [ Tu]; see also [ Wa]. There is current work, for example [ BDH], to construct a fully
extended 0-1-2-3 theory.
Example 5.11. The previous two examples are discrete: there are no interes ting invariants for
families of manifolds beyond those for single manifolds. Th at an extension of Deﬁnition 2.6 to
families would be fruitful emerged in the 1990s from 2-dimen sional ﬁeld theories. Segal promoted the
idea of a cochain-valued topological ﬁeld theory [ Se3], and there were several mathematical works
which pointed towards invariants for families of manifolds ; a quirky sample is [ LZ, G, KM, BC].
The most deﬁnitive work in this direction is by Kevin Costell o [ Co], who constructed a theory of
“open-closed” topological 2-dimensional ﬁeld theories in families from Calabi-Yau categories. These
are closely related to fully extended 2-dimensional theori es; see [ L1, §4.2].
Example 5.12. Another motivating example for the cobordism hypothesis wh ich includes invari-
ants for families of manifolds is string topology, which deﬁnes invariants of compact manifolds using
its loop space and Riemann surfaces. It was introduced by Cha s-Sullivan [CS], and there is a large
literature which follows. See [ L1, §4.2] for the relation with the cobordism hypothesis.

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 D. S. FREED
6. The cobordism hypothesis
Recall from §4 that objects in the image of a non-extended topological ﬁeld theory obey a
ﬁniteness condition, expressed in categorical terms by dua lizability (Deﬁnition 4.7). There is an
analogous ﬁniteness condition called adjointability for k-morphisms, 1 ≤ k ≤ n−1, in an extended n-
dimensional ﬁeld theory. We give the deﬁnition for 1-morphi sms, which specializes to the traditional
notion of adjoint functors in category theory [ Ka] for the 2-category of categories.
Deﬁnition 6.1. Let C be a 2-category; x, y ∈ C objects in C; and suppose f : x → y, g : y → x
are 1-morphisms. Then f is a left adjoint to g if there exist 2-morphisms u : id x ⇒ g ◦ f and
c : f ◦ g ⇒ idy such that the compositions
(6.2) f = f ◦ idx
id ×u= = =⇒ f ◦ g ◦ f c×id= =⇒ idy ◦f = f
and
(6.3) g = idx ◦ g u×id= = =⇒ g ◦ f ◦ g id ×c= = =⇒ g ◦ idy = g
are identity 2-morphisms.
We then say that g is a right adjoint to f , and u, c are the unit and counit of an adjunction. The
compositions ( 6.2) and ( 6.3) are the 2-morphism version of the S-diagram compositions ( 4.8). The
corresponding deﬁnition for ( ∞, n)-categories and higher morphisms is similar, but the compo si-
tions are only the identity maps up to higher morphisms, or eq uivalently are identity maps in a
homotopy category which remembers higher morphisms only up to equivalence. Invertible maps
have adjoints—the inverse is an adjoint—so adjointability is weaker than invertibility .
Remark 6.4. If an n-morphism in an n-category, or ( ∞, n)-category, is adjointable then it is in-
vertible. This follows since the unit and counit of an adjunc tion, which are ( n + 1)-morphisms, are
invertible.
Let C be a symmetric monoidal ( ∞, n)-category and F : Bord n → C an extended ﬁeld theory.
Then just as F (pt) is dualizable, so too is F (W ) adjointable for every k-dimensional bordism W
with 1 ≤ k ≤ n − 1. This is an extended ﬁniteness condition satisﬁed by an ext ended topological
ﬁeld theory. We extract from C all objects which have duals, and whose duality data have adj oints,
which in turn have adjoints, etc.
Lemma 6.5. [L1, §2.3] Let C be a symmetric monoidal (∞, n)-category. There is an (∞, n)-
category Cfd and a homomorphism i : Cfd → C so that (i) every object in Cfd is dualizable and every
k-morphism, 1 ≤ k ≤ n − 1, is adjointable, and (ii) i : Cfd → C is universal with respect to (i).
Here ‘fd’ stands either for ‘fully dualizable’ or ‘ﬁnite dim ensional’. An ( ∞, n)-category which
satisﬁes (i) is said to “have duals”, as in the statement of Th eorem 1.1. The ﬁniteness condition
on a topological ﬁeld theory F : Bord n → C may be summarized by the diagram
(6.6) Cfd
iBordn F
C

===== PAGE 27 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 27
In other words, F factors through Cfd.
Extended topological ﬁeld theories F : Bord n → C are the objects of an ( ∞, n)-category we
denote Hom(Bord n, C). A 1-morphism η : F0 → F1 between two homomorphisms assigns a ( k + 1)-
dimensional morphism η(W ) : F0(W ) → F1(W ) to each k-dimensional bordism W . The fact that
adjointable n-morphisms are invertible (Remark 6.4) implies, after some argument, that any 1-
morphism η is in fact an isomorphism. The same applies to higher morphis ms. It follows that
Hom(Bordn, C) is in fact an ( ∞, 0)-category—all morphisms are invertible—so according to Re-
mark 5.4 can be viewed as a space. In other words, the collection of extended topological ﬁel d
theories with values in C is a space.
The cobordism hypothesis identiﬁes the space Hom(Bord n, C) with a space constructed directly
from C by combining Lemma 6.5 with another universal construction.
Lemma 6.7. [L1, §2.4] Let D be an (∞, n)-category. There is an ∞-groupoid D∼ and a homomor-
phism j : D∼ → D so that (i) every k-morphism, k > 0, in D∼ is invertible, and (ii) j : D∼ → D is
universal with respect to (i).
The ∞-groupoid D∼, which is an ∞-category in which every morphism is invertible, may be
constructed from D by removing all noninvertible morphisms.
Finally, we can state a precise version of the cobordism hypo thesis, ﬁrst for n-framed manifolds.
Theorem 6.8 (Cobordism hypothesis: framed version) . Let C be a symmetric monoidal (∞, n)-
category. Then the map
(6.9)
Hom(Bordfr
n , C) − →(Cfd)∼
F ↦− →F (pt+)
is a homotopy equivalence of spaces.
At this point the reader should refer back to the heuristic ve rsions stated in §1 as well as the discrete
1-dimensional version in Theorem 4.9. In particular, the cobordism hypothesis is a theorem about
smooth manifolds and their diﬀeomorphism groups, which is r eﬂected by the method of proof.
Suppose W is a bordism of dimension k ≤ n which is n-framed. Recall that the n-framing is
an isomorphism ( n) → (n − k) ⊕ T W, where ( j) denotes the trivial real vector bundle of rank j
over W . The orthogonal group 9 O(n) acts on framings by precomposition with constant orthogon al
maps ( n) → (n). This induces an action of O(n) on the space Hom(Bord fr
n , C).
Corollary 6.10. There is a canonical action of the orthogonal group O(n) on the space (Cfd)∼.
Let G be a Lie group equipped with a homomorphism ρ : G → O(n). A G-structure on a
bordism W is a reduction of structure group of its tangent bundle to G along ρ. More precisely,
choose a Riemannian metric on W (this is a contractible choice). Then a G-structure is a principal
G-bundle P → W together with an isomorphism of the associated G-bundle ρ(P ) with the bundle
of orthonormal frames of ( n − k) ⊕ T W. For example, for G = {e} a G-structure is an n-framing,
and for G = SO(n) it is an orientation. There is a bordism category Bord G
n of manifolds with
G-structure.
9It is perhaps more natural to use the full general linear grou p GL(n; R), but all of the topological information is
carried by the maximal compact subgroup O(n) ⊂ GL(n; R).

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 D. S. FREED
Theorem 6.11 (Cobordism hypothesis: G-structure version). The map
(6.12) Hom(BordG
n , C) − →
(
(Cfd)∼)hG
F ↦− →F (pt+)
is a homotopy equivalence between the space of extended topo logical ﬁeld theories on G-manifolds
and the homotopy ﬁxed point space of the G-action on (Cfd)∼.
Here G acts through the homomorphism ρ : G → O(n) and the O(n)-action given in Corollary 6.10.
Example 6.13. For n = 2 an oriented 2-dimensional theory is determined by the val ue on pt +, but
in the ﬁxed point space. Consider C = AlgC, as in Example 5.7. First, the 2-category Algfd
C of fully
dualizable complex algebras has objects ﬁnite dimensional semisimple algebras, i.e., ﬁnite products
of matrix complex algebras. (A proof may be found in [ Da, §3.2].) A point in the homotopy
ﬁxed point space of the SO(2)-action includes extra data—in this case being a ﬁxed point is
not a condition—and the extra data here is the nondegenerate trace τ discussed in Example 5.7;
see [ FHLT, Example 2.8] for details.
We are not going to attempt to summarize the proof sketched in [L1] in any detail. Rather, we
give a very rough intuition for why the cobordism hypothesis might be true. Our exposition in §4,
in particular the proof of Theorem 4.9, emphasizes the role of Morse theory. The existence of Morse
functions allows the decomposition of a bordism into a compo sition of elementary bordisms ( 5.2).
These elementary bordisms encode the evaluations and coeva luations, or units and counits, of
duality and adjointness data. That is clear in the proof of Th eorem 4.9. As another example,
Figure 17 may be read as a counit for the adjunction between the two 1-mo rphisms coev, ev in
Figure 10. So if x ∈ C is fully dualizable, a choice of duality data—duals and adjo ints all the
way up—deﬁnes F on elementary bordisms. As arbitrary bordisms are composit ions of elementary
bordisms, F can be extended to arbitrary bordisms. In other words a Morse function gives, in
principle, a way to evaluate F (W ) for every bordism W . The issue is whether F (W ) is well-
deﬁned. The duality data involves choices, and we must be sur e that those choices can be made
coherently. This is expressed via contractibility stateme nts. The ﬁrst is that the space of duality
data for a dualizable object x is contractible. The second generalizes the connectivity s tatement at
the heart of Cerf theory [ C]. Lurie uses a higher connectivity theorem of Kiyoshi Igusa [I] for the
space of generalized framed Morse functions . Such functions relax the nondegeneracy condition at
a critical point to allow a single degeneracy, as in ( 2.9), and also include a framing of the negative
deﬁnite subspace at a critical point. Igusa proves that on a k-dimensional manifold this space is k-
connected.10 These contractibility statements are central to the proof, but it is a highly nontrivial
problem to organize the higher categorical data to apply the se theorems. The solution to that
problem, described in detail in [ L1], is equally central to the proof.
10It is in fact a consequence of the cobordism hypothesis that t his space of functions is weakly contractible. This
has been proved independently of the cobordism hypothesis i n [ EM] and also in unpublished work of Galatius.

===== PAGE 29 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 29
7. Implications, extensions, and applications
Some brief vignettes illustrate the scope of the extended to pological ﬁeld theory and the cobor-
dism hypothesis.
Invertible theories and Madsen-Tillmann spectra
Recall from Lemma 6.7 that any ( ∞, n)-category D has an underlying ∞-groupoid D∼ → D ,
which may be identiﬁed with a space. There is a quotient const ruction as well.
Lemma 7.1. Let D be an (∞, n)-category. There is an ∞-groupoid |D| and a homomorphism
q : D → |D| so that (i) every k-morphism, k > 0, in |D| is invertible, and (ii) q : D → |D| is
universal with respect to (i).
These constructions are relevant to invertible topological ﬁeld theories . We say an object x in a
symmetric monoidal ( ∞, n)-category is invertible if it has an inverse y for the monoidal structure:
x ⊗ y is isomorphic to the unit object.
Deﬁnition 7.2. A topological ﬁeld theory α : Bord n → C is invertible if α(W ) is invertible for all
objects and morphisms W .
It follows from the cobordism hypothesis that α is invertible if and only if α(pt+) is invertible.
By the universal properties an invertible ﬁeld theory α : Bord n → C factors through | Bordn |
and ( Cfd)∼:
(7.3) Bordn
α
q
C
| Bordn | ˜α (Cfd)∼
j
Since Bord n and C are symmetric monoidal, so too are | Bordn | and ( Cfd)∼. An ∞-groupoid is
equivalent to a space (Remark 5.4), and a symmetric monoidal ∞-groupoid is equivalent to an
inﬁnite loop space, i.e., the 0-space of a spectrum. Further more, ˜α is an inﬁnite loop space map.
This reduces the study of invertible topological ﬁeld theor ies to a problem in stable homotopy
theory.
Remark 7.4. Invertible ﬁeld theories play a role in ordinary quantum ﬁel d theory, for example as
anomalies.
A corollary of the cobordism hypothesis [ L1, §2.5] determines the homotopy type of the spectrum
| Bordn |. Consider ﬁrst the bordism ( ∞, n)-category Bord fr
n of n-framed manifolds. The cobordism
hypothesis, in the heuristic form Theorem 1.1, asserts that Bord fr
n is free on one generator. It
follows that so too is | Bordfr
n |. The latter is a spectrum, and the free spectrum on one genera tor
is the sphere spectrum. For the bordism ( ∞, n)-category of G-manifolds Bord G
n the cobordism
hypothesis in the form Theorem 6.11 implies that | BordG
n | is the nth suspension of a Madsen-
Tillmann spectrum. (These spectra are mentioned in §2 before Deﬁnition 2.5.)

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 D. S. FREED
An ∞-groupoid—or ( ∞, 0)-category—is a model for a space. We may view an ( ∞, n)-category
as a generalization of a space which allows noninvertibilit y. From that perspective the cobordism
hypothesis is a generalization of the Madsen-Weiss theorem .
V ariations on the cobordism hypothesis
Morrison and Walker [MoW] take a somewhat diﬀerent, but closely related, approach to extended
topological ﬁeld theories which incorporates dualizabili ty from the beginning.
In [ L1, §4] Lurie describes several applications and extensions of t he cobordism hypothesis. One
important extension is to manifolds with singularities, th ough there are many special cases which do
not in fact involve singularities. To illustrate, in Exampl e 5.7 we described a 2-dimensional oriented
ﬁeld theory F associated to a Frobenius algebra A. Now suppose that M is a left A-module. Recall
that M determines a 1-morphism M : 1 → A in the Morita 2-category of algebras, where the tensor
unit 1 is the trivial algebra C. We might ask what sort of ﬁeld theory we can associate to the
pair ( A, M), assuming suﬃcient ﬁniteness.. A physicist might describ e M as giving a boundary
condition for F , and so extend F to a ﬁeld theory ~F in which some boundaries are “colored” with
the boundary condition M . For example, a closed interval with one endpoint colored is associated
to M as a left A-module; the closed interval with both endpoints colored is associated to M as
a vector space. The coloring represents a coning oﬀ of a point , which is viewed as a manifold
with singularities. This is just the tip of the iceberg of pos sibilities opened up by the cobordism
hypothesis with singularities.
From the point of view of algebra, given that Bord fr
n is the free symmetric monoidal ( ∞, n)-
category with duals on one generator, we might ask how to desc ribe more general symmetric
monoidal (∞, n)-categories speciﬁed by generators and relations. Roughl y speaking, the cobordism
hypothesis with singularities identiﬁes these as bordism c ategories of manifolds with singularities.
Applications to topology
We indicated brieﬂy in Example 5.10 the important role that Chern-Simons theory played in the
development of extended topological quantum ﬁeld theories . That theory encodes invariants of 3-
manifolds and links. Newer invariants of links and low dimen sional manifolds were in part inspired
by notions in extended ﬁeld theory. Crane and Frenkel [ CF] suggested that “categoriﬁcation” of the
3-dimensional invariants would lead to new invariants, pot entially related to Donaldson invariants.
Later Khovanov [ Kh] introduced such a categoriﬁcation of the Jones polynomial . This now has a
proposed derivation from quantum ﬁeld theory [ GSV, W4].
There is current research in many directions which will pote ntially take advantage of more
powerful aspects of extended ﬁeld theories and the cobordis m hypothesis in contexts which are
not discrete and semisimple. For example, the cobordism hyp othesis illuminates string topology
invariants and topological versions of Hochschild homolog y and its cousins [ BCT]. It also appears
in several discussions of the 2-dimensional extended topol ogical ﬁeld theories relevant for mirror
symmetry: the “A-model” and the “B-model”. There is an enorm ous literature on this subject;
see [ Te2] for one recent example which uses ideas around the cobordis m hypothesis.

===== PAGE 31 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 31
Applications to algebra
Now we shift focus from topology and bordism categories to th e codomain C. Quite generally a
homomorphism in algebra organizes the codomain according t o the structure of the domain. This
principle is often applied in the context of group actions on sets, for example: the structure of
orbits and stabilizers illuminates the situation at hand. H ere if F : Bord n → C is a homomorphism,
and F (pt+) = x then we can study x using smooth manifolds and their gluings.
One application is to Ek-algebras, which are objects in a symmetric monoidal category which
have k associative composition laws. We met E1-algebras (ordinary associative algebras) in the
category VectC of complex vector spaces in Example 5.7. An E2-algebra in Vect C is a commutative
algebra and there is nothing higher up: an Ek-algebra for k > 2 is also a commutative algebra. More
interesting examples are obtained if we look in other symmet ric monoidal categories, for example
the ∞-category of chain complexes. In [ L1, §4.1] Lurie describes some relationships between the
cobordism hypothesis and Ek-algebras in ( ∞, n)-categories. In particular, an Ek-algebra A in
an ( ∞, n)-category C is automatically k-dualizable, so determines a homomorphism F : Bord fr
k →
Ek(C), where Ek(C) is the ( ∞, n+k)-category whose objects are Ek-algebras in C. Thus Ek-algebras
may be studied with smooth manifolds. For example, if A is an ordinary algebra ( E1-algebra), then
in the associated ﬁeld theory F (S1) is the Hochschild homology of A (see (5.9) for a simple example).
Since the circle is an E2-algebra in the bordism category, so too is the Hochschild ho mology F (S1).
This assertion is the Deligne conjecture, which together wi th generalizations is proved in many
works, for example [ Co, KS, L2, BFN]. (We remark that there are several other proofs of the
Deligne conjecture.)
As another application of the cobordism hypothesis to algeb ra, we mention ongoing work [ DHS]
which proves that a fusion category [ENO] is 3-dualizable. A fusion category is a special type of
tensor category, and a tensor category is an E1-algebra in the 2-category of linear categories. So
tensor categories form a 3-category, and it is in that 3-cate gory that fusion categories are fully
dualizable. The associated 3-dimensional framed ﬁeld theo ry can be brought to bear on the study
of fusion categories. We remark that simple topological dia grams involving 0- and 1-dimensional
manifolds are usually used to study fusion categories and th eir cousins. The cobordism hypothesis
opens up the possibility of using the more powerful topology of 3-dimensional manifolds. In related
ongoing work of the author and Teleman, we consider E2-algebras in the 2-category of linear
categories; they comprise the 4-category of braided tensor categories . We prove that modular
tensor categories are invertible, which now gives a 4-dimen sional perspective on quantum groups.
Applications to representation theory
In §4 and in Example 5.7 we illustrated a very simple, discrete 2-dimensional ﬁeld t heory associ-
ated to a ﬁnite group G. There is also a 3-dimensional ﬁeld theory with values in the 3-category of
tensor categories; it attaches the tensor category of vecto r bundles over G under convolution to pt.
(The theory is unoriented—as is the 2-dimensional theory—s o we have an unframed unoriented
unadorned point.) That theory may be viewed as the simplest c ase of 3-dimensional Chern-Simons
theory (Example 5.10). Ben-Zvi and Nadler [ BN] study the analogous theory for a reductive com-
plex group G. Discrete categories are futile here; the full force of ∞-categories comes into play.
One would like a 3-dimensional theory which generalizes tha t of a ﬁnite group, and now attaches

===== PAGE 32 =====
32 D. S. FREED
the symmetric monoidal ∞-category of D-modules on G to a point. However, the necessary ﬁnite-
ness conditions are not satisﬁed. Instead, they construct a related 2-dimensional ﬁeld theory, the
character theory, which assigns to a point the Hecke category associated to G. Then one computes
that the category of Lusztig’s character sheaves is attached to S1. The character theory may be
viewed as a dimensional reduction of a 4-dimensional ﬁeld th eory [ KW] related to the geometric
Langlands program. It seems likely that the topological ﬁel d theory perspective, and the cobordism
hypothesis, will shed light on old questions in the represen tation theory of semisimple Lie groups.
Echos in quantum ﬁeld theory
As mentioned earlier, quantum ﬁeld theorists traditionall y only studied 2-tier theories: corre-
lation functions on n-manifolds and Hilbert spaces attached to ( n − 1)-manifolds. In recent years
the ideas mathematicians have developed around extended ﬁe ld theories, including the cobordism
hypothesis, have seeped into physics. In 2-dimensional con formal ﬁeld theory there is a category
of boundary conditions, called D-branes, and in topological versions this is understood to be part
of an extended ﬁeld theory. Higher dimensional analogs are n ow common; see [ Kap] for a re-
cent review. For example, Kapustin-Witten [ KW] study a topological twist of the 4-dimensional
N = 4 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory. Going beyond the trad itional two tiers, this theory
attaches a category to every closed 2-manifold. Kapustin-W itten relate that to a category which
appears in the geometric Langlands program. The story is ric her: there is a family of theories
parametrized by CP1 and S-duality acts as an involution on the theories. This suggests an equiv -
alence between two diﬀerent categories attached to a 2-mani fold, which is a topological version of
the basic conjecture in the geometric Langlands program.
The maximally supersymmetric N = 4 Yang-Mills theory is the dimensional reduction of a
6-dimensional supersymmetric ﬁeld theory which has superc onformal invariance. Its name ‘the
(2,0) superconformal ﬁeld theory in six dimensions’ reﬂect s its symmetry group; a simpler name
is ‘Theory X’. This theory has no classical description. It is predicted to exist from limiting
arguments in string theory. Its mysterious nature justiﬁes the appellation ‘Theory X’, as does its
dimension: si X. A few properties can be predicted from string theory, and th ese can be used to study
compactiﬁcations to lower dimensions. Among the many prota gonists here we mention Gaiotto [ Ga]
and Gaiotto-Moore-Neitzke [ GMN]. One important idea—which is clearly inspired by extended
ﬁeld theory and the activity surrounding the cobordism hypo thesis—is to study compactiﬁcations
of the 6-dimensional theory as a function of the compactifyi ng manifold. This is formalized as
follows. Suppose F : Bord 6 → C is a 6-dimensional extended topological theory. Then for an y
closed 2-manifold N we obtain a 4-dimensional theory FN : Bord 4 → HomC
(
F (N ), F(N )
)
deﬁned
using Cartesian product: 11 FN (M ) = F (N × M ). Now view FN as a function of N . Then we
obtain a 2-dimensional extended ﬁeld theory with values in t he ( ∞, 4)-category of 4-dimensional
ﬁeld theories! The ﬂexibility in Deﬁnition 5.6 which allows arbitrary codomains is heavily used
here. One can get other ﬁeld theories by composing with homom orphisms out of 4-dimensional
theories. A recent paper [ MoT] implements this idea in a physics context, and predicts the existence
of certain holomorphic symplectic manifolds.
11The bordism groups of Pontrjagin and Thom are rings with multiplication given by Cartesian product. Our
discussion of topological ﬁeld theory has not used this ring structure until now.

===== PAGE 33 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 33
Finally, the renewed interest in En-algebras and their role in extended topological ﬁeld theor ies
may bring some fresh perspectives to quantum ﬁeld theories w hich are not topological. One ax-
iomatic approach to quantum ﬁeld theory [ H] assigns operator algebras to open sets and describes
how they ﬁt together. This idea was imported in an algebro-ge ometric framework in certain math-
ematical approaches to 2-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theor y, in vertex operator algebras [ Bo] and
chiral algebras [ BeDr]. These ideas are circling back to general quantum ﬁeld theo ries [ CG] with
potential to shed new light on their structure.
These are only a few examples of the potential that extended t opological ﬁeld theories and the
cobordism hypothesis hold in both mathematics and physics.
References
[A1] M. F. Atiyah, Bordism and cobordism , Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 57 (1961), 200–208.
[A2] , Topological quantum ﬁeld theories, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. (1988), no. 68, 175–186
(1989).
[Ab] Lowell Abrams, Two-dimensional topological quantum ﬁeld theories and Fro benius algebras ,
J. Knot Theory Ramiﬁcations 5 (1996), no. 5, 569–587.
[B-N] Dror Bar-Natan, On Khovanov’s categoriﬁcation of the Jones polynomial ,
Algebr. Geom. Topol. 2 (2002), 337–370 (electronic).
[Ba] Clark Barwick, (inﬁnity, n)-Cat as a closed model category , ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 2005. Thesis
(Ph.D.)–University of Pennsylvania.
[BC] Martin Betz and Ralph L. Cohen, Graph moduli spaces and cohomology operations , Turkish J. Math. 18
(1994), no. 1, 23–41.
[BCT] Andrew J. Blumberg, Ralph L. Cohen, and Constantin Tel eman, Open-closed ﬁeld theories, string topol-
ogy, and Hochschild homology , 0906.5198.
[BD] John C. Baez and James Dolan, Higher-dimensional algebra and topological quantum ﬁeld t heory,
J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995), no. 11, 6073–6105.
[BDH] Arthur Bartels, Christopher L. Douglas, and Andr´ e G. Henriques, Conformal nets and local ﬁeld theory ,
0912.5307.
[Be] Julia E. Bergner, A survey of (∞, 1)-categories, Towards higher categories, IMA Vol. Math. Appl., vol.
152, Springer, New York, 2010, pp. 69–83.
[BeDr] Alexander Beilinson and Vladimir Drinfeld, Chiral algebras, American Mathematical Society Colloquium
Publications, vol. 51, American Mathematical Society, Pro vidence, RI, 2004.
[BFN] David Ben-Zvi, John Francis, and David Nadler, Integral transforms and Drinfeld centers in derived
algebraic geometry, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 23 (2010), no. 4, 909–966.
[BN] David Ben-Zvi and David Nadler, The Character Theory of a Complex Group , 0904.1247. preprint.
[Bo] Richard E. Borcherds, Vertex algebras, Kac-Moody algebras, and the Monster , Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 83 (1986), no. 10, 3068–3071.
[BS] Clark Barwick and Christopher Schommer-Pries, On the Unicity of the Homotopy Theory of Higher
Categories, 1112.0040.
[C] Jean Cerf, La stratiﬁcation naturelle des espaces de fonctions diﬀ´ er entiables r´ eelles et le th´ eor` eme de la
pseudo-isotopie, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. (1970), no. 39, 5–173.
[CF] Louis Crane and Igor B. Frenkel, Four-dimensional topological quantum ﬁeld theory, Hopf ca tegories, and
the canonical bases , J. Math. Phys. 35 (1994), no. 10, 5136–5154. Topology and physics.
[CG] K. Costello and O. Gwilliam, Factorization algebras in perturbative quantum ﬁeld theor y.
http://math.northwestern.edu/∼costello/factorization public.html. in preparation.

===== PAGE 34 =====
34 D. S. FREED
[Co] Kevin Costello, Topological conformal ﬁeld theories and Calabi-Yau catego ries, Adv. Math. 210 (2007),
no. 1, 165–214.
[CS] Moira Chas and Dennis Sullivan, String Topology, math/9911159.
[D] S. K. Donaldson, Polynomial invariants for smooth four-manifolds , Topology 29 (1990), no. 3, 257–315.
[Da] O. Davidovich, State sums in 2-dimensional fully extended topologi-
cal ﬁeld theories , Ph.D. thesis, University of Texas at Austin, 2011.
http://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/ETD-UT-2011-05-3139.
[DHS] C. Douglas, A. Henriques, and C. Schommer-Pries, The 3-category of tensor categories . in preparation.
[Di] R. Dijkgraaf, A geometrical approach to two-dimensional conformal ﬁeld t heory, Ph.D. thesis, University
of Utrecht, 1989. http://igitur-archive.library.uu.nl/dissertations/2011-0929-200347/UUindex.html.
[DW] Robbert Dijkgraaf and Edward Witten, Topological gauge theories and group cohomology , Comm. Math.
Phys. 129 (1990), no. 2, 393–429.
[EM] Yakov M. Eliashberg and Nikolai M. Mishachev, The space of framed functions is contractible , 1108.1000.
[ENO] Pavel Etingof, Dmitri Nikshych, and Viktor Ostrik, On fusion categories , Ann. of Math. (2) 162 (2005),
no. 2, 581–642.
[F] Daniel S. Freed, Higher algebraic structures and quantization , Comm. Math. Phys. 159 (1994), no. 2,
343–398, arXiv:hep-th/9212115.
[Fa] L. Faddeev, Elementary introduction to quantum ﬁeld theory , Quantum ﬁelds and strings: a course for
mathematicians. Vol. 1 (P. Deligne et. al., ed.), American M athematical Society, 1999, pp. 513–550.
Notes by L. Jeﬀrey.
[FHLT] Daniel S. Freed, Michael J. Hopkins, Jacob Lurie, and Constantin Teleman, Topological quantum ﬁeld
theories from compact Lie groups , A celebration of the mathematical legacy of Raoul Bott, CRM Proc.
Lecture Notes, vol. 50, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 20 10, pp. 367–403. arXiv:0905.0731.
[FHT] Daniel S. Freed, Michael J. Hopkins, and Constantin Te leman, Consistent orientation of moduli spaces ,
The many facets of geometry, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 201 0, pp. 395–419. arXiv:0711.1909.
[FQ] Daniel S. Freed and Frank Quinn, Chern-Simons theory with ﬁnite gauge group , Comm. Math. Phys.
156 (1993), no. 3, 435–472, arXiv:hep-th/911100.
[G] E. Getzler, Batalin-Vilkovisky algebras and two-dimensional topological ﬁeld theories, Comm. Math. Phys.
159 (1994), no. 2, 265–285.
[Ga] Davide Gaiotto, N=2 dualities , JHEP 1208 (2011), 034, arXiv:0904.2715.
[GJ] James Glimm and Arthur Jaﬀe, Quantum physics , second ed., Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987. A
functional integral point of view.
[GMN] Davide Gaiotto, Gregory W. Moore, and Andrew Neitzke, Wall-crossing, Hitchin Systems, and the WKB
Approximation, 0907.3987.
[GMTW] Søren Galatius, Ulrike Tillmann, Ib Madsen, and Mich ael Weiss, The homotopy type of the cobordism
category, Acta Math. 202 (2009), no. 2, 195–239, arXiv:math/0605249.
[GSV] Sergei Gukov, Albert Schwarz, and Cumrun Vafa, Khovanov-Rozansky homology and topological strings ,
Lett. Math. Phys. 74 (2005), no. 1, 53–74.
[H] Rudolf Haag, Local quantum physics , second ed., Texts and Monographs in Physics, Springer-Ver lag,
Berlin, 1996. Fields, particles, algebras.
[I] Kiyoshi Igusa, The space of framed functions , Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 301 (1987), no. 2, 431–477.
[K] Robion Kirby, A calculus for framed links in S3, Invent. Math. 45 (1978), no. 1, 35–56.
[Ka] Daniel M. Kan, Adjoint functors, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 87 (1958), 294–329.
[Kap] Anton Kapustin, Topological ﬁeld theory, higher categories, and their appl ications, Proceedings of the
International Congress of Mathematicians. Volume III (New Delhi), Hindustan Book Agency, 2010,
pp. 2021–2043. arXiv:1004:2307.
[Kh] Mikhail Khovanov, A categoriﬁcation of the Jones polynomial , Duke Math. J. 101 (2000), no. 3, 359–426.
[KM] M. Kontsevich and Yu. Manin, Gromov-Witten classes, quantum cohomology, and enumerati ve geometry,
Comm. Math. Phys. 164 (1994), no. 3, 525–562, arXiv:hep-th/9402147.
[Ko] Joachim Kock, Frobenius algebras and 2D topological quantum ﬁeld theorie s, London Mathematical So-
ciety Student Texts, vol. 59, Cambridge University Press, C ambridge, 2004.
[KS] M. Kontsevich and Y. Soibelman, Notes on A∞-algebras, A∞-categories and non-commutative geometry,
Homological mirror symmetry, Lecture Notes in Phys., vol. 7 57, Springer, Berlin, 2009, pp. 153–219.
arXiv:math/0606241.
[KW] Anton Kapustin and Edward Witten, Electric-magnetic duality and the geometric Langlands pro gram,
Commun. Number Theory Phys. 1 (2007), no. 1, 1–236, arXiv:hep-th/0604151.
[L1] Jacob Lurie, On the classiﬁcation of topological ﬁeld theories , Current developments in mathematics,
2008, Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2009, pp. 129–280. arXiv:0905.0465.

===== PAGE 35 =====
THE COBORDISM HYPOTHESIS 35
[L2] , Higher Algebra. http://math.harvard.edu/~lurie/papers/higheralgebra.pdf. draft version.
[L3] , Lectures on the cobordism hypothesis . http://www.ma.utexas.edu/video/perspectives.html.
Perspectives in Geometry lectures at University of Texas, J anuary, 2009.
[LZ] Bong H. Lian and Gregg J. Zuckerman, New perspectives on the BRST-algebraic structure of string
theory, Comm. Math. Phys. 154 (1993), no. 3, 613–646.
[Ma] George W. Mackey, The mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics: A lectu re-note volume , W.,
A. Benjamin, Inc., New York-Amsterdam, 1963.
[May] J. P. May, Stable algebraic topology, 1945–1966 , History of topology, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1999,
pp. 665–723.
[Mc] Saunders Mac Lane, Categories for the working mathematician , second ed., Graduate Texts in Mathe-
matics, vol. 5, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998.
[Mi1] John W. Milnor, Topology from the diﬀerentiable viewpoint , Based on notes by David W. Weaver, The
University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, Va., 1965.
[Mi2] , Morse theory, Based on lecture notes by M. Spivak and R. Wells. Annals of Ma thematics Studies,
No. 51, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1963.
[Mi3] , Lectures on the h-cobordism theorem, Notes by L. Siebenmann and J. Sondow, Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965.
[MoT] Gregory W. Moore and Yuji Tachikawa, On 2d TQFTs whose values are holomorphic symplectic varieti es,
1106.5698.
[MoW] Scott Morrison and Kevin Walker, Higher categories, colimits, and the blob complex ,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 (2011), no. 20, 8139–8145, arXiv:1108.5386.
[MS] Gregory W. Moore and Graeme B. Segal, Dirichlet branes and mirror symmetry , Clay Mathematics
Monographs, vol. 4, ch. D-branes and K-theory in 2D conformal ﬁeld theory, pp. x+681, American
Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2009. arXiv:hep-th/0609042.
[MSei] Gregory W. Moore and Nathan Seiberg, Classical and quantum conformal ﬁeld theory , Comm. Math.
Phys. 123 (1989), no. 2, 177–254.
[MT] Ib Madsen and Ulrike Tillmann, The stable mapping class group and Q(CP∞
+ ), Invent. Math. 145 (2001),
no. 3, 509–544.
[Mu] David Mumford, Towards an enumerative geometry of the moduli space of curve s, Arithmetic and geom-
etry, Vol. II, Progr. Math., vol. 36, Birkh¨ auser Boston, Bo ston, MA, 1983, pp. 271–328.
[MW] Ib Madsen and Michael Weiss, The stable moduli space of Riemann surfaces: Mumford’s conj ecture,
Ann. of Math. (2) 165 (2007), no. 3, 843–941, arXiv:math/0212321.
[P] L. S. Pontryagin, Smooth manifolds and their applications in homotopy theory , American Mathematical
Society Translations, Ser. 2, Vol. 11, American Mathematic al Society, Providence, R.I., 1959, pp. 1–114.
[Pa] Richard S. Palais, Seminar on the Atiyah-Singer index theorem , With contributions by M. F. Atiyah,
A. Borel, E. E. Floyd, R. T. Seeley, W. Shih and R. Solovay. Ann als of Mathematics Studies, No. 57,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1965.
[Q] Frank Quinn, Lectures on axiomatic topological quantum ﬁeld theory , Geometry and quantum ﬁeld theory
(Park City, UT, 1991), IAS/Park City Math. Ser., vol. 1, Amer . Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1995,
pp. 323–453.
[R] Charles Rezk, A Cartesian presentation of weak n-categories, Geom. Topol. 14 (2010), no. 1, 521–571,
arXiv:0901.3602.
[RT1] N. Yu. Reshetikhin and V. G. Turaev, Ribbon graphs and their invariants derived from quantum gro ups,
Comm. Math. Phys. 127 (1990), no. 1, 1–26.
[RT2] N. Reshetikhin and V. G. Turaev, Invariants of 3-manifolds via link polynomials and quantum groups ,
Invent. Math. 103 (1991), no. 3, 547–597.
[Se1] G. B. Segal, Felix Klein Lectures 2011 . http://www.mpim-bonn.mpg.de/node/3372/abstracts.
[Se2] , The deﬁnition of conformal ﬁeld theory , Topology, geometry and quantum ﬁeld theory, London
Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 308, Cambridge Univ. Pres s, Cambridge, 2004, pp. 421–577.
[Se3] , String algebras. http://www.cgtp.duke.edu/ITP99/segal/stanford/lect5.pdf.
[Sm] S. Smale, On the structure of manifolds , Amer. J. Math. 84 (1962), 387–399.
[Sp] Edwin H. Spanier, Algebraic topology, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1981. Corrected reprint.
[SW] R. F. Streater and A. S. Wightman, PCT, spin and statistics, and all that , Princeton Landmarks in
Physics, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2000. Corrected third printing of the 1978 edition.
[T] Ren´ e Thom, Quelques propri´ et´ es globales des vari´ et´ es diﬀ´ erentiables, Comment. Math. Helv. 28 (1954),
17–86.
[Te1] C. Teleman, Five lectures on topological ﬁeld theory. http://math.berkeley.edu/∼teleman/math/barclect.pdf.

===== PAGE 36 =====
36 D. S. FREED
[Te2] , Lie group actions in categories and Langlands duality .
http://www.ma.utexas.edu/video/perspectives.html. Perspectives in Geometry lectures at Univer-
sity of Texas, October, 2011.
[Til1] Ulrike Tillmann, The classifying space of the (1 + 1) -dimensional cobordism category ,
J. Reine Angew. Math. 479 (1996), 67–75.
[Til2] , On the homotopy of the stable mapping class group , Invent. Math. 130 (1997), no. 2, 257–275.
[Tu] V. G. Turaev, Quantum invariants of knots and 3-manifolds , de Gruyter Studies in Mathematics, vol. 18,
Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 1994.
[W1] Edward Witten, Topological quantum ﬁeld theory , Comm. Math. Phys. 117 (1988), no. 3, 353–386.
[W2] , Topological sigma models, Comm. Math. Phys. 118 (1988), no. 3, 411–449.
[W3] , Quantum ﬁeld theory and the Jones polynomial , Comm. Math. Phys. 121 (1989), no. 3, 351–399.
[W4] , Fivebranes and knots , Quantum Topol. 3 (2012), no. 1, 1–137, arXiv:1101.3216.
[Wa] K. Walker, On Witten ’s 3-manifold invariants . http://canyon23.net/math/1991TQFTNotes.pdf.
The University of Texas at Austin, Mathematics Department RL M 8.100, 2515 Speedw ay Stop C1200,
Austin, TX 78712-1202
E-mail address : dafr@math.utexas.edu
