===== PAGE 1 =====
Carlo Rovelli takes aim at analytic
philosophy's naive realism
"Reality is a collection of appearances"
15th September 2026
 cite
Carlo Rovelli | Emeritus Professor at the Centre de Physique Théorique of Marseille.
Ozbir Kip | Contributing Editor at the Institute of Art and Ideas.
2,638 words
Read time: approx. 13 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
With the release of his first book directly taking on philosophy, On the Equality of All
Things, physicist Carlo Rovelli takes aim at analytic philosophy's return to realism.
He argues that much of the philosophy of the twentieth century either hasn’t taken up
the new sciences of Einstein and Bohr, or is too trapped focusing on how mind, spirit,
or consciousness is special. In this interview with the IAI's Ozbir Kip, Rovelli argues
that electrons and minds, stones and laws, judgments and galaxies, are not
fundamentally different in nature from one another. He goes onto argue, neither
science nor philosophy, will ever be able to get at ultimate reality.
 
Kip: You're a theoretical physicist who is also a philosopher, which is a rare
attribute to see in a lot of physicists. What first got you into philosophy?
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
Gödel and Lewis
Carroll revealed
that reality is
inexplicable
Reality is a dream
not a simulation
We don't have
different
perspectives, we
inhabit different
realities
LLMs show
language does not
describe reality
Related Videos:
Buddhism and the
emptiness of
reality
Rovelli: I have been interested in philosophy since I was young. Maybe today it is not
too common to see scientists interested in philosophy, but certainly it was not so in the
past. Think about the greatest, like Einstein, Maxwell, Boltzmann, or Newton, or - to
get out of physics - Darwin: they were all deeply interested in philosophy. There have
always been some scientists totally uninterested in philosophy, or even coming out
with strongly disparaging comments on philosophy, like Stephen Hawking, who said
philosophy is dead because now we have science. But I think that’s plain nonsense.
The reason so many scientists are interested in philosophy is that there is an actual
dialogue between science and philosophy which is a constitutive part of both science
and philosophy. From the science side, philosophy becomes relevant when the rules
of the game and the conceptual scheme in which you’re working are not clear.
Science is also finding new ways for thinking about reality on the basis of the
information we have, new data, measurements, new ideas, whatever—and that’s also
philosophical work. So the scientists that say philosophy has nothing to do with their
science—actually they are just in a certain philosophical position. They’ve learned a
certain philosophy, and they’re stuck there. Kant is almost the prototypical
philosopher, right? What was Kant doing? To a large extent, Kant was trying to make
sense of Newton. There is this fabulous thing that is Newtonian mechanics—it seems
to be explaining the world. How can it make sense? What is the space that Newton is
talking about? I work in this interface as a scientist. Quantum gravity, which is my own
science, is particularly close to philosophical questions.
 
An important question in the philosophy of science is the question of realism
versus anti-realism. So you have people like Bas van Fraassen claiming that
things like electrons aren't real, whereas you have people like Stathis Psillos
who think they are, and you have structural realists somewhere in the middle.
How would you characterise your philosophical position on this debate?
I think it’s a badly posed question whether an electron is real or not, because it takes
for granted a clear understanding of what is to be real, which is not an a priori given.
It’s part of the discussion itself. Some of the arguments of the anti-realists are very
good, and I see that some of the arguments of the realists are very good, and when I
read them carefully, I ask: where are they actually disagreeing? They disagree about
a question that, in my opinion, has no meaning; it is only terminology
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
Why Plato matters
now
Beyond truth and
reality
The language we
speak shapes the
way we think, with
Lera Boroditsky
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.

===== PAGE 4 =====
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
