===== PAGE 1 =====
The crisis of quantum gravity
Is radical action needed?
Issue 95, 23rd March 2021
 cite
Karen Crowther | Philosopher of physics at the University of Oslo 2,351 words
Read time: approx. 12 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
More from this issue:
The fact that a theory of quantum gravity hasn't been found reflects a crisis in physics.
If we have a clearer understanding of the question “what is quantum gravity”, we will
be better equipped to find our answer, writes Karen Crowther.
 
We are all familiar with gravity. We observe its effects in the drooping of our bodies,
the falling of sand through an hourglass, and the passing of the years as the Earth
orbits the Sun. Our best description of gravity is Einstein's theory of general relativity,
which tells us that the effects we observe are due to the interaction of objects with
spacetime. While this theory is remarkably successful at describing the universe,
physicists have long wanted to do away with it. For more than 70 years, they have
been trying to find its successor: a theory of quantum gravity.
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
The new opium of
the people
Tipping points
and the Earth's
system
Related Videos:
Time's great
mystery
Our future
theories of the
universe
Physics has
misunderstood
time
The trouble with
string theory
The fact that a theory of quantum gravity hasn't been found reflects a crisis in physics.
But it is not obvious what the crisis is. How might we "diagnose" it? Here, I explore
this question, and suggest that the answer is connected to another question—what is
quantum gravity?
The reason that physicists want a theory of quantum gravity is not that there are any
anomalous observations or unexplained experimental results that indicate a need to
replace general relativity. Indeed, until recently, there were no observational results
agreed to be evidence of quantum gravitational effects, and none of the attempts at a
theory made any testable predictions. Although the empirical situation is no longer so
bleak, the data available is still unlikely to be sufficient to lead to a new theory or
strongly support any of the current attempts at finding one. And now, some physicists
are starting to dissent.
Dissenting physicists argue that there are flaws in the formalism and methodology of
some of the approaches to quantum gravity, particularly string theory. The underlying
causes of the crisis, according to these physicists, range from psychosocial factors
such as academic groupthink on the one hand to philosophical and scientific factors
on the other.
“Although the empirical situation is no longer so bleak, the
data available is still unlikely to be sufficient to lead to a new
theory or strongly support any of the current attempts at
finding one.”
 
What is the Problem? We Don't Know the Problem
Here, I would like to present one way of diagnosing the crisis that may be useful in
eventually helping resolve it. My suggestion is that the problem is that we don't know
what quantum gravity is. Or, put another way, the reason we haven't found a theory is
because we don't know what we are looking for.
So, what is quantum gravity? Quantum gravity is whatever satisfies the constraints, or
criteria of acceptance, we take to define quantum gravity.
A constraint is a principle, or feature, that physicists assume the new theory must
satisfy. Physicists impose these in their search in order to narrow down the space of
possible theories so that they're not left groping around completely in the dark.
So, what are the constraints on quantum gravity?
 
Constraining the Search
The constraints on quantum gravity are both empirical (coming from observational and
experimental data) and non-empirical. The empirical constraints usually take

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
precedence over the non-empirical ones in confirming or disconfirming a theory. The
non-empirical constraints, however, are of great relevance to the current crisis.
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
