===== PAGE 1 =====
communications physics Article
A Nature Portfolio journal
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z
Activity propagation with Hebbian
learning
Check for updates
Will T. Engedal 1,R ó b e r tJ u h á s z2 & István A. Kovács 1,3,4,5
Biological and social systems, including infection spreading, inter-regional brain activity propagation,
and population spreading, exhibit learning across a broad range of scales. These applications of the
contact process therefore call for an extension that incorporates local learning rules. Here we
introduce learning as a positive (Hebbian) or negative (anti-Hebbian) reinforcement of the activation
rate between a pair of sites after each successful activation event. We show that Hebbian learning
leads to a rich class of emergent behaviors, where local incentives can produce opposite global
effects. In general, positive reinforcement causes the loss of the active phase, while negative
reinforcement can turn the inactive phase into a globally active phase. Our analytical and numerical
results demonstrate that, in two dimensions and above, the effect of negative reinforcement is twofold:
it promotes the spreading of activity while simultaneously generating effectively immune regions,
leading to the emergence of two distinct critical points. By contrast, positive reinforcement can give
rise to Grif ﬁths effects with non-universal power-law scaling, a manifestation of the ‘ant-mill’
phenomenon.
Biological and social systems show learning and adaptation across a broad
range of scales 1–3. Yet, understanding the impact of local learning
mechanisms remains mostly unexplored even in simple models4. Here, we
focus on a paradigmatic model of activity (or infection) spreading, the
contact process (CP) 5 and explore the impact of local learning on its
dynamics, motivated by Hebbian learning6. As introduced by T. E. Harris,
the CP is a variant of the susceptible-infected-susceptible (SIS) model that is
equivalent to the standard SIS model on regular lattices 5.T h eC Pi sa
continuous-time Markov process that acts on a network of sites with each
site either in an“active” or “inactive” state. Other common terminology for
these states are infected/healthy and occupied/unoccupied. Each site can be
active multiple times, like how a person can get sick many times in the case of
the common cold or COVID, or how a neuron or brain region can be active
on multiple occasions.
In the case of infection spreading, it is natural to explore what happens
if individuals learn from the dynamics and lower the rate at which they
interact with those individuals that infected them, a form of negative rein-
forcement, or anti-Hebbian learning7. For example, a reinforcement effect
similar to social distancing8 would result in a mutual learning mechanism,
where the two sites involved would reduce the time spent together.
In the context of brain dynamics, each site can be viewed as a small
region of the brain (on the order of a mm 3) that can be either active or
inactive and each edge can be viewed as a connection between the brain
regions9. As chemical synapses in the brain are directed, this motivates
implementing a directed learning mechanism, either impacting the con-
nection starting at the source or at the target. Positive reinforcement
between brain regions aligns with the observation that brain regions thatﬁre
together will wire together more strongly10–12.
As a further motivation, the CP has been also applied to the spreading
of populations13. For example, parasites spreading on a background of hosts
can induce local adaptations throu gh a triggered immune response and
resistance resulting from the host-parasite“arms race”14–17,l e a d i n gt oaf o r m
of negative reinforcement. Positive reinforcement could also happen along
ecological corridors that are strips of f avorable conditions (e.g., land and
water) connecting fragmented habitats18. Once established, these corridors
can be preferably used later by the population.
Both negative and positive reinforcement leads to heterogeneities in the
system if started from a homogeneous network, a form of kinetic disorder.
Here, we address the question of how local learning changes the large-scale
emergent behavior of the system, compared to the standard CP. The stan-
dard CP is only a rough approximation of the aforementioned biological
systems, but it is extremely well understood as a starting point. Here, we seek
to study the fundamental impact of local learning rules on this paradigmatic
process, focusing on the emergent mechanisms, instead of creating a realistic
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. 2HUN-REN Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary.
3Northwestern Institute on Complex Systems, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. 4Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. 5NSF-Simons National Institute for Theory and Mathematics in Biology, Chicago, IL, USA.
e-mail: istvan.kovacs@northwestern.edu
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

===== PAGE 2 =====
model for a particular system. To begin, we provide a brief recap of the
standard CP. The standard CP has two phases, an active phase and an
inactive phase, governed by the activation rate λ. In the active phase, the
i n f e c t i o ns u r v i v e si na ni nﬁnite system, whereas, in the inactive phase, the
infection dies out and never returns— the system reaches an absorbing state.
This is known as an absorbing phase transition 19,20. The transition in the
standard CP serves as a representative of the robust directed percolation
universality class (DP)21,22, which is believed to contain any absorbing phase
transition with short-range interactions, a scalar order parameter, a single
absorbing state, and no extra conservation laws or symmetries23,24. Outside
of the CP, transitions of the DP class occur in a broad range of systems,
including models of catalytic reactions 25, damage spreading transitions26
and interface growth27.
At the critical activation rate of the transition, labeledλc, the standard
CP follows a power-law behavior for long times. When starting from a single
active site on an inﬁnite d-dimensional lattice, the number of active sitesN,
survival probabilityP, and the root-mean-square distance of the active sites
from the initial active siteR scale asymptotically as19,20
N /C24 tη ð1Þ
P /C24 t/C0 δ ð2Þ
R /C24 t1=z ð3Þ
with critical exponents η, δ,a n d1 /z. The standard CP also showcases a
phenomenon called duality28,29. When starting from a fully-active lattice
with periodic boundary conditions, the density of active sites,ρ,i si d e n t i c a l
to the survival probability of a spreading simulation, started from a single
active site, yielding the relationship19,20:
ρ /C24 t/C0 α ð4Þ
with α = δ. Duality also implies that the critical infection rateλc is the same
for the two initial conditions. Note thatthe critical exponents above are not
independent, as they are related by the hyperscaling relationη ¼ d
z /C0 δ /C0 α,
where d is the dimension of the underlying lattice19,20.
Our results indicate that Hebbian (and anti-Hebbian) learning quali-
tatively changes the emergent phenomena in the CP, leading to a rich class of
behavior, depending on the microscopic details of how learning is imple-
mented, as well as on the initial condi tions. Our analytic and numerical
results show that local incentives can lead to the opposite global effects, like
avoiding activated or activating neighbors can help global activity propa-
gation, and vice versa. Negative reinforcement in higher dimensions (like in
infection and population spreading) leads to the emergence of two distinct
phase transitions, one where a propa gating front emerges and another
where bulk activity is maintained. Positive reinforcement (motivated by the
brain) prevents the formation of an active phase (like quarantining). In
higher dimensions, it can lead to a non-universal power-law regime, known
as a Grif ﬁths phase, providing an alternative mechanism for this phe-
nomenon. Altogether, our results represent a comprehensive picture of the
impact of Hebbian learning on activi ty spreading, mapping out all uni-
versality classes. We expect our mainﬁndings to be generic, applicable to a
broad range of out-of-equilibrium spreading processes with Hebbian
learning in two and higher dimensions. Although our models explore a— to
the best of our knowledge— so far overlooked learning mechanism in the
CP, the observed family of phenomenaﬁt into the broader class of variants
of the CP19,21,30. Some aspects of the collective behavior of our systems are
also seen in models with quenched heterogeneities 31,32, or adaptation
through rewiring33,34. The latter can lead to a rich set of critical phenomena
due to the presence of multiple absorbing conﬁgurations. We demonstrate
that this is also the case for our CP model variants, and, as a frequent feature
of such systems19, the scaling of certain quantities can still be governed by
DP, while others deviate from it.
Methods
T h eC Pi sc o n t r o l l e db ya na c t i v a t i o nr a t eλ and a rate μ of spontaneous
deactivation, which is usually chosen to be one for convenience. In the
numerical implementation, we follow the standard simulation prescription
by Dickman35. An active site i is chosen at random from a list of N active
sites. The site transitions to the inactive state with probability 1/(1+ λ)a n d
attempts to activate a neighboring site with probabilityλ/(1 + λ). In order to
approximate a continuous-time Markov chain, each of these steps increases
time by Δt =1 /N, so that, on average, each active site acts once per unit of
time. In the standard CP, if activation is chosen, a neighboring site is chosen
at random with uniform probabilities. Ift h i ss i t ei si n a c t i v e ,t h ea c t i v a t i o n
attempt is deemed successful and the neighbor transitions to the active state.
For actual biological, social and physical networks, relationships between
sites need not be uniform. To model this, we introduce edge weights, carried
in a weight matrix,W,w h e r ewi,j is the weight of the connection from sitei to
site j. Then, the direction of activation is chosen with probability propor-
tional to the edge weight in that direction. As a simple example, if sitei in a
1D chain has chosen to activate a neighbor, it will attempt to activate site
i + 1w i t hp r o b a b i l i t ywi,i+1/(wi,i−1 + wi,i+1) and it will attempt to activate
site i − 1 with probabilitywi,i−1/(wi,i−1 + wi,i+1).
To model Hebbian learning in the CP,we choose a multiplicative type
of event-based reinforcement rule: the weights are multiplied with a con-
stant factorr after each successful activation event between sitesi and j.T h i s
can be realized according to one of the three possible scenarios: mutual,
source, or target learning, as illustrated in Fig.1 and summarized in Table1.
In the mutual learning model, bothwi,j and wj,i are multiplied by the rein-
forcement parameter,r. In the source learning model, only the weightwi,j is
multiplied by r, while in the target learning model only wj,i changes. In all
cases, if sitei attempts to activate the already-active sitej, wi,j and wj,i are left
unchanged. In line with the usual intu itive picture of Hebbian learning,
reinforcement happens in these models only at events when two sites
become simultaneously active. However, simultaneous activity alone does
not lead to reinforcement, as a direct activation event is required.
Note that even with the application of a reinforcement rule, the total
rate of activations sourcing from a given site is invariant (λ), as changes in
the weights only affect the preferences according to which a site spends its
contact time. In other words, we have an implicit normalization for the total
activation rate, and learning induces directional selectivity towards (r >1 )o r
against (r < 1) some partners. Without some sort of normalization, Hebbian
learning is in general unstable as either all activation rates grow until a
maximum allowed value or all rates decay to zero36.
Our implementation of local learning is in stark contrast to past
attempts in the literature to capture adaptation in spreading processes. In
the traditional framework of adaptive networks 33,37, the topology of the
connections is changing, while in the more recent approach of
“awareness”38,39, the infection rate changes according to the local or global
Fig. 1 | Illustration of our Hebbian learning rules in the contact process. (a)
denotes the initial condition while (b–d) denote successful activation for the mutual
learning, source learning, and target learning models, respectively. Purple denotes an
active site and bold denotes a modiﬁed connection, multiplied by the reinforcement
parameter, r. The edge from node i to node j has initial weight wi,j, which is used to
calculate activation probability.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 2

===== PAGE 3 =====
activity. Hence, our implementation of Hebbian learning is a qualitatively
different adaptation mechanism that might in practice appear simulta-
neously with other modes of adaptation, such as rewiring the topology or
adjusting the local infection rates based on awareness.
To investigate the effects of our Hebbian learning rules on the CP, we
consider two initial conditions — spreading from a single active site or
decaying from a fully-active lattice. For spreading simulations, we monitor
t h en u m b e ro fa c t i v es i t e sN, the survival probabilityP,a n dt h em e a ns q u a r e
radius R; while for a fully active initial condition we monitor the density of
active sites ρ. Initially, wi,j =1f o ra l ln e i g h b o r s(i, j). Each edge weight can
then be written as wi;j ¼ rui;j ,w h e r eui,j is the number of times the con-
nection wi,j has been reinforced. In the 1D chain case, the quotient wi,i−1/
(wi,i−1 + wi,i+1) can be written as 1=ð1 þ rni Þ whereni = ui,i+1 − ui,i−1 is the
difference in usage betweenoutgoing edges. Likewise,wi,i+1/(wi,i−1 + wi,i+1)
c a nb ew r i t t e na s1=ð1 þ r/C0 ni Þ. Hence, in the 1D chain, all relevant infor-
mation concerningthe actions of sitei can be stored in the quantityni,w h i c h
we refer to as the imbalance of the site. With this deﬁnition, the imbalance of
a site is zero if it has activated both of its neighbors the same number of
times, indicating no bias in the preferences for future infection events.
We note that the contact process endowed with the above event-based
learning rules is still a Markov process, however, on an extended state space:
besides the usual occupation variables of the standard CP, the conﬁgurations
of the system are also characterized by the additional set {ui,j}( o r{ni}i n1 D )
which encode the actual weights. This model differs from the standard CP in
that it has an inﬁnite number of absorbing conﬁgurations differing only in
the weight variables. As a consequence, our model is exempted from the
scope of the DP conjecture mentioned in the Introduction.
Note that to check the emergent behavior for anti-Hebbian values of
r < 1, it is also useful to investigate the limiting caser → 0. When tracking the
number of times each edge has been used, as r approaches 0, the site will
choose to spread activity along the least used edge more often. In ther → 0
limit, activity always spreads along the least-used edges. If there are multiple
such edges, the direction of activity spreading is chosen uniformly ran-
domly, like in the standard CP. Similarly, for Hebbian values of r >1i ti s
useful to consider the case with r → ∞, where activity spreads along the
most-used edges.
For investigating spreading from a single active site, we chose our lattice
size such that the spread never touches the boundary. For example, to run
simulations to t =1 06 for mutual learning in 1D, it was suf ﬁcient to have
lattice sizes ofL =1 06 for r → 0. For the same model in 2D,L =2 . 5×1 04 was
sufﬁcient up to time t =1 05. We typically collected over 10 4 samples for
spreading simulations and around 102 for fully infected simulations. In 1D,
fully infected simulations had a typical linear size of L =1 06,a n di n2 D
L =5×1 0 3, but at least L =2×1 0 3 to reduce ﬁnite-size effects.
We regarded the activation rate λ as a control parameter and per-
formed simulations for a series ofλ values while the other model parameters
were ﬁxed, measuring P(t), N(t), R(t), and ρ(t) as a function of time.
Assuming power-law characteristics at criticality, we estimated the critical
activation rateλc by ﬁnding the curve which is closest to a straight line in a
log-log plot at late times. The critical exponent was then estimated by a linear
ﬁt to this curve in the late-time domain. The error margins were estimated
by performingﬁts to curves with λ closest to λc (both below and aboveλc).
Results
Negative Reinforcement in one dimension
In one dimension, anti-Hebbian negative reinforcement (r <1 )r e s u l t si n
qualitatively different behavior in the three different learning modes as
illustrated in Fig. 2. Here, we show the density pro ﬁles at various times
starting from a single active site at the center. In the source learning model,
the activity peaks at the center and it s spreading at the critical point is
partially compatible with the DP universality class, as can be seen in Table2.
We ﬁnd that the scaling function of density proﬁles— plotted in the inset of
Fig. 2a— has the same non-Gaussian tail, ~ρðxÞ/C24 e/C0 CxΦ
with Φ ≈ 2.4 as
observed for the standard CP21. The critical mutual learning model has a
qualitatively different behavior: the activity peaks at two ballistically
advancing front regions as shown in Fig. 2b. In stark contrast, there is no
active bulk phase in the target learning model, Fig.2c, with only two narrow
fronts propagating outwards ballistically that have aﬁnite lifetime.
In the following, weﬁrst present detailed scaling results for the critical
source and mutual learning models, supported by analytic arguments and
further measurements in the Supplementary Note 1 on the behavior of the
imbalance variable. Then, we also shed light on the absence of active phase in
the target learning model. The case of positive reinforcement (r >1 ) ,w h e n
there is no active stationary state irrespective of the value ofλ, is discussed for
all one-dimensional variants of the model in Supplementary Note 2.
Source learning model. In the source learning model, we have explored
several values of the learning rater, leading to qualitatively similar results
for all r < 1 values. Here, as an illustration, we focus on presenting the
results at r = 0.8, shown in Fig. 3, with additional results summarized in
Table 2.W e ﬁnd that the critical point of the standard CP is inactive with
negative reinforcement, and the critical point is monotonically shifted
towards larger values of λ as r decreases. Note that duality is violated in
this model, as evident from the different values of α and δ, although the
transition happens at the sameλc for both initial conditions. Yet, in terms
of standard observables (Fig. 3), all r < 1 cases are similar in the sense that
within the error they cannot be distinguished from the DP universality in
terms of α, z, and η + δ. Following directly from the de ﬁnitions, η + δ
governs the total number of active sites in the surviving runs as Ns ~ tη+δ.
This means that the observables conditioned on survival, Ns and R show
DP critical behavior, but the survival probability itself is affected by
reinforcement; see the altered values of δ in Table 2. This entails the
change of η, characterizing the number of active sites in all trials. The
latter two exponents seem to show hardly any change with the reinfor-
cement parameter.
It is useful to interpret these results in the broader context of other CP
variants in the literature. For example, the surface critical behavior is also
known to be characterized by a modiﬁed order parameter exponent, while
the exponents related to observables conditioned on survival are
unaffected21. Further examples to this type of critical behavior are various
one-dimensional processes such as the model in ref. 30, which have in
common that they possess an inﬁnite number of absorbing conﬁgurations,
just like our model. For this reason, we refer to this diverse class of critical
behavior with multiple absorbing conﬁgurations as “MAC”19.A taM A C ,
Table 1 | Summary of the studied learning models
Gray background color indicates the lack of a phase transition. Forr < 1, the behavior can depend on
the initial condition being a fully active lattice (full) or a single active site (spreading). We use the
following abbreviations: DyP: dynamical percolation, GP: Grif ﬁths phase. MAC stands for a broad
class of behavior that is driven by multiple absorbing con ﬁgurations, where certain aspects are
governed by the DP universality class, see text. The precise value of the reinforcement parameterr is
often irrelevant, apart from whether it corresponds to negative (r < 1) or positive (r > 1) reinforcement.
(*) stands for emergent quenched directional con ﬁguration(s) in the r → 0 limit, see text.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
certain exponents and exponent combinations are governed by DP, while
others (here δ and η) deviate from DP, similarly to ref.30.
A deeper understanding of our manifestation of the MAC behavior can
be obtained through the imbalance variable. As introduced earlier, the
imbalance of a siteni(t) is a signed sum of successful activation events from
site i, in which each activation to the left (right) corresponds to a term− 1
(1). As shown in Supplementary Fig. 1b, the imbalance distributions tend to
a limit distribution at late times, which has Gaussian tailspn /C24 e/C0 Cn2
with
an r-dependent constantC for ∣n∣≫ 1. This is found to hold irrespective of
whether the model is in the active phase or at its critical point. The emer-
gence of a Gaussian tail can be explained by a mean-ﬁeld treatment, which is
presented in detail in Supplementary Note 1. In this calculation, the local
states, which are speciﬁed by the occupation and the imbalance variables, are
assumed to be uncorrelated at different sites. This allows us to write down a
master equation for the dynamics of local states, which turns out to reduce to
that of a one-dimensional random walkin the presence of a site-dependent
potentialUn. Here, the positionn of the walker corresponds to the imbalance
variable, while the potential is found to be quadratic in n for large ∣n∣,a s
Un ’ n2 lnð1=rÞ
2 . Upon increasingr, the potential changes its character atr =1
from attractive to repellent near the origin. As a consequence, the dis-
tribution of imbalance variables will be stationary at late times only ifr <1 ,i n
which case it has a Gaussian tail: pn /C24 e/C0 Un ’ e/C0 n2 lnð1=rÞ
2 .W en o t et h a t ,
although the functional form is correctly reproduced by the mean- ﬁeld
approach, the numerical value of the constant lnð1=rÞ=2d e v i a t e sf r o mt h e
estimate obtained by simula tions; for details, see the “Stationary state”
subsection of Supplementary Note 1: Source learning model.
The Gaussian tail of the limit dist ribution of imbalance variables
translates to a log-normal tail of the distribution of instantaneous weights. It
is worth mentioning that the local variableni at aﬁxed site has the same limit
distribution as the ensemble of local variables, and this limit distribution is
symmetric undern → − n.
Mutual learning model. Just like in the source learning case, we obtained
qualitatively similar results for all values ofr < 1, illustrated here through the
case of r =0 . 9 ,s e eF i g .3, with all results summarized in Table2. As opposed
to source learning, the critical acti vation rate weakly decreases with
decreasingr. Thus the r < 1 mutual learning model is active at the critical
point of the standard CP, indicating that mutual negative reinforcement
promotes activity spreading. The otherqualitative difference compared to
source learning is that the survival probabilityP(t) tends to a positive limit at
late times even at the critical point. This means that regarding, as usual, the
limiting value ofP(t) as an order parameter, the transition is discontinuous,
with a formally vanishing exponent, δ = 0. The other measured critical
exponents also differ from those of the source learning model. The dyna-
mical exponent is close to 1 for allr < 1, indicating a ballistic spreading of the
active zone, in agreement with the density proﬁles in Fig.2b. The asymptotic
velocity of spreading is foundto increase with decreasingr.T h en u m b e ro f
active sitesN shows a power-law like scaling with a much largerη exponent
than for the standard CP or the source learning model. The global density
ρ(t), when the process starts from a fully active initial state, decays algeb-
raically in time, and the exponentα i sc l o s et ot h eD Pv a l u ef o rn o tt o oh i g h
values of r, otherwise it has a somewhat increased value compared to DP.
Duality of the DP class is clearly broken — even the corresponding critical
exponents are different sinceα ≠ δ. Mutual learning in one dimension thus
serves as another example of MAC, a mixture of DP-like and non-DP
behavior, although it is clearly different from the MAC manifestation of the
source learning model.
The inspection of the density proﬁles shown in Fig. 2b, as well as the
measured values of dynamical critical exponents lead us to the following
picture of activity spreading at the critical rate with mutual learning. At a given
time, the system can be divided in three parts. An intact region, which has not
yet been visited by activity, a front region with a high [O(1)] local density of
activity, and an interior part in which sites were reactivated many times so that
the imbalance distribution is close to itslimiting distribution. It is easy to see
that the mutual learning rule withr < 1 facilitates activation processes from the
actual front particle toward the intact region. When starting from a single
active site, as activity spreads outwards, the edge connecting the newly active
site back towards the center of the cluster is weakened. When it is this newly
activated site’s turn to activate others, it is signiﬁcantly more likely to activate
outwards, towards inactive sites. This reduces the amount of times activation
is attempted but failed, promoting spreading.
This mechanism results in a ballistic drift of the fronts, at which the
process is locally supercritical. In the interior part, the process is critical and
the local density decays algebraically in time. This ballistic expansion of the
critical zone (c.f. the sublinear creeping of the frontR(t)~ t1/z in the standard
CP) ensures that the process remains surviving with aﬁnite probability even
at the critical point. Speciﬁcally, at a ﬁxed site x,t h el o c a ld e n s i t yi sO(1) at
time tx ≃ x/v, i.e., the time at which the front sweeps through sitex.H e r e ,v
denotes the mean asymptotic velocity of the front. After this event, the local
density decreases in time asymptotically asρx(t)~( t−x/v)−α. Summing up
these local densities in the interior part [ − vt, vt], we obtain an algebraic
Table 2 | Critical scaling in one dimension
r λc αδη z
DP61,62 1.0 3.2979 0.1595 0.1595 0.3137 1.5808
source 0.9 3.512(1) 0.15(1) 0.05(1) 0.45(1) 1.54(3)
0.8 3.721(1) 0.14(1) 0.04(1) 0.46(2) 1.54(2)
0.5 4.425(2) 0.15(1) 0.03(2) 0.48(2) 1.53(4)
0 8.13(1) 0.16(1) 0.04(2) 0.45(2) 1.55(3)
mutual 0.9 3.269(1) 0.29(7) 0.00(1) 0.73(4) 1.005(3)
0.8 3.248(1) 0.30(8) 0.00(1) 0.75(3) 1.002(4)
0.5 3.203(1) 0.25(7) 0.00(1) 0.79(4) 0.998(7)
0 3.193(1) 0.17(5) 0.00(1) 0.83(3) 1.00(2)
Critical activation rate and critical exponents at various negative reinforcement rates ( r < 1),
corresponding to anti-Hebbian learning. For comparison, results on standard directed percolation
(DP) are shown up to four digits after the decimal.
Fig. 2 | Density proﬁles of the three different learning models in one dimension.
Here, we illustrate the ρx activity density pro ﬁles at various times starting from a
single active site in the center ( x = 0) for the ( a) source (r = 0.8), b mutual (r = 0.5),
and c) target (r = 0.8) learning models. The source and mutual learning models are at
their critical points, see Table 2, while for the target learning λ = 5. The insets show a
good data collapse of the proﬁles with the critical exponents listed in Table2. For the
mutual learning model (b), the velocity of the front isv = 0.11 and the DP value ofz is
used in the inset.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 4

===== PAGE 5 =====
increase of the number of active sites N(t)~ t1−α. Assuming that the bulk
criticality belongs to the DP universality class, we obtain 1 − α = 0.8405.
Numerical estimates presented in Table2 are somewhat lower; this devia-
tion may be attributed to correctionsstemming from the front region which
is found to spread out proportionally tot1/z with the DP dynamical exponent
z on top of the ballistic advancement, see Fig.2b.
A ss h o w ni nS u p p l e m e n t a r yF i g .2 ,the distribution of the imbalance
variables tends to a stationary distribution with exponential tails,pn ~ e−a∣n∣,
with a = 0.87(2). This scaling form, apart from the numerical value ofa,i si n
agreement with our mean-ﬁeld calculation, shown in the“Stationary state”
subsection of Supplementary Note 1: Mutual learning model. Here, just as
for the source learning model, the dynamics of imbalance variable is
represented by a one-dimensional random walk in a site-dependent
potential Un.A g a i n ,w eﬁnd this random walk to be recurrent, having a
stationary state only ifr <1 .I nt h i sc a s e ,t h ep o t e n t i a lh a sal i n e a ra s y m p -
totics Un ’j njln3f o rl a r g e∣n∣, leading to exponential tails of the dis-
tribution of imbalance variable as pn /C24 e/C0 Un /C24 3/C0j nj.N o t et h a tt h e
exponential tail of imbalance variablecorresponds to a power-law tail of the
instantaneous weights.
Target learning model . In the target learning model with negative
reinforcement (r < 1), simulations started from the fully active state show
that the density decays to zero at late times, no matter how largeλ is. This
means that in this case, there exists no active stationary phase. The reason
for this lies in the dynamical rules of this model which enforce a “per-
sistence” of the directionality of activity spreading. This means that, after
a successful activation event in some direction, the target site will acquire
a bias in the activation rates to the same direction. As a consequence,
during the time evolution of the process, domains are spontaneously
formed within which sites have the same directionality i.e., imbalance
variables are all positive or all negative, and this bias of domains is steadily
ampliﬁed in the presence of activity. Naturally, the activity spreading in a
biased environment ( n >0o r n < 0) is characterized by a non-zero drift
velocity. In case of a total bias ( n → ∞ or n → − ∞), also known as the
one-sided CP 40, the survival of a steadily drifting bunch of activity is
possible only in an inﬁnite system. Therefore, an environment composed
of alternating biased domains can not sustain activity for arbitrarily long
time. This conclusion is compatible with the result of mean- ﬁeld
approach in Supplementary Note 1: Target learning model, stating that
there is no stationary state of the imbalance variable for any value of r.
I nt h ec a s eo fs t a r t i n gt h ep r o c e s sf r om a single active seed, the activity
spreads out ballistically in two directions leaving behind a predominantly
left and right-oriented environment on the two sides of the origin. However,
as opposed to the fully active initial condition, the fate of spreading activity
will be different for 0 <r <1a n df o rr → 0. In the former case, there is a small
but ﬁnite probability that in the front region, where the imbalances are close
to zero, an oppositely biased domain emerges by a rare ﬂuctuation. This
domain hinders the drift of activity behind it and may ultimately lead to the
vanishing of activity. Our numerical simulations (not shown) indicated that
such catastrophicﬂuctuations occur for any 0 <r < 1 and for high values ofλ,
suggesting the absence of an active phase forλ >0 .
In the limit r → 0, however, the probability for the appearance of an
oppositely biased site tends to zero, and the process reduces to the one-sided
CP. This model has an absorbing phase transition at λc = 3.306(2), which
belongs to the DP universality class when inspecting it from a co-moving
frame40.
Higher dimensional systems
In higher dimensions, for simplicity, we restrict our presentation to the
results obtained in the limits r → 0a n d r → ∞.T h e s el i m i t sa r ec o m p u -
tationally more feasible to study, leadto less severe scaling corrections, and
are usually expected to be representative of the generic cases with negative
Fig. 3 | Critical scaling with negative reinforcement in one dimension. Source
learning is shown in the top panels ( a, b), with mutual learning indicated in the
bottom panels (c, d). In the main panels, for varying activation rates λ, we illustrate
the number of active sites N (left panels: a, c), and the survival probability P (right
panels: b, d). The insets show the mean square radius R (left panels: a, c), and the
density of active sites ρ (right panels: b, d)a t r = 0.8 (source learning) and r = 0.9
(mutual learning). The asymptotic critical behavior is illustrated by the straight
dashed line.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 5

===== PAGE 6 =====
(r < 1) and positive (r > 1) reinforcement, respectively. As in 1D, the target
learning model is an exception atr → 0, as in this limit the heterogeneities
become frozen, leading to an emergent quenched disorder, as discussed later
in this section.
As opposed to the one-dimensional models, a generic observation for
the two-dimensional variants of these models is that they possess distinct
phase transition points for different initial conditions. In the case of
spreading from a single active seed, the transition point can be identiﬁed by
inspecting P(t), N(t), and R(t). The critical activation rate in this case is
denoted byλ1. For a fully active initial state, the transition point can be found
by inspecting the global densityρ(t), and the corresponding bulk critical rate,
which is higher than λ1, is denoted by λ2.
Negative reinforcement . For all cases, our simulation results are illu-
strated in Fig. 4 for r → 0, with the estimates of the critical exponents
listed in Table 3. In the source learning model, for a fully-active initial
condition, λ2 ≈ 1.695 and α is around the DP value, while spreading
simulations indicate a lower critical rate around λ1 ≈ 1.6768. In the
mutual learning model, we again observe two critical points, with the
exponents presented in Table 3. Our results indicate that the system is
moved to a supercritical state when run at the clean critical point but with
r < 1. Both the spreading critical point (λ1) and the bulk critical point (λ2)
are shifted down for r < 1 negative reinforcement, just like in the 1D case.
A similar scenario of distinct phase transitions is observed for the target
learning model. Here,λ1 is below while λ2 is above the clean critical point.
F o rt h i sm o d e lw i t hr → 0, a special spontaneous “freezing” of random
directions takes place, which is analogous to the extraordinary behavior of
t h es a m em o d e li no n ed i m e n s i o n .H e re, the set of least-used (highest-
weight) directions at each site constitutes the“directional conﬁguration” of
the system. Occupation variables t hen follow a simple dynamics that is
completely determined by the directional conﬁguration of the system. It is
easy to see that there is an inﬁnite number of directional conﬁgurations that
remain invariant under the dynamics of the model. The only restriction for
creating such invariant conﬁgurations is non-reciprocity, i.e., whenever sitei
h a sal e a s t - u s e dd i r e c t i o nt os i t ej then site j must not have a least-used
direction to sitei. A reciprocal situation is unstable against the dynamics and
Fig. 4 | Hebbian learning in 2D. Temporal scaling behavior for varying activation
rates λ is shown for source learning (a, b), mutual learning (c, d), and target learning
(e, f). In the main panels we illustrate the number of infected sites N (left panels:
a, c, e), and the survival probabilityP (right panels: b, d, f). The insets show the mean
square radius R (left panels: a, c, e), and the density ρ for r → 0 (right panels: b, d, f).
The asymptotic critical behavior is illustrated by dashed lines either at the spreading
critical point, λ1, for N, P, and R; or at the bulk critical point, λ2, for ρ, see Table 3.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 6

===== PAGE 7 =====
can only happen if the local activity ceases to exist beforeﬁxing the direction
of the link. Indicating the least-used directions by arrows on links, invariant
conﬁgurations are constructed by placing arrows (in either direction) on
links or not placing any, under the condition that each site has at least one
outgoing arrow. According to ournumerical observations, ther → 0t a r g e t
learning process— when started from an isotropic directional conﬁguration
— evolves under the dynamics to an invariant directional con ﬁguration,
which is chosen randomly by the ﬂuctuating dynamics. Obviously, the
evolution of directional con ﬁguration may also freeze locally in some
domain before settling into an invariant conﬁguration by the vanishing of
activity in that domain. This quenching phenomenon is similar to what
happens in one dimension, although the directional conﬁguration in that
case is trivial due to the 1D topology.
In all cases, our observations imply the existence of two phase transi-
tions in these models, dividing the emergent behavior into three distinct
phases of (i) no activity below λ1, (ii) a propagating front with no bulk
activity forλ1 < λ < λ2, and iii) an active bulk phase forλ > λ2.A saf u r t h e r
evidence for this picture, atλ1 we eventually observe a fast decay of the local
density at the origin as illustrated in Fig. 5, indicating that the bulk is
asymptotically inactive at λ1.T h e λ2 location of the bulk critical point is
different in all three models, as identiﬁed by the critical point of fully infected
simulations based on the scaling of the total densityρ(t).
The source and mutual learning models are close to the DP scaling at
the bulk critical point,λ2. In the case of the target learning model, for which
spontaneous freezing of directions occurs (c.f. theﬂuctuating weights in the
other two models), the exponentα differs signiﬁcantly from the DP value,
although strong corrections may not be excluded. At the spreading critical
point λ1, we see a marked deviation from the DP expectations, close to the
values of the dynamical percolation (DyP) universality class. In this case,
target learning is closest to the DyP exponents, but the other two model
variants might also show the same behavior (as suggested byz and δ), albeit
with stronger corrections (mostly in the case of η). The DyP is known to
capture the phase transition in the sus ceptible-infected-recovered (SIR)
model. Note that the DyP exponents satisfy a modi ﬁed hyperscaling
relation21,g i v e nb yη = d/z − 2δ − 1. This hyperscaling relation is also
satisﬁed by our exponents for each of the three learning models atλ1.N e x t ,
we argue that indeed, at λ1, asymptotically all three learning models are
expected to follow SIR dynamics.
As in the 1D model with mutual learning, we can distinguish three
different domains of the spreading system aboveλ1. These are the (i) bal-
listically expanding annular front region, where the activity is high, (ii) the
unvisited domain outside of the front, and iii) the interior part which has
already been swept through by the front. Spreading of the front region
toward the outer empty region where there is no directional bias is facilitated
compared to spreading in the inner domain, in which there is a random
directional ﬁeld for transmitting activity. As a consequence, for a not too
high values ofλ, the process is still locally subcritical in the interior, although
the front region is steadily expandin g outwards. Note that once activity
visited a local region, the homogeneity of weights there is irreversibly bro-
ken. This suggests an analogy with the dynamics of the SIR model, which
differs from the standard CP in that active sites do not return to the inactive
state but get removed irrevocably from the system. The analogy is salient: the
unvisited (homogeneous) local regionscorrespond to the susceptible state of
the SIR model, whereas the visited (in homogeneous) local regions corre-
spond to the recovered state. This correspondence is obviously not perfect:
in the SIR model, recovered sites can never be reactivated, while in our
model, this rule is less strict, since activity is able to penetrate into an
inhomogeneous region. Nevertheless, as this latter region is subcritical, the
penetration length isﬁnite. Hence, concerning large-scale properties at the
critical point, this circumstance is irrelevant. Based on this observation, we
expect the lower (spreading, λ1) critical points of our two-dimensional
learning models to belong to the DyP universality class of the SIR model.
Thus, the lower phase transition of the model (λ1) is governed by the
criticality of the front region, while the interior of the system is subcritical at
this point. It is clear that such a situation can be realized only in dimensions
higher than 1, in which the boundary between the intact and visited domain
has a dimensiond − 1 ≥ 1. On the contrary, in one dimension the criticality
of the system cannot be sustained solely by a (zero-dimensional) front. As a
consequence, in 1D models, the entire inner region must be critical at the
spreading transition. This is in agreement with our numerical observations
that our models in one dimension display only a single phase transition i.e.,
λ1 = λ2 in 1D.
Positive reinforcement . As found in Supplementary Note 2, and illu-
strated in Supplementary Fig. 3, in the one-dimensional case within a
mean-ﬁeld treatment, there is generally no active phase with positive
reinforcement. This is also the case in higher dimensions. While the
mutual and target learning models lead to a quick localization of the
activity for all r > 1, the source learning case can show a qualitatively
different behavior in higher dimensions. This generic phenomenon is
easier to understand for r → ∞. In this case, the direction of the ﬁrst
Table 3 | Critical scaling in 2D
λ1 (spread) λ2 (bulk) αδη z
DP52 1.64874(2) 1.64874(2) 0.4526(7) 0.4526(7) 0.233(6) 1.757(8)
DyP63,64 4.66571(3) 4.66571(3) 0.092 0.092 0.586 1.1293
source 1.6768(1) 1.695(1) 0.44(1) 0.07(7) 0.65(3) 1.11(2)
mutual 1.3990(2) 1.4675(1) 0.44(4) 0.07(4) 0.71(7) 1.08(3)
target 1.5970(5) 1.8360(5) 0.55(4) 0.099(4) 0.57(4) 1.13(2)
Critical activation rates and critical exponents at negative reinforcement rater → 0, in comparison to the directed percolation (DP) and dynamical percolation (DyP) universality classes. The exponentsδ, η,
and z pertain to the spreading critical point at λ1, while α pertains to the bulk critical point at λ2.
Fig. 5 | Local activity scaling in 2D. Time dependence of the local density ρ0 at the
origin (x = 0) in ther → 0 limit at critical spreading activation rateλ1 (see Table 3) for
source, mutual, and target learning. In all cases, we observe a sharp decay at long
enough times, indicating a subcritical bulk phase.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
successful activation from a given site“freezes”i.e., any further activation
from that site can occur only in that direction. This means that learning
leads to an emergent, correlated quenched disorder in the system. As a
consequence, in spreading simulations, a train of particles is forming, the
front particle performing a random walk until it revisits a site that was
activated before. In any dimensions, this happens with probability one—
after a ﬁnite transient— and then the activity can only propagate around
the one-dimensional loop. This is a manifestation of the “ant mill ”
phenomenon41. An ant mill emerges when certain ants reinforce their
trajectories by pheromones following each other until they die of
exhaustion when accidentally forming a loop. The simplest mathematical
model considers multiplicative reinforcement in the form of a directed
edge reinforced random walk, with rigorous results in all d ≥ 2
dimensions42.
Large loops occur with an exponentially small probability, but they are
active for an exponential amount of time above the critical point of the one-
dimensional one-sided CP withλ* = 3.306(2)40. Hence, aboveλ*,w eo b s e r v e
a non-universal power-law decay of the survival probability as shown in
Fig. 6 in the large r limit. Note that non-universal power-law dynamics is
well-known in quenched disorderedsystems such as the disordered CP in
the inactive phase, where disorder implies the presence of so-called rare
regions with above-average couplings— a phenomenon known as a Grif-
ﬁths effect32,43–45. However, unlike in the CP with quenched disorder where
rare regions are present ab ovo, in our learning model, the rare regions
(loops) are formed by the dynamics itself in the early stage of the process.
The emergence of such a Grifﬁths phase is expected to be a generic result
that holds for all r > 1 reinforcement rates in all d≥2 dimensions aboveλ*.
Note that in one dimension, loops have only two sites, so a Grifﬁths phase
with the same mechanism cannot occur.
Discussion
In this study, we introduced generalizations of the contact process with a
local learning rule inspired by Hebbian learning, leading to rich emergent
phenomena. We found that local incentives can lead to the opposite global
effects, like locally avoiding previously activating or activated neighbors can
turn the inactive phase into a globally active phase, and vice versa. For
example, positive reinforcement in the mutual learning model is akin to
quarantining simultaneously exposed groups. In this case, if infection is
passed between two sites, they preferentially interact with each other, instead
of their other neighbors, leading to activity localization at aﬁnite scale that
depends on the value of the reinforcement parameter, r > 1. Such locali-
zation hinders activity spreading at the global scale, forcing the system to be
in the inactive phase.
In stark contrast to standard critical phenomena, microscopic differ-
ences in the learning models can lead to dramatic changes in the emergent
behavior, from completely destroying a phase transition to introducing an
additional phase transition. For exam ple, in two dimensions, with anti-
Hebbian negative reinforcement, w e see different phase transitions
depending on the initial conditions. At the fully infected (bulk) critical point,
we observe manifestations of a class o f behaviors controlled by multiple
absorbing conﬁgurations (MAC) behavior, where some observables follow
the DP scaling, while (depending on the model) others show a distinct
behavior affected by learning. At the spreading critical point, in higher
dimensions, our results suggest a critical point in the universality class of
dynamical percolation (DyP), as in the SIR model. In this case, learning with
negative reinforcement turns the SISmodel (without immunization) into an
effective SIR model, even though the local infection and healing rates remain
unaffected. In the region between the spreading and the bulk critical point,
the system is in a phase showcasing a propagating front with a subcritical
bulk. It is an interesting future direction to explore if such a phase could be
observed in some real-life applications,either in infection, brain activity or
population spreading. Although the contact process is a genuinely non-
equilibrium model and learning leads to changes in the model parameters
coupled to the dynamics, we were also able to obtain informative analytic
results, further supporting our simulation observations.
Our minimal Hebbian models with positive reinforcement have been
inspired by reinforcement learning in the brain. In the source learning
model, positive reinforcement leads to a Grifﬁths phase in higher dimen-
sions. There is increasing evidence t hat brain dynamics also shows hall-
marks of being in a Grifﬁths phase46–49, believed to be advantageous in terms
of memory and computational capabilities9. Signatures of Grifﬁths phases
might be also present in arti ﬁcal neural networks 50,a ne x c i t i n gf u t u r e
direction to explore in relation to Hebbian learning. Note that, in standard
models, a Grif ﬁths phase is either caused by time-invariant (quenched)
disorder44, or a hierarchical-modular architecture of cortical networks9,51.
Our results serve as an independent alternative mechanism for a Grifﬁths
phase, a manifestation of the “ant mill” phenomenon42, originating from
dynamical trapping in activity loops emerging from heterogeneities induced
by learning. It remains an open problem— in both real and artiﬁcial neural
networks — to unveil which sort of mechanism is underlying the obser-
vations of Grifﬁths effects.
The target learning model leads to an emergent quenched system in the
r → 0 limit, leading to invariant directional con ﬁguration(s) in both 1D
(totally asymmetric CP40) and 2D. Note that in 2D the system is disordered,
as there are in ﬁnitely many directional conﬁgurations depending on the
initial condition and the dynamics. The directional con ﬁguration also
contains correlations resulting from the generating dynamics. Without
learning, uncorrelated quenched disorder in the rates leads to a distinct type
of critical behavior characterizedby ultra-slow activated scaling44 below four
dimensions52,53 and on certain types of complex networks54,i nl i n ew i t ht h e
perturbative argument known as the Harris criterion55.I ti sa ni n t e r e s t i n g
open question to explore whether sucha directional quenched disorder is a
relevant perturbation at the critical p oint, potentially leading to exotic,
strong disorder phenomena.
To the best of our knowledge, our work presented here is theﬁrst study
of Hebbian (and anti-Hebbian) learningfor activity spreading, with several
future directions remaining open. Su ch extensions could consider alter-
native forms of Hebbian learning, either incorporating information on the
duration when the sites are simultaneously active, or different normalization
schemes. For example, in the case of positive reinforcement, brain dynamics
would suggest the study of the potentially stabilizing impact of inherently
decaying activation rates36. As real-life infection spreading is complicated,
combinations with other mechanisms, like the simultaneous impact of
Fig. 6 | Grif ﬁths phase in the 2D source learning model with positive reinfor-
cement. In the inset, we plot survival probability P as a function of time for varying
activation rates λ. In this representation, straight lines indicate a Grif ﬁths phase of
non-universal power-laws, expected to appear above the critical point of the one-
dimensional totally asymmetric CP, λ* = 3.306(2) (dashed line)40. Here, the Grifﬁths
phase is a manifestation of the“ant mill”phenomenon, where the activity propagates
along randomly formed loops until it ceases to exist 41. The main panel indicates the
best ﬁt and the estimated error of the δ exponents that correspond to the non-
universal power-laws observed in the inset for λ > λ*.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Hebbian learning and awareness 38,39, or excitatory and inhibitory
connections56, are especially of interest as these are expected to lead to an
even more rich phase diagram.
Although the CP is equivalent to the SIS model on a lattice, this is no
longer true on complex networks. In stark contrast to the CP57,i nt h eS I S
model there is no inactive phase on scale-free networks with degree expo-
nent γ >2 58–60. Hence, positive reinforcement might not completely elim-
inate the active phase. Instead, a phase transition might happen between an
inactive and an active phase on such networks. Another direction of study is
unveiling the condition under which a similar reinforcement-driven Grif-
ﬁths phase occurs on complex networks through the ant mill
phenomenon42.
Data availability
The data for the plots can be accessed at Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.19237533.
Code availability
Code used to simulate the models in this study is available from the cor-
responding author.
Received: 21 November 2025;Accepted: 10 April 2026;
References
1. Rosen, R. Biological systems as paradigms for adaptation. In Day, R.
H. & Groves, T. (eds.)Adaptive Economic Models, 39-72 https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780122073502500051
(Academic Press, 1975).
2. Guirfa, M. & Menzel, R.Biology of Adaptation and Learning, 7-9
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-05594-6_2 (Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003).
3. Tu, Y. & Rappel, W.-J. Adaptation in living systems. Annu. Rev.
Condens. Matter Phys. 9, 183– 205 (2018).
4. Pemantle, R. A survey of random processes with reinforcement.
Probab. Surv. 4,1 – 79 (2007).
5. Harris, T. E. Contact interactions on a lattice. Ann. Probab. 2, 969– 988
(1974).
6. Hebb, D. O. The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological
theory (Psychology Press, 2005).
7. Magnasco, M. O., Piro, O. & Cecchi, G. A. Self-tuned critical anti-
Hebbian networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 258102 (2009).
8. te Vrugt, M., Bickmann, J. & Wittkowski, R. Effects of social distancing
and isolation on epidemic spreading modeled via dynamical density
functional theory. Nat. Commun. 11, 5576 (2020).
9. Moretti, P. & Muñoz, M. A. Grif ﬁths phases and the stretching of
criticality in brain networks. Nat. Commun. 4, 2521 (2013).
10. Moldakarimov, S. & Sejnowski, T. 1.34 - neural computation theories
of learning. In Byrne, J. H. (ed.) Learning and Memory: A
Comprehensive Reference, 667-679 https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780123705099000863 (Academic Press,
Oxford, 2008).
11. Clark, D. G. & Abbott, L. F. Theory of coupled neuronal-synaptic
dynamics. Phys. Rev. X 14, 021001 (2024).
12. Lynn, C. W., Holmes, C. M. & Palmer, S. E. Heavy-tailed neuronal
connectivity arises from Hebbian self-organization. Nat. Phys. 20,
484– 491 (2024).
13. Oborny, B., Szabó, G. & Meszéna, G.Survival of species in patchy
landscapes: percolation in space and time, 409-440. Ecological
Reviews (Cambridge University Press, 2007).
14. Best, A. et al. The evolution of host-parasite range. Am. Naturalist 176,
63– 71 (2010).
15. Hund, A. K. et al. Population-level variation in parasite resistance due
to differences in immune initiation and rate of response.Evolution Lett.
6, 162– 177 (2022).
16. White, T. A. & Perkins, S. E. The ecoimmunology of invasive species.
Funct. Ecol. 26, 1313– 1323 (2012).
17. Brown, G. P., Shine, R. & Rollins, L. A. Does a biological invasion
modify host immune responses to parasite infection? R. Soc. Open
Sci. 12, 240669 (2025).
18. Jacquemyn, H., Butaye, J. & Hermy, M. In ﬂuence of environmental
and spatial variables on regional distribution of forest plant species in
a fragmented and changing landscape. Ecography 26, 768– 776
(2003).
19. Marro, J. & Dickman, R. Nonequilibrium phase transitions in lattice
models https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:122463560
(1999).
20. Hinrichsen, H. Non-equilibrium critical phenomena and phase
transitions into absorbing states. Adv. Phys. 49, 815– 958 (2000).
21. Henkel, M., Hinrichsen, H. & Lübeck, S.Non-Equilibrium Phase
Transitions: Volume 1: Absorbing Phase Transitions. Theoretical and
Mathematical Physics https://books.google.hu/books?id=
OKbtkq4A-1EC (Springer Netherlands, 2008).
22. Ódor, G. Universality classes in nonequilibrium lattice systems. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 76, 663– 724 (2004).
23. Janssen, H. K. On the nonequilibrium phase transition in reaction-
diffusion systems with an absorbing stationary state. Z. f.ür. Phys. B
Condens. Matter 42, 151– 154 (1981).
24. Grassberger, P. On phase transitions in Schlögl ’s second model. Z.
f.ür. Phys. B Condens. Matter 47, 365– 374 (1982).
25. Ziff, R. M., Gulari, E. & Barshad, Y. Kinetic phase transitions in an
irreversible surface-reaction model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2553– 2556
(1986).
26. Grassberger, P. Are damage spreading transitions generically in the
universality class of directed percolation? J. Stat. Phys. 79,1 3– 23
(1995).
27. Tang, L.-H. & Leschhorn, H. Pinning by directed percolation. Phys.
Rev. A 45, R8309– R8312 (1992).
28. Schütz, G. M. Exactly solvable models for many-body systems far
from equilibrium. In Domb, C. & Lebowitz, J. L. (eds.)Phase Transitions
and Critical Phenomena, vol. 19 (Academic, London, 2000).
29. Hooyberghs, J. & Vanderzande, C. One-dimensional contact process:
Duality and renormalization. Phys. Rev. E 63, 041109 (2001).
30. Muñoz, M. A., Grinstein, G. & Dickman, R. Phase structure of systems
with inﬁnite numbers of absorbing states. J. Stat. Phys. 91, 541– 569
(1998).
31. Hooyberghs, J., Iglói, F. & Vanderzande, C. Strong disorder ﬁxed point
in absorbing-state phase transitions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 100601
(2003).
32. Vojta, T. Rare region effects at classical, quantum and nonequilibrium
phase transitions. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39, R143 (2006).
33. Gross, T., D ’Lima, C. J. D. & Blasius, B. Epidemic dynamics on an
adaptive network. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 208701 (2006).
34. Risau-Gusman, S. & Zanette, D. H. Contact switching as a control
strategy for epidemic outbreaks. J. Theor. Biol. 257,5 2– 60 (2009).
35. Dickman, R. Reweighting in nonequilibrium simulations. Phys. Rev. E
60, R2441– R2444 (1999).
36. Miller, K. D. & MacKay, D. J. C. The role of constraints in Hebbian
learning. Neural Comput. 6, 100– 126 (1994).
37. Gross, T. & Sayama, H.Adaptive Networks. Theory, Models and
Applications (Springer Verlag, Germany, 2009).
38. Ódor, G. & Karsai, M. Epidemic-induced local awareness behavior
inferred from surveys and genetic sequence data. Nat. Commun. 16,
4758 (2025).
39. Kolok, C. B., Ódor, G., Keliger, D. & Karsai, M. Epidemic paradox
induced by awareness driven network dynamics. Phys. Rev. Res. 7,
L012061 (2025).
40. Tretyakov, A. Y. & Inui, K. N. N. Phase transition for the one-sided
contact process. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 66, 3764 (1997).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
41. Delsuc, F. Army ants trapped by their evolutionary history. PLOS Biol.
1, null (2003).
42. Erhard, D., Franco, T. & Reis, G. The directed edge reinforced random
walk: The ant mill phenomenon. J. Stat. Phys. 190, 18 (2022).
43. Noest, A. J. New universality for spatially disordered cellular automata
and directed percolation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 90 (1986).
44. Iglói, F. & Monthus, C. Strong disorder RG approach of random
systems. Phys. Rep. 412, 277– 431 (2005).
45. Iglói, F. & Monthus, C. Strong disorder RG approach – a short review of
recent developments. Eur. Phys. J. B 91, 290 (2018).
46. Buendía, V., Villegas, P., Burioni, R. & Muñoz, M. A. The broad edge of
synchronization: Grifﬁths effects and collective phenomena in brain
networks. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 380, 20200424 (2022).
47. Girardi-Schappo, M., Bortolotto, G. S., Gonsalves, J. J., Pinto, L. T. &
Tragtenberg, M. H. R. Grifﬁths phase and long-range correlations in a
biologically motivated visual cortex model. Sci. Rep. 6, 29561 (2016).
48. Pretel, J., Buendía, V., Torres, J. J. & Muñoz, M. A. From asynchronous
states to grifﬁths phases and back: Structural heterogeneity and
homeostasis in excitatory-inhibitory networks. Phys. Rev. Res. 6,
023018 (2024).
49. Fuscà, M. et al. Brain criticality predicts individual levels of inter-areal
synchronization in human electrophysiological data. Nat. Commun.
14, 4736 (2023).
50. Wright, L., Anderson, M. & McMahon, P. Evidence for Grif ﬁths phase
criticality in residual neural networks. In APS March Meeting
Abstracts, vol. 2022 of APS Meeting Abstracts, M09.012 (2022).
51. Ódor, G., Dickman, R. & Ódor, G. Grif ﬁths phases and localization in
hierarchical modular networks. Sci. Rep. 5, 14451 (2015).
52. Vojta, T., Farquhar, A. & Mast, J. In ﬁnite-randomness critical point in
the two-dimensional disordered contact process. Phys. Rev. E 79,
011111 (2009).
53. Vojta, T. Monte Carlo simulations of the clean and disordered contact
process in three dimensions. Phys. Rev. E 86, 051137 (2012).
54. Juhász, R. & Kovács, I. A. In ﬁnite randomness critical behavior of the
contact process on networks with long-range connections. J. Stat.
Mech.: Theory Exp. 2013, P06003 (2013).
55. Harris, A. B. Effect of random defects on the critical behaviour of Ising
models. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 7, 1671 (1974).
56. Corral López, R., Buendía, V. & Muñoz, M. A. Excitatory-inhibitory
branching process: A parsimonious view of cortical asynchronous
states, excitability, and criticality. Phys. Rev. Res. 4, L042027 (2022).
57. Castellano, C. & Pastor-Satorras, R. Non-mean- ﬁeld behavior of the
contact process on scale-free networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 038701
(2006).
58. Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. Epidemic dynamics and endemic
states in complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 63, 066117 (2001).
59. Castellano, C. & Pastor-Satorras, R. Thresholds for epidemic
spreading in networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 218701 (2010).
60. Chatterjee, S. & Durrett, R. Contact processes on random graphs with
power law degree distributions have critical value 0. Ann. Probab. 37,
2332– 2356 (2009).
61. Jensen, I. & Dickman, R. Time-dependent perturbation theory for
nonequilibrium lattice models. J. Stat. Phys. 71,8 9– 127 (1993).
62. Jensen, I. Low-density series expansions for directed percolation: I. a
new efﬁcient algorithm with applications to the square lattice.J. Phys.
A: Math. Gen. 32, 5233– 5249 (1999).
63. Tomé, T. & Ziff, R. M. Critical behavior of the susceptible-infected-
recovered model on a square lattice. Phys. Rev. E 82, 051921 (2010).
64. Muñoz, M. A., Dickman, R., Vespignani, A. & Zapperi, S. Avalanche
and spreading exponents in systems with absorbing states. Phys.
Rev. E 59, 6175– 6179 (1999).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research, Development and
Innovation Ofﬁce NKFIH under Grant No. K146736. The work of I.A.K. was
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. PHY-
2310706 of the QIS program in the Division of Physics, by the Domus
Hungary Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, and by the
Baker Faculty Grant of the Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences, North-
western University. W.T.E. was supported by the Northwestern Ofﬁce of
Undergraduate Research’s Summer Undergraduate Research Grant
(SURG) and the Baker Program in Undergraduate Research. We thank L. V.
Luzzatto, N. Love, and J. Barrera Lopez for useful discussions, and M. M.
Driscoll, B. Oborny and G. Ódor for useful comments.
Author contributions
W.T.E. and R.J. contributed equally. I.A.K. designed and supervised the
research; R.J. developed the mean-ﬁeld description; W.T.E. and R.J. per-
formed the numerical simulations; all authors analyzed data and wrote
the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
István A. Kovács.
Peer review informationCommunications Physicsthanks the anonymous
reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review
ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modi ﬁed the licensed material. You
do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-026-02638-z Article
Communications Physics |           (2026) 9:218 10
