===== PAGE 1 =====
The first demonstration of braiding in
photonic topological zero modes
October 9 2020, by Ingrid Fadelli
  
 
  
Schematic depiction of the structure that performs the braiding process with
light. (a) Waveguide array structure, where light is braided opposite directions in
the two arrays, and then interfered; (b) diagram showing the displacement of
waveguide array coordinates required to perform the braiding operation, where
\alpha denotes the angle of a ‘vortex at infinity’ that is braided around the array.
Credit: Noh et al.
Physics theory suggests that exotic excitations can exist in the form of
bound states confined in the proximity of topological defects, for
instance, in the case of Majorana zero modes that are trapped in vortices
within topological superconducting materials. Better understanding these
1/4

===== PAGE 2 =====
states could aid the development of new computational tools, including
quantum technologies.
One phenomenon that has attracted attention over the past few years is
"braiding," which occurs when electrons in particular states (i.e.,
Majorana fermions) are braided with one another. Some physicists have
theorized that this phenomenon could enable the development of a new
type of quantum technology, namely topological quantum computers.
Researchers at Pennsylvania State University, University of California-
Berkeley, Iowa State University, University of Pittsburgh, and Boston
University have recently tested the hypothesis that braiding also occurs
in particles other than electrons, such as photons (i.e., particles of light).
In a paper published in Nature Physics, they present the first
experimental demonstration of braiding using photonic topological zero
modes.
"The idea was inspired by a well-known architecture for building a
quantum computer; one that has been theoretically predicted but never
experimentally realized," Mikael C. Rechtsman, one of the researchers
who carried out the study, told Phys.org. "To perform operations in this
previously theorized type of quantum computer, Majorana fermions are
moved around one another—this is called braiding. In a previous
theoretical study, some of my colleagues predicted that braiding is a
general phenomenon that can be applied not only to electrons, but to
photons, as well. In our new paper, we demonstrate this experimentally,
using an array of waveguides that are similar to fiber optic cables."
Rechtsman and his colleagues measured the geometric phase of the
braiding phenomenon by conducting an experiment in which two
different braiding processes interfered with one another. In one of these
processes, topological defects were braided clockwise, while in the other
one, they were braided counterclockwise.
2/4

===== PAGE 3 =====
Interference is a feature of wave mechanics that is often used to study
physical systems. This feature is responsible for countless wave-related
phenomena, ranging from rainbow swirls on soap bubbles to
gravitational waves.
"We observed that the light from the two opposite braiding processes
interfered destructively, which confirmed our theoretical prediction that
the processes have a relative braiding phase of pi," Thomas Schuster,
another researcher involved in the study, told Phys.org. "Crucially, due
to the particularly simple action of braiding, the measurement we
collected allows us to extrapolate the behavior of any braiding process.
In particular, it verifies that when performing multiple braids in a row,
the order of the braiding matters."
Rechtsman, Schuster and their colleagues demonstrated the existence of
a generalizable braiding process that they refer to as non-Abelian
braiding, which is a simple manifestation of a feature that researchers
have sought for in electronic systems for several years. Their results
suggest that braiding may, in fact, be a common phenomenon that
reaches beyond electrons and also applies to light, sound, water and
potentially even seismic waves.
In addition to highlighting the possibility of using photonic lattices as a
platform to study topological defects and their braiding, this study could
inspire other research teams to examine braiding in the context of other
phenomena that involve the production of waves. Rechtsman, Schuster
and their colleagues now plan to continue investigating the braiding of
photonic topological zero modes, along with other topological
phenomena that could also be applied to light-related systems.
"Braiding is a topological phenomenon that has been traditionally
associated with electronic devices," Rechtsman said. "We now hope to
show that a whole class of topological phenomena can potentially be
3/4

===== PAGE 4 =====
useful not only for electronic devices, but also photonic devices, such as
lasers, medical imaging devices, telecommunications systems, and
others. We also expect that this new type of topological physics could be
applied to quantum information systems, particularly those based on
photons."
  More information: Jiho Noh et al. Braiding photonic topological zero
modes, Nature Physics (2020). DOI: 10.1038/s41567-020-1007-5 
Thomas Iadecola et al. Non-Abelian Braiding of Light, Physical Review
Letters (2016). DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.073901
© 2020 Science X Network
Citation: The first demonstration of braiding in photonic topological zero modes (2020, October
9) retrieved 9 September 2026 from https://phys.org/news/2020-10-braiding-photonic-
topological-modes.html
This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private
study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is
provided for information purposes only.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
4/4
