===== PAGE 1 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT
JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Abstract.This survey article discusses the emerging interaction between conformally symplectic
topology and dynamics, with a focus on recent developments in convex hypersurface theory.
1.Introduction
Since the emergence of Floer theory in the 1980s, the interplay between symplectic topology
and dynamics has been a fundamental theme of symplectic geometry. The first achievement
in this spirit was Floer’s celebrated proof of the Arnold Conjecture for aspherical symplectic
manifolds [32–34]. In subsequent decades, many remarkable results in symplectic dynamics
have been achieved by applying Floer-theoretic methods. Examples include the proof of the
Conley conjecture [37] for aspherical symplectic manifolds; the proof of the Hofer-Zehnder
conjecture [52] for monotone symplectic manifolds with semi-simple quantum cohomology;
the proof of the Weinstein conjecture in dimension three [44,54] and in other settings [1,35];
and smooth closing lemmas in symplectic dynamics [3,17,24,25,45]. This list, by no means
comprehensive, highlights the remarkable dynamical applications of Floer theoretic methods.
Classical symplectic and Hamiltonian dynamics deals with maps and flows that preserve a
symplectic form (e.g. Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms and flows) or that conserve a contact form
(e.g. Reeb flows). However, there is a natural, broader class of dynamical systems in symplectic
topology that has (until recently) attracted much less attention from the symplectic community.
Definition 1.A diffeomorphismΦon a manifold𝑀isconformally symplecticif it preserves a
symplectic (or Liouville, or contact) formΩon𝑀up to a scaling factor.
Φ˚Ω“𝐹¨Ωfor a smooth function𝐹:𝑀ÑR `
Conformally symplectic dynamics is not nearly as well studied as its strictly symplectic counter-
part. Relatively little is is known about the properties of these systems, e.g. their fixed points,
invariant sets, ergodic theory and so on. However, conformally symplectic dynamics is quite
ubiquitous, appearing naturally in many parts of symplectic topology. Prototypical examples
include the Liouville flow on an exact symplectic manifold, contactomorphisms and the flow of
the characteristic foliation on hypersurfaces in contact manifolds. Moreover, several interesting
questionsofapurelytopologicalnatureaboutLiouvillemanifolds,contactmanifoldsandconvex
hypersurfaces are closely related to dynamical questions in conformally symplectic dynamics.
The interaction between conformally symplectic topology and dynamics therefore represents
excitingandlargelyunchartedmathematicalterritory. Thisshortarticleservesasaninvitationto
thesubject,withafocusonthespecificsettingofcharacteristicfoliations. Westartbyintroducing
contact Hamiltonian manifolds and their characteristic foliations (Section 2). These are intrinsic
versions of hypersurfaces in contact manifolds, and they give rise to many of the most natural
examples of conformally symplectic dynamical systems that the author is acquainted with. We
thendiscussconvexityinthesenseofGiroux[39]inthisintrinsiclanguage,andgiveanoverview
ofrecentdevelopmentsintheproblemofconvexapproximationfromthedynamicalperspective
(Section3). Weconcludewithadiscussionofseveralconjecturesandopenproblems(Section4).
Acknowledgements.This article was written for the Proceedings of the 2026 Georgia Interna-
tionalTopologyConference. TheauthorwaspartiallysupportedbyNationalScienceFoundation
award DMS-2446019 and by the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation award 2024157. This
articleisdedicatedtothememoryofDietmarSalamon,oneofthemostimportantmathematical
influences on the author.
1
arXiv:2607.03019v1  [math.SG]  3 Jul 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
2.Contact Hamiltonian Manifolds And Characteristic Flows
Contact Hamiltonian manifolds are the natural intrinsic models for hypersurfaces in contact
manifolds. They are directly analogous to Hamiltonian manifolds, which model hypersurfaces
insymplecticmanifolds(cf. Fish-Hofer[30]). Moreover,theypossessanaturaldynamicalsystem
called the characteristic foliation, which will be the main object of interest in this survey. In this
section, we introduce contact Hamiltonian manifolds and their various associated structures.
2.1.ContactHamiltonianStructures.Westartbygivingaprecisedefinitionandsomeexamples.
Definition 2.1(Contact Hamiltonian Form).Acontact Hamiltonian form𝜆on a2𝑛-manifoldΣis
a smooth 1-form such that
(2.1)𝑑𝜆 𝑛‰0at any point where𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 vanishes.
Lemma 2.2(Rescaling Invariance).Let𝜆be a contact Hamiltonian form onΣand let𝑓be a smooth
nowhere vanishing function onΣ. Then𝑓𝜆is also contact Hamiltonian.
Proof.This is immediate from Definition 2.1 and the following identities.
𝑓𝜆^𝑑p𝑓𝜆q 𝑛´1“𝑓 𝑛𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 and𝑑p𝑓𝜆q 𝑛|kerp𝜆q“𝑓 𝑛¨𝑑𝜆 𝑛|kerp𝜆q □
Definition 2.3(Singular Hyperplane Field).Asingular hyperplane field𝜂on a manifoldΣis an
equivalence class of 1-forms up to multiplication by a nowhere zero smooth function. We let
kerp𝜆qdenote the equivalence class of a 1-form𝜆
Asingularityof a singular hyperplane field𝜂is a point where the defining 1-form𝜆vanishes.
Definition 2.4(Contact Hamiltonian Manifold).Acontact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis a2𝑛-
manifoldΣequippedwithasingularhyperplanefield𝜂definedbyacontactHamiltonianform.
Remark 2.5.This definition is more general than the version given in the authors work [16],
where contact Hamiltonian manifolds are synonymous with even contact manifolds.
Figure 1.Examples of contact Hamiltonian structures on the 2-torus and the disk.
Here are the motivating examples of contact Hamiltonian manifolds that arise in practice.
Example 2.6(Hypersurfaces).Fix a hypersurfaceΣin a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qwith contact
form𝛼. ThenΣis a contact Hamiltonian manifold with contact Hamiltonian structure
𝜂“𝜉X𝑇Σdefined by the contact Hamiltonian form𝜆“𝛼| Σ
Indeed,notethat𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 vanishesatapointinΣifandonlyif𝜆vanishesatthatpoint. Inthis
case𝜉“𝑇Σat that point and thus𝑑𝜆| 𝑇Σ is symplectic.

===== PAGE 3 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 3
Example 2.7(Exact Symplectic Manifolds).Any exact symplectic manifoldpΣ,𝜆qis contact
Hamiltonian with contact Hamiltonian form𝜆since𝑑𝜆𝑛 is nowhere vanishing.
Example 2.8(Even Contact Manifolds).Recall that an even contact manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis a2𝑛-
manifold with a maximally non-degenerate (non-singular) hyperplane field𝜂. Equivalently
𝜂“kerp𝜆qwhere𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 is nowhere vanishing
Thus an even contact manifold is precisely a contact Hamiltonian manifold where𝜂is nowhere
singular.
Example2.9(Symplectization).ThesymplectizationR 𝑠ˆΓofacontactmanifoldpΓ,𝜉qisnaturally
a contact Hamiltonian manifold with contact Hamiltonian structure
𝜂“spanpB 𝑠q‘𝜉
This is a special case of both Example 2.7 and Example 2.8.
Example 2.10(Suspensions).LetΦbe a contactomorphism of a contact manifoldpΓ,𝜉q. Recall
that the suspension ofΦis the quotient
ΣpΦq“pR 𝑠ˆΓq{„
by the identification sendingp𝑠,𝑥qto the pointp𝑠´1,Φp𝑥qq. This preserves the contact Hamil-
tonian structure onR𝑠ˆΓ, which then descends to the suspension.
Exercise 2.11.Find a contact Hamiltonian 1-form defining each of the 1-dimensional singular
hyperplane fields (or in this case, line fields) depicted in Figure 6.
We are often interested in understanding contact Hamiltonian structures up to deformation
(or equivalently, isotopy). There are a two different notions of isotopy that are important.
Definition 2.12(Isotopies).An isotopy𝜂 𝑠 of contact Hamiltonian structures on a manifoldΣis
simply a smooth family of contact Hamiltonian structures
𝜂𝑠“kerp𝜆 𝑠qfor𝑠Pr0,1s
where𝜆 𝑠 is a smooth family of contact Hamiltonian forms. An isotopy isambientin a contact
manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qif there is a family of codimension one embeddings such that
𝜄𝑠 :ΣÑ𝑌such that𝜂 𝑠“𝜄 ˚
𝑠𝜉
Remark 2.13.With respect to isotopy, contact Hamiltonian structures behave more like contact
forms and Liouville forms than symplectic forms and contact structures. In particular, there is
no Moser stability or Grey stability that guarantees that isotopic contact Hamiltonian structures
are strictly isomorphic.
2.2.CharacteristicFoliation.AcontactHamiltonianmanifoldhasanaturallyassociatedsingu-
lar line field, which generates a naturally associated smooth flow.
Definition 2.14(Characteristic Flow).Thecharacteristic vector field𝑍determined by a contact
Hamiltonian form𝜆and a volume form𝜇is the unique vector field satisfying
(2.2)𝜄 𝑍𝜇“𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1
A flow acquired by integrating a characteristic vector field is called acharacteristic flow.
ThecharacteristicvectorfielddependsonthechoiceofcontactHamiltonianformandvolume
form, but it determines a well-defined (singular) line field, in the following sense.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Definition 2.15(Singular Line Field).Asingular line field𝐿on a manifoldΣis an equivalence
class of vector fields up to multiplication by a nowhere zero smooth function. We let
spanp𝑉qdenote the equivalence class of a vector field𝑉
Asingularityof a singuar line field𝐿is a point where the defining vector field vanishes.
Definition 2.16(Characteristic Foliation).Thecharacteristic foliationΣ 𝜂 of a contact Hamiltonian
manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis the unique singular line field spanned by any characteristic vector field.
The well-definedness of the characteristic foliation is given by the following elementary lemma.
Lemma2.17(Well-Defined).Thesingularlinefieldspannedbyacharacteristicvectorfield𝑍ofacontact
Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis independent of the choice of contact Hamiltonian form and volume form.
Proof.Let𝑍be the characteristic vector field for a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆and volume form
𝜇, and let𝜆1“𝑓𝜆and𝜇 1“𝑔𝜇for nowhere vanishing functions𝑓and𝑔. Then
𝜄𝐹𝑍𝜇1“𝜆1^p𝑑𝜆1q𝑛´1 where𝐹“𝑓 𝑛{𝑔
Thus𝐹𝑍is the characteristic vector field of𝜆1 and𝜇1. This proves the lemma.□
A similar argument shows that any spanning vector field of the characteristic foliation is
characteristic for some contact Hamiltonian form.
Lemma 2.18(Spanning Vector Fields).Fix a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qand a volume form
𝜇. Then any vector field𝑍spanningΣ𝜂 satisfies (2.2) for some contact Hamiltonian form𝜆.
Thecharacteristicfoliationcanbedescribedasthekernelofacertainmaximallynon-degenerate
bilinear form at any of the non-singular points.
Lemma 2.19(Kernel Description).The singularities of the characteristic foliationΣ 𝜂 of a contact
Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qagree with the singularities of𝜂. Away from the singularities
(2.3)Σ 𝜂“kerp𝑑𝜆| 𝜂qĂ𝜂for any contact Hamiltonian form𝜆
Proof.Fix a characteristic vector field𝑍defined by𝜆and a volume form𝜇. For the first claim,
note that𝑍vanishes if and only if𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 vanishes by (2.2), and that𝜆^𝑑𝜆𝑛´1 vanishes if
and only if𝜆vanishes by (2.1). For the second claim, note that therestriction of𝑑𝜆to𝜂“kerp𝜆q
must have a rank one kernel at any point where𝜆^𝑑𝜆𝑛´1 is non-zero. Moreover, any non-zero
vector𝑊tangent to this kernel satisfies
(2.4)𝜄 𝑊p𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1q“𝜄 𝑊𝜆¨𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1`𝜆^𝜄 𝑊𝑑𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´2“0
It follows that𝑍and𝑊are proportional at any non-singular point of𝜂, which proves (2.3).□
There is also a corresponding description of any characteristic vector field.
Lemma2.20.FixacontactHamiltonianmanifoldpΣ,𝜂qwithcontactHamiltonianform𝜆. Thenavector
field𝑍ischaracteristicifandonlyifthereisasmoothnowherevanishingfunction𝑓suchthat𝜄 𝑍𝑑𝜆“𝑓𝜆.
Proof.Away from the singularities of𝜂, Lemma 2.19 immediately implies that𝑍is characteristic
if and only if𝜄𝑍𝑑𝜆|𝜂 “0or equivalently𝜄 𝑍𝑑𝜆“𝑓𝜆for a (unique) smooth function𝑓. Thus, it
suffices to prove the result in a neighborhood𝑈of the singularities where𝑑𝜆is symplectic. Fix
a volume form𝜇such that𝑛¨𝜇“˘𝑑𝜆 𝑛 in the neighborhood𝑈. For this choice of volume form,
it is simple to see that for any vector field𝑍, we have
𝜄𝑍𝜇“˘𝑓¨𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1in𝑈if and only if𝜄 𝑍𝑑𝜆“𝑓¨𝜆in𝑈
Moreover, a vector field𝑍is characteristic on𝑈if and only if it satisfies the formula on the left
for some choice of𝑓that is nowhere vanishing on𝑈. This proves the result.□

===== PAGE 5 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 5
Any hypersurface in a contact Hamiltonian manifold that is transverse to the characteristic
foliation has a natural contact structure, and a characteristic flow induces a local identification
with the symplectization.
Lemma 2.21(Contact Transversals).Any hypersurfaceΓin a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂q
that is transverse to the characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 is a contact manifold with contact structure
𝜉“𝜂X𝑇Γ
Moreover,ifΓiscompactthen,forsmall𝜖,theflowbyanycharacteristicvectorfield𝑍definesanembedding
r´𝜖,𝜖s 𝑠ˆΓÑΣinducing an identification𝜂“spanpB 𝑠q‘𝜉
Proof.TakeanycontactHamiltonianform𝜆andlet𝑍beacharacteristicvectorfield. Byassump-
tion, it is non-zero alongΓand transverse toΓ. Since𝑍is the unique vector field in the kernel of
the interior product with𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1, it follows that𝜆^𝑑𝜆𝑛´1 restricts to a nowhere vanishing
p2𝑛´1q-form onΓ. ThusΓis contact with contact structurekerp𝜆| Γq“𝜂X𝑇Γ. Next, let𝑈be
a compact neighborhood ofΓ. The flow by𝑍induces a mapΦ:r´𝜖,𝜖s 𝑠ˆ𝑈ÑΣ. By Lemma
2.20, the flow satisifes
L𝑍𝜆“𝜄 𝑍𝑑𝜆“𝑓𝜆and thusΦ ˚
𝑠𝜆“𝐹 𝑠𝜆
for some smooth function𝑓and family of smooth functions𝐹𝑠 on𝑈. It follows that the kernel
of the 1-form𝛼“Φ ˚𝜆restricted tor´𝜖,𝜖s 𝑠ˆΓis invariant under translation by𝑠. The kernel
along0ˆΓis spanned byB 𝑠 and𝜂X𝑇Γ“𝜉, so this proves the result.□
Corollary 2.22(Conformally Liouville).For any point𝑃in a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂q,
there is a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆for𝜂such that
𝜆is a Liouville form in a neighborhood of𝑃
Proof.If𝑃is a singular point of𝜂, then any contact Hamiltonian form is Liouville near𝑃by
Definition 2.1. At a non-singular point𝑃, the characteristic foliation is non-singular. Choose a
small hypersurfaceΓcontaining𝑃. By Lemma 2.21, there is a chart containing𝑃in its interior
r´𝜖,𝜖sˆΓÑΣsuch that𝜂“B 𝑠‘𝜉
for some contact form𝜉onΓ. If𝛼is a contact form onΓfor𝜉, then𝜆“𝑒 𝑠𝛼is a contact
Hamiltonian form in the chart that is Liouville.□
Remark 2.23.The observations in Lemmas 2.19-2.21 show that the flow of the characteristic
foliation can be viewed as conformally symplectic. More specifically, fix a contact Hamiltonian
manifoldpΣ,𝜂qwithcontactHamiltonianform𝜆andacharacteristicvectorfield𝑍. Alsofixtwo
open sets𝑈and𝑊such that the time𝑇flowΦof𝑍maps𝑈to𝑊. ThenΦis a map
Φ:𝑈Ñ𝑊withΦ ˚𝜆|𝑊 “𝐹¨𝜆| 𝑈
Alternatively,Φis conformally symplectic (or more appropriately, conformally Liouville) when-
ever𝜆is chosen to be Liouvile on𝑈and𝑊. If𝑈and𝑊are replaced with transverse hyper-
surfaces,thenΦdefinesacontactomorphismbetweenthosetransversals. Fromthisperspective,
characteristic flows are the flow analogues of contactomorphisms.
ThereisareasonablenotionofisotropicandLegendriansub-manifoldsinthesettingofcontact
Hamiltonian manifolds.
Definition 2.24(Isotropic).An embedded (or more generally, immersed) sub-manifoldΛÑΣ
in a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qisisotropicif𝑇ΛĂ𝜂.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Figure 2.The characteristic foliation along with contact transversals mapped to
each other, and small neighborhoods isomorphic to their symplectizations.
Lemma2.25(Dimension).Anyisotropicsub-manifoldΛinacontact HamiltonianmanifoldpΣ,𝜂qhas
(2.5)dimpΛqď 1
2 dimpΣq
The isotropicΛis tangent to the characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 (or equivalently, invariant under any charac-
terstic flow) if the inequality (2.5) is an equality.
Proof.Let𝜆beanycontactHamiltonianformfor𝜂andnotethat𝑑𝜆| 𝑇Λ“0. Therearetwocases.
At a point where𝜂“𝑇Σ, the form𝑑𝜆is symplectic and𝑇Λis isotropic, implying (2.5). SinceΣ𝜂
has a singularity at such a point, the tangency condition holds tautologically.
At any other point, we know that𝑑𝜆|𝜂 is maximally non-degenerate and𝑇ΛĂ𝜂. It follows
that𝑑𝜆| 𝜂 descends to a symplectic form on the quotient𝜂{Σ𝜂 and𝑇Λprojects to an isotropic
subspace𝑉Ă𝜂{Σ 𝜂. It follows that at that point
dimp𝑇Λqďdimp𝑉q`1“ 1
2 dimp𝜂{Σ𝜂q`1“ 1
2 dimpΣq
This can only be an equality ifdimp𝑇Λq“dimp𝑉q`1which implies thatΣ𝜂Ă𝑇Λ.□
Definition 2.26(Legendrian).ALegendriansub-manifoldΛÑΣis an isotropic sub-manifold of
maximal dimension.
2.3.Contactization.Any contact Hamiltonian manifold admits a contactization, which is a
contactstructureontheproductofthemanifoldwithasmallinterval. Thisconstructionrequires
the following choice of auxilliary data.
Definition 2.27(Framing).Aframingp𝑢,𝜃qfor a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆on a contact
Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis apair ofa smoothfunction𝑢and asmooth 1-form𝜃onΣwhere
(2.6)𝑢¨𝑑𝜆 𝑛`𝑛𝜃^𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 is a volume form onΣ
Definition 2.28(Contactization).Thecontactizationp𝐶Σ,𝜉 𝜂qof a contact Hamiltonian manifold
pΣ,𝜂qis the contact manifold
𝐶Σ“r´𝜖,𝜖s 𝑠ˆΣ
equipped with the contact structure𝜉defined by the contact form
𝛼“𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝑠p𝜃`𝑑𝑢q`𝜆for any contact Hamiltonian form𝜆and framingp𝑢,𝜃q
To show that the contactization is a contact manifold independent of the framing, we need
some elementary results. First, note that there is an ample supply of framings available.
Lemma 2.29(Volume Form).For any contact Hamiltonian from𝜆and volume form𝜇onΣ, there is a
framingp𝑢,𝜃qsuch that
𝜇“𝑢¨𝑑𝜆 𝑛`𝑛𝜃^𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1

===== PAGE 7 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 7
Proof.ItfollowsfromDefinition2.4thatthereisacoverofΣbytwoopensets𝑈and𝑉suchthat
(2.7)𝑑𝜆 𝑛‰0on𝑈and𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1‰0on𝑉
Fix an auxilliary volume form𝜇and choose a partition of unity subordinate to the cover by𝑈
and𝑉. In other words, choose two smooth and non-negative functions𝐹𝑈 and𝐹 𝑉 such that
suppp𝐹𝑈qĂ𝑈suppp𝐹 𝑉qĂ𝑉 𝐹 𝑈`𝐹𝑉“1
Then (2.7) implies that we may choose a smooth function𝑢compactly supported in𝑈and a
smooth 1-form𝜃compactly supported in𝑉such that
𝑢¨𝑑𝜆 𝑛“𝐹 𝑈¨𝜇and𝜃^𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1“𝐹 𝑉¨𝜇
For this choice of𝑢and𝜃, the form (2.6) coincides with𝜇. This proves the claim.□
Remark2.30.Notethatthespaceofchoicesofframingiscontractible(andevenconvex). Thisis
immediate from the linearity of (2.6) in the framing.
Wethenhavethefollowingconstructionofan(essentiallyunique)germofacontactstructure
on the thickening of a contact Hamiltonian manifold.
Lemma 2.31(Contact Germ).Fix a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆and a framingp𝑢,𝜃qon a contact
Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. Then for sufficiently small𝜖
𝛼“𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝑠p𝜃`𝑑𝑢q`𝜆is a contact form onr´𝜖,𝜖s 𝑠ˆΣ
The corresponding contact structure𝜉is independent of the contact Hamiltonian form𝜆and the framing
p𝑢,𝜃qin a neighborhood ofΣ“0ˆΣ, up to ambient isotopy fixing0ˆΣ.
Proof.The associated differential form in the top degree associated to𝛼can be computed as
𝛼^𝑑𝛼 𝑛“𝑑𝑠^p𝑢¨𝑑𝜆 𝑛`𝑛𝜃^𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1qalong0ˆΣĂR 𝑠ˆΣ
This is a volume form in a small neighborhood of0ˆΣif and only ifp𝑢,𝜃qis framing for𝜆.
Therefore𝛼is a contact form near0ˆΣfor any framing. For the uniqueness, note that
𝜉X𝑇Σ“𝜂for the contact structure𝜉for any choice of𝜆,𝑢and𝜃
Note that this is an equality of singular hyperplane fields. The uniqueness result thus follows
from Lemma 2.32 below.□
Lemma2.32.[36]Let𝜉and𝜉 1 beapairofcontactstructureson𝑌andletΣĂ𝑌beahypersurfacesuch
that𝜉X𝑇Σ“𝜉 1X𝑇Σas singular hyperplane fields. Then there is an ambient isotopy
Φ:r0,1s 𝑡ˆ𝑌Ñ𝑌such thatΦ 0“IdΦ ˚
1𝜉“𝜉 1 nearΣandΦ 𝑡pΣq“Σ
Finally, note that the contactization provides a standard neighborhood model for any hypersur-
face in a contact manifold.
Lemma 2.33(Standard Neighborhood).LetΣbe a closed hypersurface in a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉q
with the contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂“𝜉X𝑇Σ. Then there is a contact embedding
𝜄:𝐶ΣÑ𝑌with𝜄p0ˆΣq“Σ
Proof.Choose a tubular neighborhood𝜄:r´𝜖,𝜖sˆΣÑ𝑌ofΣand a contact form𝛽on𝑌. Let𝜆
betherestrictionof𝜄 ˚𝛽to0ˆΣandlet𝛼bethecontactizationcontactformcorrespondingtoan
arbitrary framing. Then𝛼and the pullback𝜄˚𝛽are two contact forms on𝐶Σthat pull back to𝜆
on0ˆΣ. Thus𝜄can be isotoped to a contact embedding with𝜄p0ˆΣq“Σby Lemma 2.32.□

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
2.4.Liouville Subsets.We have already seen that Liouville domains are a natural example of
contact Hamiltonian manifolds. While most contact Hamiltonian manifolds are not Liouville,
even up to a conformal factor, it is still useful to consider the subsets that are.
Definition 2.34(Liouville Subsets).A subsetΛĂΣin a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis
calledLiouvilleif there is a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆such that
𝜆|𝑈 is a Liouville form on a neighborhood𝑈ofΛ
WesaythatΛispositiveornegativeif𝜆| 𝑈 ispositiveornegativeLiouville(withrespecttoachoice
of orientation or volume form).
Remark 2.35.Note that a subset can be both positive and negative Liouville.
There is a characterization of Liouville subsets that only makes reference to the smooth dy-
namics of the characteristic vector field. Specifically, we have the following lemma.
Lemma 2.36(Divergence Criterion).Fix a subsetΛĂΣof a contact Hamiltonian manifold and a
volume form𝜇. ThenΛis positive Liouville if and only if there is a characteristic vector field𝑍such that
divp𝑍,𝜇qp𝑍,𝜇qą0alongΛ
Similarly,ΛisnegativeLiouvilleifandonlyifthereisacharacteristicvectorfieldwithnegativedivergence.
Proof.Note that𝑑𝜆 𝑛 “𝐹¨𝜇, and that𝜆is positive (or negative) Liouville if and only if𝐹is
positive (or negative) everywhere alongΛ. Now suppose that𝑍is the characteristic vector field
determined by𝜇and a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆as in (2.2). Then
(2.8)𝑑𝜆 𝑛“𝑑p𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1q“𝑑p𝜄 𝑍𝜇q“divp𝑍,𝜇qp𝑍,𝜇q¨𝜇
Thus, a characteristic vector field𝑍has positive divergence if and only if the corresponding
contact Hamiltonian form𝜆is positive Liouville.□
The basic examples of Liouville subsets that will be used later are the following.
Example 2.37(Transversal).Fix a contact sub-manifold𝑃ĂΣinpΣ,𝜂qtransverse to the charac-
teristic foliation. Then Lemma 2.21 and Corollary 2.22 imply that there is an embedding
R𝑠ˆ𝑃ÑΣof symplectization of𝑃
preserving the contact Hamiltonian structures. Therefore𝑃is (positive and negative) Liouville.
Example2.38(Singularities).Anysingularity𝑥ofthecharacteristicfoliationofacontactHamil-
tonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis automatically Liouville, essentially by Definition 2.1.
Lemma 2.39(Hyperbolic Orbits).Let𝛾be a hyperbolic orbit of the characteristic foliation of a contact
Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. Then𝛾is Liouville.
Proof.We leave this as an exercise to the reader (cf. Breen [13] for help).□
Remark 2.40(Hyperbolic Singularities And Orbits).Recall that a fixed point𝑥of a diffeomor-
phismΦof a smooth manifold𝑀ishyperbolicif the differential
𝑇𝑥Φ:𝑇 𝑥𝑀Ñ𝑇 𝑥𝑀at the point𝑥
is a hyperbolic linear map, e.g. an invertible linear map with no eigenvalues of unit norm.
Similarly, a singularity𝑥of a singular line field𝐿is hyperbolic if it is a hyperbolic fixed point of
mapΦ 𝑇 for𝑇ą0, whereΦis any generating flow. Finally, a closed orbit𝛾of a vector field𝑉is
hyperbolic if the closed orbit corresponds to a hyperbolic fixed point of the Poincaré return map
on a small hypersurface transverse to the orbit at a point.

===== PAGE 9 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 9
Remark 2.41.One interpretation of Example 2.37 is the following: regions where the character-
istic foliation has trivial (non-recurrent) dynamics are automatically both positive and negative
Liouville. In contrast, we will shortly see that regions containing recurrent dynamics (e.g. peri-
odic orbits) are generally either one or the other.
2.5.Stable And Unstable Manifolds.We next analyze the stable and unstable manifolds of
closed orbits and singularities. We recall the definition.
Definition2.42(Stable/UnstableManifolds).Thestablemanifoldandunstablemanifoldofaclosed
orbit𝛾of a singular line field is the sets given by
𝑊𝑠p𝛾q“
␣
𝑥: lim
𝑇Ñ8
`
distpΦ𝑇p𝑥q,𝛾q
˘
Ñ0
(
𝑊𝑢p𝛾q“
␣
𝑥: lim
𝑇Ñ´8
`
distpΦ𝑇p𝑥q,𝛾q
˘
Ñ0
(
whereΦis generated by a smooth vector field that spans the singular line field anddistp¨qis the
distance for an arbitrary Riemannian metric.
The standard Stable Manifold Theorem (cf. [31, Thm 6.1.1]) states that the stable (and unstable)
manifolds are indeed smooth manifolds when the orbit is a hyperbolic orbit or singularity.
Definition 2.43(Index).Theindexindp𝛾qof a hyperbolic closed orbit (or singularity) of an
oriented singular line field is the dimension of the stable manifold of𝛾.
indp𝛾q“dimp𝑊 𝑠p𝛾qq´1if𝛾is an orbit andindp𝛾q“dimp𝑊 𝑠p𝛾qqif𝛾is a singularity
Lemma2.44(IsotropicStable/UnstableManifolds).Let𝛾beaclosedhyperbolicorbit(orsingularity)
of the characteristic foliation of a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. Then
𝑊𝑠p𝛾qis isotropic if𝛾is positive Liouville and𝑊 𝑢p𝛾qis isotropic if𝛾is negative Liouville
Proof.Byreversingtheorientation(andthustheorientationofthecharacteristicfoliation),wecan
reduce to the case of the stable manifold of a positive Liouville hyperbolic orbit (or singularity).
Fix a point𝑥in𝑊 𝑠p𝛾qand a positive Liouville form𝜆near𝛾. Let𝑍be a characteristic
vector field that is the Liouville vector field of𝜆in a neighborhood𝑈of𝑥and letΦbe the
correspondingcharacteristicflow. SinceΦpreservesisotropics,wecanapplytheflowΦforlarge
time and assume that𝑝is in a neighborhood where𝜆is positive Liouville. Then
L𝑍𝜆“𝜆andΦ ˚
𝑇𝜆“𝑒 𝑇¨𝜆
On the other hand, if𝑣P𝑇𝑊 𝑠p𝛾qis a vector tangent to𝑊𝑠p𝛾qat𝑥, then|𝑇Φ 𝑇p𝑣q|is uniformly
bounded for all𝑇ą0. It follows that there is a constant𝐶such that
|𝜆p𝑣q|“𝑒 ´𝑇¨|Φ˚
𝑇𝜆p𝑣q|“𝑒 ´𝑇¨|𝜆p𝑇Φ 𝑇p𝑣qq|ď𝐶𝑒 ´𝑇
Taking the limit as𝑇Ñ8yields the desired result.□
Asacorollary,weacquirethefollowinglemmasofBreen-Honda-Huang[13,43]. Theystatethat
hyperbolic closed orbits and singularities are either positive or negative Liouville, but not both.
Lemma 2.45(Liouville Orbits).Let𝛾be a hyperbolic closed orbit of the characteristic foliation of a
contact Hamiltonian2𝑛-manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. Then𝛾is either
positive Liouville withindp𝛾qď𝑛´1or negative Liouville withindp𝛾qě𝑛
Lemma2.46(LiouvilleSingularities).Let𝑥beahyperbolicsingularityofthecharacteristicfoliationof
a contact Hamiltonian2𝑛-manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. Then𝑥is either
positive Liouville withindp𝑥qď𝑛or negative Liouville withindp𝑥qě𝑛
The sign (positive or negative) of a singularity can be computed via the eigenvalues of the linearization.

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Figure 3.The different types of singularities and closed orbits in dimension two.
The index one singularities are distinguished by the sign of the divergence.
The two lemmas follow immediately from Lemma 2.44, Lemma 2.25 and Definition 2.43.
Remark 2.47(Symplectic Case).In the case of symplectic diffeomorphisms and flows on a
symplectic manifoldp𝑋,Ωq, any hyperbolic fixed point or closed orbit must have index given
by half the dimension of𝑋. This follows immediately from the corresponding statement for
hyperbolicsymplecticmatrices. Intheconformallysymplecticsetting,thereisnosuchrestriction.
2.6.No Anosov Characteristic Foliations.So far, we have introduced a special class of confor-
mally symplectic dynamical system: characteristic foliations (or flows) on contact Hamiltonian
manifolds. Here we discuss a non-trivial constraint on the dynamics of characteristic foliations.
Precisely, we prove that characteristic flows cannot be Anosov, generalizing a recent result of
Asaoka-Mitsumatsu [4] for contactomorphisms.
Theorem 2.48(No Anosovs).LetΦbe a characteristic flow of a closed contact Hamiltonian manifold
pΣ,𝜂q. ThenΦis not an Anosov flow.
Anosov flows are a fundamental class of smooth dynamical system that include geodesic flows
on hyperbolic manifolds and suspensions of hyperbolic torus automorphisms. They have been
central objects of study in dynamics since the work of Anosov [2] and Smale [53], and thus their
exclusion from characteristic flows is indeed a major constraint.
FortheproofofTheorem2.48,wewillneedtorecallsomebasicfactsaboutAnosovflows. For
a more complete reference, we refer the reader to the monograph of Fisher-Hasselblatt [31].
Definition 2.49(Anosov).A smooth flowΦgenerated by a vector field𝑉on a closed manifold
𝑀isAnosovif there areΦ-invariant continuous sub-bundles
𝐸𝑠pΦqĂ𝑇𝑀and𝐸 𝑢pΦqĂ𝑇𝑀
called thestable bundleand theunstable bundle, such that the tangent bundle splits as
𝑇𝑀“spanp𝑉q‘𝐸 𝑠pΦq‘𝐸 𝑢pΦq
and such that there are constants𝐴,𝐵ą0such that, for all sufficiently large𝑇ą0, we have
|𝑇Φ𝑇p𝑣q|ď𝐴expp´𝐵𝑇qfor𝑣P𝐸 𝑠pΦqand|𝑇Φ ´𝑇p𝑣q|ď𝐴expp´𝐵𝑇qfor𝑣P𝐸 𝑢pΦq
Definition2.50(Weak-(Un)stableFoliations).Theweak-stablefoliation𝑊 𝑠pΦqandtheweak-unstable
foliation𝑊 𝑢pΦqare the continuous foliations with smooth leaves tangent to the distributions
spanp𝑉q‘𝐸 𝑠pΦqandspanp𝑉q‘𝐸 𝑢pΦq

===== PAGE 11 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 11
We denote the leaves of the weak-stable and weak-unstable foliations containing a point𝑝by
𝑊𝑠pΦ,𝑝qand𝑊 𝑢pΦ,𝑝q
Remark 2.51.The stable and unstable bundles, and the corresponding weak-stable and weak-
unstable foliations, of an Anosov flow are unique.
Lemma 2.52(Invariant Bundles).LetΦbe an Anosov flow on a manifold𝑀and let𝐹Ă𝑇𝑀be a
Φ-invariant𝑘-plane field. Then
𝐸𝑠pΦqĂ𝐹at a point𝑝if and only if𝐸 𝑠pΦqĂ𝐹along all of𝑊 𝑠pΦ,𝑝q
Then𝐸 𝑠pΦqĂ𝐹along the entire weak-stable leaf𝑊𝑠pΦ,𝑝qcontaining𝑝.
Exercise 2.53.Prove Lemma 2.52 following the proof for Anosov diffeomorphisms given in [4].
Proof.(Theorem2.48)SupposeforcontradictionthatΦisanAnosovcharacteristicflowonpΣ,𝜂q.
Fix a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆and a volume form𝜇such that
𝜄𝑍𝜇“𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1
SinceΦis characteristic, there is a smooth family of functions
𝐹:RˆΣÑRsuch thatΦ ˚
𝑇𝜆“𝐹 𝑇¨𝜆
We assume (after possibly reversing orientations) that the leaves of the stable foliation are more
than half the dimension ofΣ. Consider the set
𝑆“t𝑝PΣ:𝐸 𝑠pΦqĂ𝜂at the point𝑝u
Weclaimthat𝑆isnon-empty. Indeed, supposeotherwise. Thenateverypoint𝑝, wecanchoose
a vector𝑊P𝐸 𝑠pΦqat𝑝such that𝜆p𝑊q“1. Then we compute that
𝐹𝑇p𝑝q“𝐹 𝑇p𝑝q¨|𝜆 𝑝p𝑊q|“|Φ ˚
𝑇𝜆p𝑊q𝑝|“|𝜆p𝑇Φ 𝑇p𝑊qq𝑝|ď|𝜆 𝑝|¨|𝑇Φ 𝑇p𝑊q𝑝|ď𝐴expp´𝐵𝑇q
for some𝐴,𝐵ą0. Since𝑍generates the flowΦ, we can compute that
𝜄𝑍pΦ˚
𝑇𝜇q“Φ ˚
𝑇p𝜄𝑍𝜇q“Φ ˚
𝑇p𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛q“𝐹 𝑛
𝑇¨𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛
On the other hand,𝑍is nowhere vanishing by the Anosov assumption. Therefore the interior
productwith𝑍isalinearisomorphismfromvolumeformstomultiplesof𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1. Itfollows
that we must have
Φ˚
𝑇𝜇“𝐹 𝑛
𝑇¨𝜇and thus
ż
Σ
𝜇“
ż
Σ
Φ˚
𝑇𝜇ď𝐴 𝑛 expp´𝑛𝐵𝑇q¨
ż
Σ
𝜇
For sufficiently large𝑇, this is clearly impossible. Thus𝑆must be non-empty.
Finally,takeanypoint𝑝in𝑆. ByLemma2.52,theentirestableleaf𝑊 𝑠pΦ,𝑝qistangentto𝜂. In
particular,𝑊 𝑠pΦ,𝑝qis isotropic. However, the dimension must then be half of that ofΣor less.
This is a contradiction.□
3.Convexity And Characteristic Dynamics
A contact Hamiltonian manifold is convex if the contactization admits a translation invariant
contact structure. More precisely, we adopt the following definition.
Definition 3.1(Convex Structure).A contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qisconvexif there is a
smooth function𝑢such thatp𝑢,´𝑑𝑢qis a framing, or equivalently
𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝜆is a contact form on𝐶Σ“r´𝜖,𝜖sˆΣ
We refer to the function𝑢as aframing functionfor the (convex) contact Hamiltonian manifold.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Convexity is the direct analogue of stability for Hamiltonian manifolds and hypersurfaces in
symplectic manifolds [19]. Alternatively, Definition 3.1 is simply the intrinsic formulation of
convexity for hypersurfaces in contact manifolds, in the sense of Giroux [39].
Definition3.2(ConvexHypersurface).AhypersurfaceΣinacontactmanifoldp𝑌,𝜉qisconvexif
there exists a contact vector field𝑉that is transverse toΣ.
Convex hypersurfaces are a fundamental tool in contact topology. In this section, we discuss
recent breakthroughs in the theory of convexity from a dynamical perspective, partly using the
intrinsic language of contact Hamiltonian manifolds. These results are variously due to Giroux
[38,39], Honda-Huang [42,43], Breen [13,14], Breen-Honda-Huang [15] and the author [16].
3.1.HistoryAndMotivation.Althoughthedefinitionofconvexhypersurfacesisfairlynatural,
theirkeyroleincontacttopologymaynotbecompletelyobviousatfirstglancetotheuninitiated
reader. Let us take a brief motivational and historical detour before proceeding further.
Convex hypersurfaces were introduced by Giroux [38,39] in the early 1990s, who established
many of their fundamental properties in dimension three. Giroux was originally motivated by
thenotionofaconvexcontactmanifoldintroducedbyEliashberg-Gromov[26,Def3.5.A]. Thisis
acontactmanifoldthatadmitsaMorsefunctionthatiscontactinthefollowingsense(cf.[43,51]).
Definition 3.3(Contact Morse).A Morse function𝐹on a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qiscontactif
there is a gradient-like vector field𝑉that is contact (i.e. that preserves the contact structure).
Morsetheoryplaysafundamentalroleinsmoothtopology,andthusitisclearlydesirabletohave
a well-developed Morse theory for contact manifolds. However, it was originally not even clear
that contact Morse functions exist on any contact manifold. This problem was posed explicitly
by Eliashberg-Gromov in [26, p. 34].
Question 3.4.Does every closed contact manifold have a contact Morse function?
In [39], Giroux resolved this problem in dimension three using convex surface theory.
Theorem 3.5(Giroux).Every closed contact 3-manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qadmits a contact Morse function.
In smooth topology, a Morse function𝐹is equivalent to a handlebody decomposition, which
itself may be viewed as a 1-parameter family of manifolds, the regular level setsΣp𝑎q“𝐹´1p𝑎q,
with a discrete set of simple changes (surgeries coming from handle attachments) that occur
when the parameter crosses a critical value. It is simple to see that
Σp𝑎qĂp𝑌,𝜉qis a convex hypersurface if𝐹is a contact Morse function
The key observation of Giroux was that it is actually simpler to construct this family of convex
surfaces in dimension three, rather than constructing the contact Morse function directly. We
will discuss Giroux’s proof method later in this section.
Following the work of Giroux, convex surfaces developed into the fundamental tool in the
theory of contact 3-manifolds. Landmark applications include the Giroux correspondence be-
tween open book decompsotions and contact structures in dimension three due to Giroux [38];
thefinitenessoftorsionfreecontactstructuresduetoColin-Giroux-Honda[21];thediscoveryof
3-manifoldswithnotightcontactstructures[28]andtightcontactstructureswithnofillings[29]
byHonda-Etnyre;andsolutionstomanyclassificationproblems[20,23,40,41,55]. Wewillreview
many of Giroux’s key results later in this section.
In dimensions five and higher, convex hypersurfaces were quite poorly understood until the
recent, groundbreaking work of Honda-Huang [42,43] who established very general existence
and approximation results for convex hypersurfaces. An immediate application of their work
was a proof of Theorem 3.5 in any dimension via a higher dimensional adaptation of Giroux’s

===== PAGE 13 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 13
Figure 4.Giroux’s strategy for constructing contact Morse functions used an
analysis of the family of level sets given by a Morse function and specifically the
analysis (and modification) of their characteristic foliations.
strategy. Their work also lead to further applications, such as a well developed handlebody
theory for convex hypersurfaces, including a higher dimensional theory of bypasses, and the
completed proof of the Giroux correspondence between open book decompositions and contact
structuresinalldimensionsbyBreen-Honda-Huang[15]. Duetospaceconstraints,wewillfocus
on only a small part of this story. However, we encourage the reader to investigate these topics
further in the references [13,15,42,43].
3.2.Dividing Set And Liouville Halves.We now return to a more formal discussion of convex
contact Hamiltonian manifolds (or equivalently, convex hypersurfaces). A key feature of convex
hypersurfaces is the existence of a dividing set.
Definition3.6(DividingSet).ThedividingsetΓofaconvexcontactHamiltonianmanifoldpΣ,𝜂q
with respect to a framing function𝑢is the hypersurface
Γ“t𝑢“0uĂΣ
The regionsΣ` andΣ ´ where𝑢is non-negative and non-positive are respectively called the
positiveandnegativehalves ofΣ. We have a splitting
Σ“Σ `YΓ Σ´
Figure 5.Characterstic foliations on the torus with dividing sets in green.
Lemma 3.7(Dividing Set Is Contact).The dividing setΓĂΣis a contact sub-manifold transverse to
the characteristic foliation that is independent of the framing function up to isotopy.
Proof.Let𝑢be any framing function. By Definition 2.27, the differential form (2.6) is a volume
form𝜇. It follows that
𝑑𝑢‰0along the subsetΓ“𝑢 ´1p0q

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
ThereforeΓis a transversely cut out hypersurface. In order for𝑑𝑢^𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 to be a volume
form, it must be the case that𝑑𝑢p𝑍q‰0alongΓwhere𝑍is the associated characteristic vector
field to the volume form𝜇. It follows that𝑍is transverse toΓ. The independence of𝑢up to
isotopy follows from the contractibility of the space of framing functions (see Remark 2.30).□
Lemma 3.8(Halves Are Liouville).The positive and negative halvesΣ` andΣ´ of a convex contact
Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qare conformally Liouville domains.
Proof.We prove the result forΣ`, as the proof is analogous forΣ´. Note thatΣ` is isomorphic
as a contact Hamiltonian manifold to𝑆“Φ𝑇pΣ`qwhereΦ 𝑇 is the time𝑇characteristic flow. So
it suffices to prove that𝑆is conformally Liouville. For this, note that if we choos𝑇ă0, then
𝑆ĂΣ ` is disjoint from the dividing setΓ“𝑢´1p0qand we can rescale𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝜆by a positive
smooth function so that
𝑢“1on𝑆and𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝜆“𝑑𝑠`𝜆on𝑆
Ontheotherhand,𝑑𝑠`𝜆iscontactifandonlyif𝜆isaLiouvilleform. Moreover,thecharacteristic
vector field onΣ, which agrees with the Liouville vector field of𝑆“Σ`, points outward along
Γ“BΣ `. Thus𝑆“Σ ` is (conformally) a Liouville domain.□
3.3.Morse-Smale Criterion.A basic problem is to determine if a given contact Hamiltonian
manifoldisconvex. Asithappens,themostusefulcriteriathatimplyconvexityaredynamicalin
nature,andthisisakeyinteractionpointbetweenconvexhypersurfacesanddynamicalsystems.
Here we discuss the original criterion observed by Giroux [39] and generalized by Breen [13].
Recallthatawanderingpoint𝑥withrespecttoaflowΦisapointsuchthereisaneighborhood
𝑈of𝑥whose image under the flow is disjoint from the original open set, for large times. That
is, there is a time𝑆such that
Φ𝑇p𝑈qX𝑈“Hfor all𝑇ě𝑆
Thenon-wandering setNWpΦqof a flow is the set of points that are not wandering. Note that
every periodic orbit lies in the non-wandering set. Moreover, the non-wandering points and set
depend only on the underlying singular line field𝐿.
Definition 3.9(Morse-Smale).A singular line field𝐿on a smooth manifoldΣisMorse-Smaleif
(a) thenon-wanderingsetconsistsoffinitelymanynon-degenerateclosedhyperbolicorbits.
(b) the stable and unstable manifolds of any pair of periodic orbits𝛾and𝜂are transverse.
Note that periodic orbits include singularities in this definition.
Example 3.10(Gradient-Like).A vector field (or singilar line field) that is gradient-like with
respect to a Morse function and that satisfies the Smale transversality condition is Morse-Smale.
These are precisley the Morse-Smale vector fields that have no closed orbits (only singularities).
Theorem 3.11(Morse-Smale Criterion).A contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qwith Morse-Smale
characteristic foliation is convex.
Corollary 3.12(Gradient-like Smale).A contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qwhose characteristic
foliation is gradient-like, and that satisfies the Smale transversality condition, is convex.
Theorem 3.11 is due to Giroux [39] in dimension three and to Breen [13] in general. Corollary
3.12 is due to Honda-Huang in higher dimensions [43]. We now sketch the proof of Theorem
3.11.
Proof.(Sketch) The basic problem is to construct the splitting ofΣinto a positive halfΣ` and
negative halfΣ´ with the dividing setΓin the middle. Under any splitting of this kind, the
non-wandering set of the characteristic foliation
NWpΣ𝜂qĂΣ

===== PAGE 15 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 15
must itself divide into two halves contained inΣ` andΣ ´. Indeed, all of the points inΓare
wandering since the flowline through such a point must flow intoΣ´ and out ofΣ`, never to
return toΓ. Our strategy is to first identify the correct splitting
(3.1)NWpΣ 𝜂q“NW `pΣ𝜂q\NW ´pΣ𝜂qwhereNW ˘pΣ𝜂q“Σ ˘XNWpΣ 𝜂q
and then to reconstructΣ` andΣ ´ from this splitting of the non-wandering set. To do this,
note that the characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 is Morse-Smale. Thus the setNWpΣ𝜂qis precisely the
set of hyperbolic periodic points (and singularities) of the characteristic foliation. Lemmas 2.45
and 2.46 then completely determine which of these closed orbits and singularities are positive
Liouville and which are negative Liouville. This determines the splitting (3.1) completely.
This reduces the proof to the problem of reconstructingΣ` andΣ´ from the non-wandering
componentsNW`pΣ𝜂qandNW ´pΣ𝜂q. In fact, this is essentially the problem of reconstructing a
handlebody decomposition from the critical points of a graditent-like vector field.
Figure 6.The splitting of a contact Hamiltonian 2-manifold with Morse-Smale
characteristic foliation, reconstructed from critical points.
Precisely, consider the simplified setting whereΣ𝜂 is gradient-like and there are no critical
points of middle index𝑛. In this case,NW`pΣ𝜂qandNW ´pΣ𝜂qis simply the set of all of the
critical points of index below𝑛and above𝑛, respectively. SinceΣ𝜂 satisfies the Smale property,
there is a corresponding handle decomposition
Σ“Σ `YΣ´
intothehandlebodyΣ `ofindex𝑛´1andlowerhandlesandthehandlebodyΣ ´ofindex𝑛`1and
higherhandles. ThekeypointisthatdesiredcontactHamiltonianforms𝜆 ` and𝜆´ restrictingto
positiveLiouvilleformsonΣ ` andΣ´ cannowbeconstructedinductively,handle-by-handle. In
particular, there is sufficient flexibility in the choice of positive (or negative) Liouville form near
each critical point, so that a Liouville form on the union of the𝑘-handles can be extended over a
neighborhood of thep𝑘`1q-critical points. This argument is carried out carefully in [43, §2].
InthegeneralcasewherethecharacteristicfoliationΣ 𝜂 hasclosedorbits,asimilarreconstruc-
tionprocedurecanbecarriedout. Whilesingularitiesstillcorrespondtoordinaryhandles,closed
hyperbolic orbits correspond to certain round handles that resemble an ordinary handle times a
circle. These round handles correspond to the tubular neighborhood of the stable manifold of
the given orbit. This proof is carried out in detail by Breen [13].□
3.4.Genericity In Dimension Two.The most important applications of the Morse-Smale crite-
rion (Theorem 3.11) are various results that address the abundance of convexity among hyper-
surfaces in contact manifolds, due to Giroux [39] and Honda-Huang [43]. A priori, it could be

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
thecasethatagivencontactmanifoldhasfewnon-trivialconvexhypersurfaces. Tothecontrary,
the results of Giroux and Honda-Huang state that convex hypersurfaces are abundant.
Let us start by explaining the smooth genericity result due to Giroux [39]. Here is the precise
statement of this result.
Theorem 3.13(Giroux Genericity).Convex surfaces are𝐶8-generic in the space of smooth embedded
surfaces in any contact 3-manifoldp𝑌,𝜉q.
This result is follows more-or-less immediately from Theorem 3.11 along with the analogue (for
characteristic foliations) of the following famous result of Peixoto.
Theorem3.14(Morse-SmaleGenericityInSurfaces).Morse-Smaleflowsare𝐶 8-genericinthespace
of all smooth flows on any closed surfaceΣ.
Peixoto’s result was a landmark result in low-dimensional dynamics, and it is especially
remarkable due to its utter failure in higher dimensions. The proof is fairly straightforward
using well-known facts in smooth dynamics, so we sketch it here.
Proof.(Sketch) The Poincaré-Bendixson Theorem states that the non-wandering set of a surface
flowisaunionoffixedpoints(singularities),closedorbitsandgraphsconsistingofsaddlepoint
singularities connected by heteroclinic trajectories.
Figure 7.The three types of non-wandering components.
We can apply the Kupka-Smale theorem [46,53] to𝐶8-approximate the flow by a Kupka-Smale
flowwhereallofthesingularitiesandperiodicorbitsarenon-degenerate,andwheretheunstable
and stable manifolds of the singularities intersect transversely. This prevents any heteroclinic
connections between saddle points, leaving only singularities and closed orbits. The finiteness
of the critical points and orbits follows from the fact that the non-wandering set is compact, and
each singularity and closed orbit is isolated.□
The analogue of Theorem 3.14 in the setting of characteristic surfaces states that surfaces in
contact3-manifoldswithMorse-Smalecharacteristicfoliationare𝐶 8-generic. Theorem3.13then
follows from Theorem 3.11.
3.5.Density In Higher Dimensions.In higher dimensions, a density (or genericity) result
for convex hypersurfaces in the spirit of Theorem 3.13 remained completely open for several
decades. It was widely suspected that the genericity result failed in dimensions higher than
two, although proposed counter-examples of Mori [48,49] turned out to be incorrect due to the
work of Breen [13].. This situation was finally addressed in the 2020s by groundbreaking work
of Honda-Huang [43] who proved the following result.
Theorem 3.15(Honda-Huang Density).Convex hypersurfaces are𝐶 0-dense in the space of smooth
embedded surfaces in any contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qof any dimension.

===== PAGE 17 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 17
LikeTheorem3.13,theproofisanapplicationoftheMorse-Smalecriterion(Theorem3.11)and
the following density result for Morse-Smale (and in fact, gradient-like) characteristic foliations.
Theorem 3.16(Gradient-like Density).Fix a contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂on a closed manifoldΣ.
Then there is an arbitrarily𝐶0-small𝐶 8-isotopy𝜂𝑠 ambient in𝐶Σsuch that
𝜂0“𝜂and𝜂 1 has gradient-like characteristic foliation
Moreover, the trajectories of the characteristic foliation can be made arbitrarily short with respect to any
chosen Riemannian metric.
Theorem3.16hasanextremelycomplicatedproofwithsubtletiesthatarewellbeyondthescope
of this article. A simplified proof of the result was given by Eliashberg-Pancholi [27]. Let us
sketch the latter proof of Theorem 3.16 in [27] at a very rough level.
One starts the proof by picking a transversal contact sub-manifoldΓĂΣgiven by a disjoint
union of many small contact disks of codimension one. This transversal must be ablocking
collection,inthesensethateverytrajectoryofthecharacteristicfoliationhitstheinteriorofΓafter
some small bounded amount of length. This map can be extended to an embedding
𝑈“r0,1s 𝑠ˆΓÑΣ
of a small segment of symplectization ofΓintoΣ. We then modify the contact Hamiltonian
structure and the characteristic foliation on the image of𝑈by replacing each of the components
with a certain plug that is ambiently homotopic to the original contact Hamiltonian structure.
Letusbrieflydescribetherequiredpropertiesoftheplugandgiveapicture. Let𝑃denotethe
productr0,1sˆD 𝑚 and𝐿 std denotethelinefieldspannedbyB 𝑠. Wedecomposetheboundaryas
Bi𝑃“0ˆD 𝑚 Bo𝑃“1ˆD 𝑚 Bt𝑃“r0,1s 𝑠ˆBD 𝑚
Thesearerespectivelytheinwardboundary,outwardboundaryandtangentboundary,namedforthe
fact that the vector field𝐿std points into, out of, and tangent to𝑃in these parts of the boundary.
Definition 3.17(Plug).Agradient-like plugof trapping size𝜖is an oriented singular line field
𝐿on the standard tube𝑃“r0,1s 𝑠ˆD𝑚
with the following properties.
(a) (Boundary Standard) The singular line field𝐿is the span of𝐿std“spanpB 𝑠qnearB𝑃.
(b) (Gradient-Like) The singular line field is Morse-Smale and gradient-like.
(c) (Limit Sets) Any trajectory𝛾of𝐿starting at a point𝑝inB i𝑃such thatdistp𝑝,B t𝑃q ą𝜖
must limit to a critical point in the forward direction.
(d) (Monodromy) Any trajectory of𝐿starting at𝑝“0ˆ𝑥PB i𝑃either converges to a critical
point of𝐿or ends at a point1ˆ𝑦P B o𝑃withdistp𝑥,𝑦q ă𝜖wheredistdenotes the
distance in the disk with respect to the standard metric.
Remark 3.18.[27, Rmk 2.5] A gradient-like plug of trapping size𝜖is also a gradient-plug of
trapping size2𝜖for when the orientation of𝐿std is reversed. In particular, trajectories that end
onB o𝑃far away from the boundary must originate at critical points.
Definition 3.19(Contact Hamiltonian Plug).Acontact Hamiltonian plug𝜂of trapping size𝜖and
height𝛿is a contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂on𝑃“r0,1s 𝑠ˆD 2𝑛´1 such that
(a) The characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 is a gradient-like plug of trapping size𝜖.
(b) The contact Hamiltonian strucure𝜂is ambiently homotopic to the standard structure
𝜂std“spanpB 𝑠q‘𝜉 std via an isotopy in the contactization𝐶𝑃of𝐶0-size less than𝛿.

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Figure 8.A 2-dimensional plug for small trapping size.
GivenablockingcollectionΓthickenedtoanembeddingr0,1sˆΓÑΣ,onemayreplaceeach
component with a gradient-like plug to get apluggedsingular line field. One may show that, if
the trapping size is small enough, then every trajectory of the plugged line field must begin and
end on a non-degenerate singularity in one of the plugs. After a further𝐶8-small perturbation,
the plugged flow becomes gradient-like and Morse-Smale. This discussion reduces Theorem
3.16 to the following existence result for plugs (cf. [27, Prop 4.1]).
Theorem3.20(PlugExistence).Forevery𝛿and𝜖,thereisacontactHamiltonianplugp𝑃,𝜂qoftrapping
size𝜖and height𝛿.
Theorem 3.20 is where the majority of the difficulty in Theorem 3.16 lies. The proof given by
Eliashberg-Pancholi [27] follows several stages. We conclude this part by discussing these steps.
First, one proves that one can construct a contact Hamiltonian plug of height𝛿from a contact
Hamiltonian plug of any height (cf. [27, §5]). This is accomplished by constructing the small
height plug by layering many small copies of the large height plug and exploiting an advanta-
geous scaling law for the height under scaling of the regionr0,1sˆD2𝑛´1. This allows us to
ignore the height in the remainder of the proof.
Second, one constructs a contact Hamiltonian plug of trapping size𝜖for any𝜖in dimension
two. This can be done extremely explicitly, and a picture of such a plug is given in Figure 8.
Denote the plug of dimension two by
p𝑃2,𝜂 𝜖q
Using the 2-dimensional plug, one can construct certain higher dimensionalquasi-plugs. A
quasi-plug is similar to a contact Hamiltonian plug where𝑃is replaced by
𝑄“r0,1sˆ𝑌
where𝑌iscontactmanifoldwithboundary. Hereonemayviewthisasthecylinderr0,1sˆ𝐶𝑊
where𝐶𝑊is the contactization of the Weinstein domain𝑊. The definition of a quasi-plug
of trapping size𝜖is the same as the definition of a plug, except for the monodromy property
(Definition 3.17(d)) which is replaced the following modified monodromy
(d’) (Monodromy’) Let𝛾trajectory of the characteristic foliation of𝑄starting at0ˆ𝑥PB i𝑄
and ending at1ˆ𝑦PB o𝑄. Then there is a characteristic flowline𝜁of the characteristic
foliation ofB𝑌, as a hypersurface in𝑌, such thatdistp𝑥,𝜁qă𝜖anddistp𝑦,𝜁qă𝜖.
NotethatiftheflowlinesofthecharacteristicfoliationofB𝑌areallshorterthan𝜖,thenanquasi-
plug of trapping size𝜖is a plug of trapping size𝜖(with the disk replaced by a different contact
manifold).

===== PAGE 19 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 19
Finally, one constructs a plug on𝑃. This step is carried out by perturbing the diskD2𝑛´1 to
a new domain𝑌ĂD 2𝑛´1 such that𝑌has very short Morse-Smale characteristic foliation, then
usingthequasi-plugconstructionfromtheprevioussteptoconstructaplugonr0,1sˆ𝑌,which
is then also a plug onr0,1sˆD 2𝑛´1 “𝑃. An interesting detail of this step is that it requires
induction on dimension: one must have already proven the approximation result Theorem 3.16
in order to find the approximation𝑌.
3.6.Non-Density In Higher Dimensions.A longstanding question following the work of
Giroux was the extent to which the smooth genericity of convexity (Theorem 3.13) extends
to higher dimensions. The work of Honda-Huang [43] did not resolve this problem [43, Rmk
1.2.4] and moreover their methods were not applicable to its resolution, due the evident failure
of the density of gradient-like characteristic foliations in even the𝐶1-topology. This situation
was finally rectified by recent work of the author [16] where the following result was proven.
Theorem3.21(RobustNon-Convexity).Thereareclosedorientedhypersurfacesinanycontactmanifold
of dimension five or greater that cannot be approximated by convex hypersurfaces in the𝐶2-topology.
Based on this result and inspired by terminology from the smooth dynamics literature, we
introduced the following terminology in [16].
Definition 3.22(Robust Non-Convexity).A contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qisrobustly non-
convexif𝜂cannotbeapproximatedinthe𝐶 2-topologybyaconvexcontactHamiltonianstructure.
Themechanismforrobustnon-convexityisdynamical,andithintsatafundamentalrelationship
with generic dichotomies in differentiable dynamics as pioneered by Bonatti-Diaz [7,8,10] and
others. Let us conclude this section by sketching the proof of Theorem 3.21.
ThestartingpointfortheproofofTheorem3.21isthesimpleobservationthatthecharacteristic
foliation of a convex hypersurface (or contact Hamiltonian manifold) cannot be transitive.
Definition3.23(Transitive).AsmoothflowΦonamanifold𝑀istransitiveifithasadenseorbit.
Lemma 3.24(Non-Transitivity).LetpΣ,𝜂qbe a convex contact Hamiltonian manifold. Then the
characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 (or equivalently, any characteristic flow) is not transitive.
Proof.IfpΣ,𝜂qis convex, then admits a dividing setΓbounding a sub-domainΣ ´ ĂΣsuch
thatΣ 𝜂 is transverse toΓ, pointing intoΣ´. Therefore, any trajectory can only visit a small
neighborhood ofΓonce, which makes density impossible.□
Theorem 3.21 is thus reduced to the problem of constructing a contact Hamiltonian manifold
pΣ,𝜂qwith robustly transitive characteristic foliation. To understand this problem, consider
the analogous problem in the setting of ordinary differentiable dynamics. In that setting, the
simplest example of robustly transitive flows are transitive Anosov flows, which are structurally
stable. Unfortunately, Theorem 2.48 shows that we cannot hope to find such examples in the
setting of characteristic foliations.
Luckily, the problem of finding non-hyperbolic and robustly transitive dynamical systems
was addressed in the smooth setting by seminal work of Bonatti-Diaz [7]. The key step to
their construction was the construction of an object called ablender[6], which is the primary
mechanism for such phenomena. Roughly speaking, a blender is a type of structure consisting
oftwohyperbolicperiodicorbitsofcomplementaryindex,whosestableandunstablemanifolds
intersect robustly along a larger-than-expected set. In particular, this produces a robust cycle
of heteroclinics connecting the two points. Blenders were introduced in [7] and subsequently
became a fundamental tool in differentiable dynamics [6,8,11].
The construction of a blender given in e.g. [7] is delicate and several obstacles appear in the
adaptation of this construction to the contact case. Regardless, this can be done and this results
in the following theorem.

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Figure 9.A cartoon of a blender. Here the two points in black are the interacting
periodic points and the red curve is one of the heteroclinics.
Theorem 3.25.[16] Let𝑆Λbe the unit cosphere bundle of a hyperbolic manifold and letΦ:𝑆ΛÑ𝑆Λ
be the time-𝑇map of the (hyperbolic) geodesic flow where𝑇is the period of a closed orbit. Then there is a
𝐶8-small,𝐶 1-robustly transitive contact perturbationΨcontaining a blender𝐵.
Using the suspension construction for contactomorphisms (Example 2.10), this can be used
to produce a contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂with𝐶2-robustly transitive characteristic foliation
on the productΣ“R{Zˆ𝑆Λ. For a specific family of hyperbolic manifoldsΛ, one can find
Legendrian embeddingsΛÑR 2𝑛`1 into standard contactp2𝑛`1q-space using Murphy’s h-
principle [50]. This can then be used to construct an embeddingpΣ,𝜂q ÑR 2𝑛`1, yielding
Theorem 3.21.
Remark 3.26(Topologies).The transition from the𝐶 2-topology in Theorem 3.21 to the𝐶 1-
topology in Theorem 3.25 comes from the fact that the map from contact Hamiltonian forms to
characteristic vector fields induced by (2.2) to is continuous in the𝐶2-topology on the domain
and the𝐶 1-topology on the target.
TheproofofTheorem3.21suggestsapotentialconnectionbetweenrobustnon-hyperbolicityand
convexity. We will discuss some conjectures and questions in this direction in the next section.
4.Problems, Questions And Conjectures
We conclude with a discussion of various problems, questions and conjectures about the
topology of contact Hamiltonian manifolds and the dynamics of their characteristic foliations.
4.1.Existence And Tightness.It is natural to ask when a specific even-dimensional manifold
admits a contact Hamiltonian structure, or more restrictively a convex structure. The analogous
problem for symplectic and contact structures has been a major topic of research since the
emergence of symplectic topology (cf. [47, Problem 1]).
The formal existence problem for contact Hamiltonian structures (cf. [18]) is equivalent to the
formal existence problem for contact structures on the contactization. More precisely, recall the
following definition.
Definition4.1(AlmostContact).A(cooriented)almostcontactstructure𝐸onanorientedp2𝑛`1q-
manifold𝑌consists of a cooriented hyperplane field
𝐸Ă𝑇𝑌with a fiberwise symplectic structure𝜔

===== PAGE 21 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 21
The existence problem for contact structures was largely addressed by the fundamental work
of Borman-Eliashberg-Murphy [12]. There the authors introduced the notion of anovertwisted
contact structure on a contact manifold in any dimension, and proved the following result.
Theorem 4.2(Contact H-Principle).Any almost contact structure𝐸on a closed manifold𝑌is isotopic
(through almost contact structures) to an overtwisted contact structure𝜉on𝑌.
This implies a corresponding existence result for convex contact Hamiltonian structures.
Proposition 4.3(Existence).LetΣbe a closed oriented2𝑛-manifold and let𝐸be an almost contact
structure onr´1,1sˆΣ. Then there is an convex contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂onΣsuch that the
induced contact structure𝜉on the contactization𝐶Σ“r´1,1sˆΣis homotopic to𝐸.
Proof.ByapplyingtheBorman-Eliashberg-Murphyℎ-principleforcontactstructures[12]wecan
find an overtwisted contact structure𝜉onr´1,1sˆΣhomotopic to𝐸. By applying Theorem
3.15, we can then perturb the embedding
Σ“0ˆΣÑr´1,1sˆΣto a𝐶 0-close embedding𝜄:ΣÑr´1,1sˆΣ
such that𝜂“𝜄 ˚𝜉is convex. The contactization𝐶Σ“r´1,1sˆΣwith respect to𝜂then embeds
intor´1,1sˆΣbyLemma2.33byanembeddingthatishomotopictotheidentity. Itfollowsthat
the contact form on the contactization is homotopic to𝐸.□
Contact Hamiltonian manifolds possess a tight-overtwisted dichotomy that is inherited from
the contact setting. In particular, we adopt the following terminology.
Definition4.4(Overtwisted).AcontactHamiltonianstructure𝜂onamanifoldΣisovertwistedif
any neighborhood ofΣin its contactization is overtwisted.
It seems likely that the contact Hamiltonian structure constructed in Proposition 4.3, via the
Borman-Eliashberg-Murphyexistenceresult,isovertwisted. However,thisisnotimmediateand
thus we pose the following question.
Question 4.5.Is the contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂from Proposition 4.3 always overtwisted?
More generally, it is natural to ask if every contact Hamiltonian manifold admits a tight contact
Hamiltonian manifold.
Question 4.6(Tight Structures).LetΣbe a closed 4-manifold (or more generally,2𝑛-manifold)
such thatr´1,1sˆΣis almost contact. DoesΣadmit a tight contact Hamiltonian structure?
Remark 4.7.It is well known by work of Etnyre-Honda [28] that there are closed 3-manifolds
admittingnotightcontactstructures. Question4.6asksforasimilarexampleindimensionfour.
Remark 4.8.By applying Theorem 3.15, it is simple to show that any2𝑛-manifold admitting a
tight contact Hamiltonian structure also has a tight and convex one.
4.2.Doubles.There is a rich source of contact Hamiltonian manifolds that are both tight and
convex, by taking certain kinds of doubles of Lioiville domains.
Example 4.9(Doubles).Letp𝑊,𝜆qdenote the Weinstein (or more generally, Liouville) domain
andΦ:B𝑊ÑB𝑊be a contactomorphism of the boundary. Thedoubleis given by
Σp𝑊,Φq“𝑊Y
Φ
¯𝑊
The contact Hamiltonian structures𝜂“kerp𝜆qon𝑊and ¯𝑊glue together to give a convex
contact Hamiltonian structure onΣp𝑊,Φq. Moreover, this structure only depends only on the
contact isotopy classes ofΦup to isotopy through convex contact Hamiltonian structures.
Lemma 4.10.The doublepΣp𝑊,Φq,𝜂qis tight ifΦextends to an exact symplectomorphism𝑊Ñ𝑊.

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
Proof.Thisfollowsfromthefactthatthecontacthomologyofaconvexsuturedneighborhoodof
Σp𝑊,Φqis non-vanishing. Indeed, letΓ“B𝑊and consider the augmentations
𝜖` :𝐴pΓqÑQand𝜖 ´ :𝐴pΓqÑQ
induced by the fillingsp𝑊,Idqandp𝑊,Φq. Here it is key to specify the precise identifications
IdandΦofΓwith the contact boundaries of the fillings in question. By Avdek [5, Thm 1.1.1],
the contact homology of a neighborhood ofΣp𝑊,Φqis non-vanishing if and only if𝜖` is dga-
homotopic to𝜖´. In the case whereΦextends to a symplectomorphism of𝑊, one can deduce
that in fact𝜖` “𝜖 ´ for appropriate choice of data (e.g. almost complex structures, Kuranishi
data, etc). This yields the desired result.□
Incontrasttotheaboveresult, itisalsopossibleforadoubleΣp𝑊,Φqtobeovertwisted. Indeed,
this occurs in the case of an overtwisted bypass as discussed by Honda-Huang [42].
Itisinterestingtoaskiftheovertwistednessofadoublecanbeusedtodetectexoticsymplectic
phenomena. In particular, we pose the following question.
Question4.11(OvertwistedDoubles).DoesthereexistaofaLiouville2𝑛-manifold𝑊suchthat
Φextends as a diffeomorphism over𝑊andΣp𝑊,Φqis overtwisted
Any contactomorphism as in Question 4.11 would represent a type of relative exotic behavior
distinguishing the symplectic and smooth categories.
4.3.Convexity Criteria.The Morse-Smale criterion for convexity is an essential ingredient in
the proofs in Section 3.4 and 3.5. This motivates the following problem.
Problem 4.12(Convexity Criteria).Give (necessary and sufficient, or generic) criteria, via the
dynamics of the characteristic foliation, for a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qto be convex.
Remark4.13.Hereacriterionisgenericifthecriterionimpliesconvexityfora𝐶 2-comeagersubset
of all contact Hamiltonian structures.
The Morse-Smale criterion in Theorem 3.11 for convexity is an example of a sufficient convexity
criterion,whichisgenericallynecessaryandsufficientindimensiontwo. Similarly,thegradient-
like condition is generically sufficient (since the Smale property is𝐶8-generic). We expect that
more general criteria in higher dimensions will many interesting applications.
In forthcoming work, the author will present candidate criteria for convexity that generalize
theMorse-SmalecriterionviaConleytheory[22]. Letussketchsomeoftheseresults. Recallthat
thechain recurrent setof a vector field𝑍on a closed manifoldΣis a closed invariant set
CRp𝑍qĂΣ
consisting ofchain recurrentpoints. Chain recurrence is the weakest possible type of recurrence,
generalizingperiodicityandnon-wandering. Thechainrecurrentsetdecomposesintoconnected
chain componentsΛ. The chain components possess a natural orderingdwhereΛdΞif the
chain componentΛis there is a generalized heteroclinic trajectory fromΛtoΞ.
Definition 4.14.A chain componentΛof a vector field𝑍ispositiveif there exists a volume form
𝜇with positive divergence alongΛ. We definenegativechain components similarly.
Remark4.15.Thereisactuallyaformulationofpositiveandnegativechaincomponentscoming
from ergodic theory. Precisely, there is a well-defined element
divp𝑍,𝜇qp𝑍,LebqP𝑀pΣ,𝑍q _
inthedualspaceof𝑍-invariantsignedmeasures𝑀pΣ,𝑍q. Thisisdefinedbyintegrationagainst
the divergencedivp𝑍,𝜇qp𝑍,𝜇qof any volume form with respect to the vector field, where
L𝑍𝜇“divp𝑍,𝜇q¨𝜇

===== PAGE 23 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 23
One may check that a chain componentΛis positive if and only
xdivp𝑍,Lebq,𝜈yą0for every invariant measure𝜈withsuppp𝜈qĂΛ
Definition 4.16.A vector-field𝑍ischain convexif the following conditions hold.
(a) Every chain componentΛis positive or negative.
(b) There does not exist a negative chain componentΛand a positive chain componentΞ
such thatΛdΞ. We call this aretrograde connection.
The following result result will establish chain convexity as a necessary and sufficient condition
forconvexityofhypersurfaces(orcontactHamiltonianstructures). Aproofusestheexistenceof
certain nice Lyapunov functions along with an inductive argument similar to the Morse-Smale
case. The details will appear elsewhere.
Theorem 4.17.(Forthcoming) A contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis convex if and only if the char-
acteristic foliationΣ𝜂 is chain convex.
In the setting of Morse-Smale flows, the chain components consist of individual hyperbolic
singularities and orbits, and the the chain relation is such thatΛdΞif and only if there is a
heteroclinictrajectoryfromΛtoΞ. Theindexconstraintsonpositiveandnegativeorbits(Lemmas
2.46 and 2.45) and the Smale transversality condition then prevent retrograde connections. This
is how the Morse-Smale condition is recovered from the above result.
In general, chain recurrent sets can be quite wild. However, the chain recurrent set of𝐶1-
generic diffeomorphisms and flows are known to have more controlled behavior. In particular,
thereisa(partiallyconjectural)dichotomystatingthat,𝐶 1-generically,achaincomponentiseither
hyperbolic or contains a𝐶1-robust, coindex one heterodimensional cycle (cf. Bonatti-Diaz [9]).
Definition 4.18(Heterodimensional Cycle).Aheterodimensional cycle𝐶is a pair of heteroclinic
trajectoriesΛÑΞandΛÑΞbetween a pair of hyperbolic invariant setsΛandΞ. Thecoindex
is the difference in the dimension of the stable bundles ofΛandΞ.
The first constructions of robust heterodimensional cycles were given via blender constructions,
and such a cycle is present in the construction at the heart of Theorem 3.21. Moreover, if such
a cycle contains a retrograde heteroclinic from a negative hyperbolic invariant set to a positive
hyperbolic invariant set, then it provides a robust obstruction to convexity. We conjecture that,
𝐶2-generically, such heteroclinic cycles are the universal convexity obstruction.
Conjecture4.19(CycleCriterion).A𝐶 2-genericcontactHamiltonianstructure𝜂onΣiseitherconvex
or has robust positive-negative heterodimensional cycles.
Thisconjecturewouldgiveanecessaryandsufficientconvexityconditionthatis𝐶 2-generic: the
absence of heteroclinic cycles connecting positive and negative hyperbolic invariant sets.
4.4.Approximation.Another natural problem deals with the sharpness of the density and
non-density results of Honda-Huang [43] and the author [16]. We pose the following question.
Question 4.20(𝐶 1-Genericity).Are convex hypersurfaces𝐶 1-generic in the space of closed hy-
persurfaces in any contact manifold?
Note that hypersurfaces with Morse-Smale characteristic foliation are not𝐶1-dense. Indeed,
a𝐶 1-small perturbation cannot introduce new singularities to a non-singular line field. Thus,
the Morse-Smale criterion for convexity is not useful for this approximation problem. On the
otherhand, the chain convexity condition in Definition 4.16 could potentially be dense. This is
an interesting topic for future work.

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 JULIAN CHAIDEZ
4.5.Liouville Flows.Finally, it is interesting to ask about the𝐶1-generic structure of Liouville
flows on Liouville manifolds. This is the case of a contact Hamiltonian manifold with only
positive regions.
Question 4.21(Generic Liouville Flows).What properties of the Liouville flow on a Liouville
manifoldp𝑊,𝜆qare𝐶 1-generic with respect to the Liouville form𝜆?
Any structural results in this direction could yield interesting constraints on the topology of
Liouvillemanifolds. Weposethefollowingmorespecificquestion,whichisofparticularinterest
to the author.
Question 4.22(Axiom A).Is the set of Liouville forms𝜆with Axiom A Liouville flow𝐶1-dense
in the space of all Liouville forms on a manifold𝑊?
References
[1] Peter Albers and Helmut W Hofer. On the weinstein conjecture in higher dimensions.Commentarii Mathematici
Helvetici, 84(2):429–436, 2009.
[2] Dmitry Victorovich Anosov. Ergodic properties of geodesic flows on closed riemannian manifolds of negative
curvature. InDoklady Akademii Nauk, volume 151, pages 1250–1252. Russian Academy of Sciences, 1963.
[3] Masayuki Asaoka and Kei Irie. A𝐶 8-closing lemma for Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms of closed surfaces.
Geometric and Functional Analysis, 26(5):1245–1254, 2016.
[4] Masayuki Asaoka and Yoshihiko Mitsumatsu. There exist no contact anosov diffeomorphisms.Journal of Fixed
Point Theory and Applications, 27(4):1–5, 2025.
[5] Russell Avdek. An algebraic generalization of giroux’s criterion.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09068, 2023.
[6] Christian Bonatti, Sylvain Crovisier, Lorenzo Diaz, and Amie Wilkinson. What is... a blender?arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.02848, 2016.
[7] ChristianBonattiandLorenzoJ.Diaz.Persistentnonhyperbolictransitivediffeomorphisms.AnnalsofMathemat-
ics, 143(2):357–396, 1996.
[8] Christian Bonatti and Lorenzo J Díaz. Robust heterodimensional cycles and-generic dynamics.Journal of the
Institute of Mathematics of Jussieu, 7(3):469–525, 2008.
[9] Christian Bonatti and Lorenzo J Díaz. Robust heterodimensional cycles and-generic dynamics.Journal of the
Institute of Mathematics of Jussieu, 7(3):469–525, 2008.
[10] Christian Bonatti, Lorenzo J Díaz, and Enrique R Pujals. A c1-generic dichotomy for diffeomorphisms: weak
forms of hyperbolicity or infinitely many sinks or sources.Annals of Mathematics, pages 355–418, 2003.
[11] Christian Bonatti, Lorenzo J Díaz, and Marcelo Viana.Dynamics beyond uniform hyperbolicity: A global geometric
and probabilistic perspective, volume 3. Springer Science & Business Media, 2004.
[12] Matthew Strom Borman, Yakov Eliashberg, and Emmy Murphy. Existence and classification of overtwisted
contact structures in all dimensions.Acta Mathematica, 215(2):281–361, 2015.
[13] JosephBreen.Morse-smalecharacteristicfoliationsandconvexityincontactmanifolds.ProceedingsoftheAmerican
Mathematical Society, 149(9):3977–3989, 2021.
[14] Joseph Breen. Folded symplectic forms in contact topology.Journal of Geometry and Physics, 201:105213, 2024.
[15] Joseph Breen, Ko Honda, and Yang Huang. The giroux correspondence in arbitrary dimensions.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.02317, 2023.
[16] Julian Chaidez. Robustly non-convex hypersurfaces in contact manifolds.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05979, 2024.
[17] Julian Chaidez, Ipsita Datta, Rohil Prasad, and Shira Tanny. Contact homology and higher dimensional closing
lemmas.arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04738, 2022.
[18] KaiCieliebak,YEliashberg,andNMishachev.Introductiontotheℎ-Principle,volume239.AmericanMathematical
Society, 2024.
[19] Kai Cieliebak and Evgeny Volkov. First steps in stable hamiltonian topology.Journal of the European Mathematical
Society, 17(2):321–404, 2015.
[20] Vincent Colin, Emmanuel Giroux, and Ko Honda. On the coarse classification of tight contact structures.arXiv
preprint math/0305186, 2003.
[21] VincentColin,EmmanuelGiroux,andKoHonda.Finitudehomotopiqueetisotopiquedesstructuresdecontact
tendues.Publications mathématiques, 109:245–293, 2009.
[22] Charles C Conley.Isolated invariant sets and the Morse index. Number 38. American Mathematical Soc., 1978.
[23] James Conway and Hyunki Min. Classification of tight contact structures on surgeries on the figure-eight knot.
Geometry & Topology, 24(3):1457–1517, 2020.

===== PAGE 25 =====
CONFORMALLY SYMPLECTIC TOPOLOGY FROM A DYNAMICAL VIEWPOINT 25
[24] DanCristofaro-Gardiner,RohilPrasad,andBoyuZhang.PeriodicFloerhomologyandthesmoothclosinglemma
for area-preserving surface diffeomorphisms.arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02925, 2021.
[25] Oliver Edtmair and Michael Hutchings. PFH spectral invariants and𝐶 8 closing lemmas.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.02463, 2021.
[26] Yakov Eliashberg and Mikhael Gromov. Convex symplectic manifolds.Several complex variables and complex
geometry, pages 135–162, 1991.
[27] Yakov Eliashberg and Dishant Pancholi. Honda-huang’s work on contact convexity revisited.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.07185, 2022.
[28] John B Etnyre and Ko Honda. On the nonexistence of tight contact structures.Annals of Mathematics, pages
749–766, 2001.
[29] John B Etnyre and Ko Honda. Tight contact structures with no symplectic fillings.Inventiones Mathematicae,
148(3):609, 2002.
[30] Joel Fish and Helmut Hofer. Feral curves and minimal sets.Annals of Mathematics, 197(2):533–738, 2023.
[31] Todd Fisher and Boris Hasselblatt.Hyperbolic flows. 2019.
[32] Andreas Floer. Morse theory for lagrangian intersections.Journal of differential geometry, 28(3):513–547, 1988.
[33] Andreas Floer. The unregularized gradient flow of the symplectic action.Communications on Pure and Applied
Mathematics, 41(6):775–813, 1988.
[34] Andreas Floer, Helmut Hofer, and Dietmar Salamon. Transversality in elliptic morse theory for the symplectic
action. 1995.
[35] Andreas Floer, Helmut Hofer, and Claude Viterbo. The weinstein conjecture in pˆc.Mathematische Zeitschrift,
203(1):469–482, 1990.
[36] Hansjörg Geiges.An introduction to contact topology, volume 109. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[37] Viktor L Ginzburg. The conley conjecture.Annals of mathematics, pages 1127–1180, 2010.
[38] E GIROUX. Geometrie de contact de la dimension trois vers les dimensions superior. InProceedings of the ICM,
Beĳing 2002, volume 2, pages 405–414, 2002.
[39] Emmanuel Giroux. Convexity in contact topology.Comment. Math. Helv, 66(4):637–677, 1991.
[40] Ko Honda. On the classification of tight contact structures i.arXiv preprint math/9910127, 1999.
[41] Ko Honda. On the classification of tight contact structures ii.Journal of Differential Geometry, 55(1):83–143, 2000.
[42] Ko Honda and Yang Huang. Bypass attachments in higher-dimensional contact topology.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.09142, 2018.
[43] Ko Honda and Yang Huang. Convex hypersurface theory in contact topology.arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06025,
2019.
[44] Michael Hutchings and Clifford Henry Taubes. The weinstein conjecture for stable hamiltonian structures.
Geometry & Topology, 13(2):901–941, 2009.
[45] KeiIrie.DenseexistenceofperiodicreeborbitsandECHspectralinvariants.JournalofModernDynamics,9(01):357,
2015.
[46] Ivan Kupka. Contributiona la théorie des champs génériques.Contributions to differential equations, 2:457–484,
1963.
[47] D. McDuff and D. Salamon.Introduction To Symplectic Topology, 3rd Ed. Oxford University Press, 2017.
[48] AtsuhideMori.Reebfoliationsonsˆ5andcontact5-manifoldsviolatingthethurston-bennequininequality.arXiv
preprint arXiv:0906.3237, 2009.
[49] Atsuhide Mori. On the violation of thurston-bennequin inequality for a certain non-convex hypersurface.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1111.0383, 2011.
[50] Emmy Murphy.Loose Legendrian embeddings in high dimensional contact manifolds. Stanford University, 2012.
[51] Kevin Sackel. Getting a handle on contact manifolds.arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11965, 2019.
[52] Egor Shelukhin. On the hofer-zehnder conjecture.Annals of Mathematics, 195(3):775–839, 2022.
[53] Stephen Smale. Differentiable dynamical systems.Bulletin of the American mathematical Society, 73(6):747–817,
1967.
[54] Clifford Henry Taubes. The seiberg–witten equations and the weinstein conjecture.Geometry & Topology,
11(4):2117–2202, 2007.
[55] Kanda Yutaka. The classification of tight contact structures on the 3-torus.Communications in Analysis and
Geometry, 5(3):413–438, 1997.
Department of Mathematics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90007, USA
Email address:julian.chaidez@usc.edu
