===== PAGE 1 =====
273© The Author(s) 2026
G. L. Cochran, J. D. Adams (eds.), Equity-Oriented, Discipline-Based STEM 
Education Research, Critical Studies of Education 19, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-96-9136-4_14
Chapter 14
Theoretical and Methodological Innovative 
Futures for Physics in Postsecondary 
Contexts
Eleanor S. Armstrong, Allison J. Gonsalves, Anna T. Danielsson, 
and Emma Mckay
Abstract The aim of the chapter is to highlight promising theoretical and method-
ological innovations that work to understand and address inequities in post-  
secondary physics contexts. In particular, we move beyond a focus on the individual 
and identity as the main lens. Instead, our focus on relationships pulls a range of 
new research sites into consideration as vital sites of postsecondary physics educa-
tion, where new, existing, and non-members of the field learn to navigate the profes-
sion. We show how relations between people, communities, and institutions can 
unsettle what is focused on in physics education research (PER).
Keywords Physics education research · Postsecondary physics · Communities · 
Theoretical innovations · Methodological innovations
14.1  Introduction and Overview
The aim of the chapter is to highlight promising theoretical and methodological 
innovations that work to understand and address inequities in postsecondary physics 
contexts. In particular, we move beyond a focus on the individual and identity as the 
E. S. Armstrong (*) 
Institute for Space Research, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom
e-mail: ea377@leicester.ac.uk 
A. J. Gonsalves · E. Mckay 
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
e-mail: allison.gonsalves@mcgill.ca; emma.m.mckay@mail.mcgill.ca 
A. T. Danielsson 
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
e-mail: anna.t.danielsson@su.se

===== PAGE 2 =====
274
main lens. We instead show how a focus on relations between people, communities, 
and institutions can unsettle physics education research (PER) and offer new ave -
nues for scholarly investigation. In particular, if PER researches education, then its 
hegemonic contexts, interests, goals, and methods play a role in defining what edu-
cation means. The broad overview we provide in this chapter of questions and re-
orientations for all of these pieces of PER pushes then toward reconceptualizing 
what counts as education within PER, moving toward relationships, community, 
and critical critique as core to the idea of education.
This chapter takes up and responds to two important contexts. First, PER and 
physics equity work more broadly has primarily been conducted in ways which sup-
port seeing science education as a process in service of developing capital (see, for 
example, Pierce, 2012) and, consequently, have focused on “diversity” and “inclu-
sion” issues like binarized gender inequalities. Second and more specifically, PER 
has traditionally focused on a genre of research that prioritizes learning standard 
physics knowledge and practices in the university classroom and student laborato -
ries—a context which has only recently started to challenge the colonial, enlighten-
ment values of physics research at large, instead continuing to train and socialize 
individuals into these practices. In this chapter, then, we focus on how attending to 
efforts that grapple with “politicized” questions and themes, and the social back-
grounds to the research in the community, can broaden the field of (postsecondary) 
physics education research. We look at examples of action and learning in a variety 
of contexts, which responds to  the call to pluralize the typical focus of PER on 
classroom contexts.
14.1.1  Positionality
As researchers, we acknowledge that research is a subjective endeavor that is situ -
ated in our varied positionalities. All four authors bring varying relations with 
ancestors, the lands we live on, and physics as a subject, to our scholarship on phys-
ics education. We recognize that we have White racialized identities, and are/have 
always been settlers; all four of us living and working in colonial states. We under-
stand that engaging in research means also recognizing those privileges and colo -
nized perspectives in our research and work. Our epistemological positionalities are 
aligned with research that seeks to identify and challenge issues of power, equity, 
and social justice in physics contexts, particularly in academia. Some of us position 
ourselves as insiders to physics, while others are outsider to physics but benefit from 
positions as insiders to postsecondary physics.
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 3 =====
275
14.1.2  Research Context for Postsecondary Physics Education
Often motivating physics education research is the goal to have more (and more 
diverse) people in STEM. Why do we need more people working in STEM? An 
answer to that question involves complex, entangling ideas about scientists and 
engineers as contributing to economic growth with considerations about the signifi-
cance of STEM professionals for a country’s defense capabilities and national secu-
rity (Fensham, 1985; Lövheim, 2016, 2021). To complicate matters further, 
utilitarian arguments concerning a perceived need for more STEM professionals are 
often interspersed with arguments drawing on equity and social justice (DeBoer, 
2013). This emphasis on “getting more qualified professionals into STEM fields” 
has led to research on barriers that under-represented groups face in STEM, and 
solutions to support their trajectories into the “STEM pipeline,” rather than ques -
tions about the STEM pipeline itself. In physics education research in particular, the 
issue of the uneven distribution of women and men in physical sciences has received 
considerable attention. Looking back, notable works include Laura McCullough’s 
research on gender differences in physics assessments (e.g., McCullough, 2004), 
the work on highlighting and reducing gender gaps in higher education physics 
(e.g., Pollock et al., 2007), and research in secondary schools investigating “physics 
identity” and strategies to encourage girls to enter university-level physics programs 
(e.g., Hazari et al., 2013). Such work has been pivotal in uncovering binarized gen-
der inequities in physics, and in postsecondary physics education especially.
Casting the net wider, feminist critiques of science (e.g., Fox, 1985; Prescod- 
Weinstein, 2020) and studies of physics communities from anthropological points 
of view (e.g., Traweek, 1988; Hasse, 2002) have provided complementary perspec-
tives on the intersection between gender and the epistemology and practices of 
physics. This contrasts to much equity work in physics education oriented work in 
the context of postsecondary physics that has, implicitly or explicitly, relied on 
notions of gender as something static and binary (Traxler et al., 2016). Lately, this 
work has diversified to include both a recognition of a wider set of social categories 
(e.g., Barthelemy’s (2020) work on LGBT+ physicists) and expanding theoretical 
vantage points, such as critical race theory (e.g., Hyater-Adams et al., 2018) and 
intersectionality (e.g., Avraamidou, 2020a). Such identity-oriented perspectives 
have lately gained a lot of traction in physics education research (Gonsalves & 
Danielsson, 2020) for understanding connections between gender and who is recog-
nized as a particular kind of physics student or physicist. As useful as this work has 
been in uncovering nuances of exclusionary practices in physics, we cannot but 
wonder where the perspectives’ limits are in terms of reimagining teaching, learn -
ing, and research practices in physics. Therefore, in this chapter, rather than give an 
overview of equity-oriented research in postsecondary physics education research 
to date, we look forward toward future possibilities. We seek to identify strands in 
the contemporary research that we see as auspicious for engaging a diversity of 
learners and disrupting harmful norms and practices in postsecondary physics 
contexts.
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 4 =====
276
14.1.3  Grounding Lens and Showcasing Innovations
In this chapter, we cover three innovations: theoretical innovations; methods and 
practices; and rethinking impact. In these sections, we draw into PER context devel-
opments that have taken place elsewhere in academic scholarship; and demonstrate 
their use and future potential uses within postsecondary physics DBER. We have 
selected some examples from different frameworks which are themselves expan-
sive, and we recommend that the references we include here can act as a guide for 
those interested in reading and thinking with these theoretical frameworks at large.
Our view of postsecondary contexts will include not just higher education pro -
grams and university students’ experiences in physics, but also learning in profes -
sional communities, informal learning spaces in postsecondary physics institutions, 
and community engaged physics research. Learning and education have long been 
conceived of expansively (e.g., Sandlin et al., 2011) to include extra-institutional 
contexts; de-institutionalizing the conception of teaching and learning and liberat -
ing knowledge development. In expanding our focus beyond traditional learning 
institutions, we draw inspiration from Herrenkohl et  al. ( 2019) who argue for a 
“learning humanities” that puts relationships at the center of inquiry. Thus, we move 
away from examining the cognitive dimensions of physics learning, and from the 
examination of practices shaping identity work, to instead explore how relation -
ships are centered in (in)formal physics practices, and how practices which place 
relationships at the center can transform forms of engagement in physics. Thus, we 
no longer wish to answer questions about how to get more qualified people into 
physics. Instead, we seek to learn from research and practices that ask questions 
about obligations vis-a-vis physics practices, responsibilities that physicists and 
physics students have to act in the world (in relation to human and more-than-human 
actors), and mechanisms that retain those who are qualified in the profession. Our 
focus on relationships pulls informal learning contexts into consideration as vital 
sites of postsecondary physics education, where new, existing, and non-members of 
the field learn to navigate the profession.
Thus, In Sect. 14.2, we cover theoretical innovations that engage with critical 
race and critical Whiteness theories and queer theory, as well as exploring expan-
sively other theoretical innovations elsewhere in science learning contexts that we 
see innovative futures in for postsecondary physics education research. In Sect. 
14.3, we demonstrate how mentorship communities and professional development 
networks offer novel methods and practices toward futures in postsecondary phys -
ics communities that are not structured simply around “including” new folks into 
existing communities of practice. Finally, in Sect. 14.4, we pull to the fore how 
innovation in what university outreach is and how it is studied in PER contexts, and 
in the practices and research of citizen science exercise can expand postsecondary 
physics education. We conclude the chapter looking forward to innovation in futures 
in postsecondary PER.
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 5 =====
277
14.2  Theoretical Innovations Adopted Recently in PER
In this section, we show how innovations in application of theoretical lenses offer 
critical perspectives on PER and innovative futures toward which we can expand 
physics education (and the research that studies these practices expansively).
14.2.1  Critical Race Theory and Critical Whiteness
Recent developments in postsecondary PER have seen an uptake of critical perspec-
tives on race in physics education, drawing on critical race theory, intersectionality, 
and critical Whiteness (Rosa & Mensah, 2016; Hyater-Adams et  al., 2019; 
Avraamidou, 2020b, 2022; Robertson & Hairston, 2022). Critical race theory (CRT) 
describes racism as an everyday ordinary occurrence, understanding that race struc-
tures social interactions, and that racism is normalized in social systems, social 
institutions, and social norms. This normalization of racism is an important princi -
ple that CRT seeks to make visible as a structuring feature of society (Delgado, 
1995). As race, through the lens of CRT, is produced in social interactions, to under-
stand racism research must center the voices of People of Color (Delgado & 
Stefancic, 2017). Rosa and Mensah (2016) documented the voices of Black women 
in physics, by utilizing one of the key principles of CRT: counterstories. In center -
ing the stories of Black women in physics, telling counterstories confronts the dom-
inant stories of those who are in power in physics. These counterstories revealed 
obstacles that Black women face in physics, such as ordinary racism and microag -
gressions, and frames these obstacles, such as feelings of isolation and decreased 
self-efficacy, mechanisms of exclusion which compromised their learning and per-
formance in physics. Rosa and Mensah argue that traditional narratives in research 
about persistence in physics overplays “academic achievement…and downplays the 
role of the racial social climate in STEM fields” (p. 11).
The counterstories enabled by the CRT lens reveal how racism functions specifi-
cally in students’ performance and persistence in physics, and challenges the domi-
nant narratives that place student deficits as a key feature that interventions in the 
field should seek to address. In this study, Hyater-Adams et al. (2019) adopt a CRT 
lens to investigate how Black folks identify as physicists, developing a framework 
(critical physics identity, CPI) to describe such identities. The framework draws on 
the basic tenets of science identity framings (featuring the importance of recogni -
tion, performance, and competence) but also combines these with Nasir’s ( 2011) 
model of racialized identities that foregrounds the importance of relational, ide -
ational, and material resources in the construction of identity. The findings showed 
that all participants strongly identified with physics, but experienced difficulties 
performing their physics identities due to similar structural barriers as those 
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 6 =====
278
described by Rosa and Mensah. The value of this framework which places race at 
the analytical centre is that it provides a means to capture the counterstories of 
Black participants, while identifying the structural obstacles that impact Black stu-
dents’ performances in physics.
Drawing on intersectionality theory, Avraamidou (2020b, 2022) challenges the 
prioritizing of the “politics of recognition” in physics identity research, asking 
researchers to consider where the power resides in research that seeks to learn about 
how recognition supports insider identity work in physics. Avraamidou’s use of 
intersectionality—which develops an understanding of how the way people experi-
ence society is shaped by the overlap of their different identities that are inextricably 
interlinked and not separable (Nash, 2011)—in this research highlights the often 
problematic ways that the concept of recognition is mobilized in identity research 
(in PER and science education research more broadly). Recognition has emerged as 
a strong analytical concept in identity research investigating the underrepresenta -
tion of women and racialized people in physics (e.g., Hazari et al., 2010). However, 
Avraamidou (2022) points out, recognition has been largely mobilized as a binary 
concept (either one is recognized as a physics person, or not), which neglects the 
multiple, intersecting ways that identity positions can yield various forms of recog-
nition, non-recognition, or misrecognition that are not fixed between different con-
texts. Thus, Avraamidou argues, there is a need to attend to the politics of recognition 
in identity research, and especially to attend to the ways that current conceptualiza-
tions of recognition “leaves open the possibility of women in physics seeking rec -
ognition from the very people and institutions that are responsible for their 
underrepresentation” (p. 62).
Robertson and Hairston ( 2022) operationalize Critical Whiteness theory to 
examine how White supremacist ideology can structure interactions in physics 
classrooms. The authors draw on CRT and literature from Critical Whiteness stud-
ies to identify “markers for whiteness” and to analyze how these show up in intro -
ductory physics classrooms. This research examines micro-interactions between 
students, a teacher, a whiteboard, and a physics concept to analyze the interactions 
and the teacher’s attention. Mobilizing several concepts from CWT, the authors 
demonstrate how interactions in the classroom center Whiteness in a way that ele -
vates dominant voices, ideas, and ideologies while marginalizing others. These 
interactions, and those described in follow-up interviews about the class, demon -
strate how meritocracy is intertwined with Whiteness in ways that are valued 
among students and the teacher. These ideologies are likely to be silencing to many 
of those participating in the class, yet they are reproduced by students in interac -
tions. This new research in physics education is a radical departure for the field. 
The response to its publication signals the troubling relationship physics education 
has with race and racial ideology. Shortly after this paper’s publication, the editors 
of Physical Review Physics Education journal published an editorial supporting 
the research and their choice to publish it, and admonishing the “harassing, intimi -
dating, and diminishing tweets and emails in response to the publication of the 
article” (Henderson & Thoennessen, 2022). The authors have since published sub-
sequent work employing a CWT framework that demonstrates how faculty 
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 7 =====
279
members teaching in mainstream physics programs will adopt “race evasive 
frames” (e.g., grit or equal opportunity) to discuss representation and success in 
ways that maintain race-neutrality and the minimization of racism in physics 
(Robertson et al., 2023).
14.2.2  LGBT+ Research and Queer Theorising
Where early equity and diversity work in PER was almost exclusively focused on 
binarized gender, recent work has instead expanded to consider the experiences of 
LGBT+1 physicists and the constructions of gender and sexuality. Rather than only 
accounting for the experience of cis women and cis men, this research reports on the 
experiences of trans and non-binary physicists. A notable series of papers by Ramón 
S Barthelemy and colleagues (Barthelemy, 2020; Barthelemy et al., 2022a, 2022b) 
report from an online quantitative and qualitative survey of LGBTQ+ physicists, 
exploring LGBTQ+ physicists and physics students experiences of exclusionary 
behavior and harassment. While those respondents who could be out about their 
LGBTQ+ identity were more comfortable with their institution (Barthelemy et al., 
2022a), in the 71 qualitative responses that reported on experiences of exclusionary 
behavior and harassment for cis and trans physicists, Barthelemy (2020) found that 
the majority were based on non-normative gender expression, including for cis 
physicists, and being a woman. Their data demonstrate that nearly half of the trans-
gender respondents experienced the most exclusionary behavior (with one fifth 
reporting at least one experience of this in the past year), and over one third of 
transgender respondents considering leaving their workplace. This finding is echoed 
in a survey of astronomy and planetary scientists, where Richey et al. (2019) found 
that although LGBTQPAN women and gender minorities were more likely to feel 
unsafe at work due to their race, sexual orientation, and gender identity than cisgen-
der, straight women.
To date, this line of research has focused on the experiences of LGBT+ students 
and scientists, and contributes to broadening the discussion about diversity and 
inclusion in PER beyond binary gender; demonstrating the need to take into account 
the intersection of different axes of power. There have been, for example, vital calls 
to adapt survey practices and institutional policies to take a complex approach to 
gender, specifically moving beyond gender as something binary, discrete, or that 
can be easily discernible through names or other external characteristics (Rasmussen 
et al., 2019; Strauss et al., 2020). Similarly, raising the profile in PER projects of 
both LGBTQ+ physics students and physicists through developing resources about 
prominent LGBTQ+ folks (e.g., 500 Queer Scientists, n.d.), or of popular culture 
1 We use the term LGBT+ in our writing, but where we refer to findings from other papers, we use 
the language in the original text. This is to honor the ways that the researchers have worked to 
categorize their participant experiences, and highlights the plurality of approaches in the scholar -
ship to date.
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 8 =====
280
figures engaging with physics such as Amrou Al-Kadhi describing quantum 
mechanics’ non-binary state as “beautiful, strange and glorious” (Al-  Kadhi, 2024) 
has been a vital step toward developing both representation and identity- confirmation 
in postsecondary physics education.
However, we might distinguish this work on LGBTQ+ visibility and recognition, 
to practices that embed queer theory and queer approaches to both PER and  
postsecondary physics education contexts. In postsecondary informal science edu-
cation contexts, Armstrong (2022) has demonstrated the use of queer theorizing to 
unpack “hidden” narratives that both discuss LGBTQ+ identities and moved to 
apply critical queer perspectives on physics and other science research for tour 
guide attendees in a museum. This demonstrates the potential of queer theorizing in 
postsecondary physics education where it seeks to deconstruct dominant narratives 
around gender and sexuality, dismantling binary constructions such as heterosexual/
homosexual and masculine/feminine. Elsewhere, work to theorize queer epistemol-
ogies of identities in physics contexts is taking shape (see, for example, Armstrong 
& Danielsson, 2023, and Orthia & Roberson ( 2023)). In a recent anthology, Letts 
and Fifield ( 2019), who have collected STEM education writings engaging with 
queer theories over two decades, state that “Queer theorizing uncovers and incites 
paradoxical relations of the normal and strange in ways of knowing, feeling, and 
being …[and attends to] processes that normalize and naturalize (and abnormalize 
and denaturalize) particular manifestations of human subjects, society, culture, and 
nature.” (p.  4). This can be seen in Helene Götschel’s ( 2019) physics university 
classroom. She seeks to teach queering of physics by, for example, “scrutinizing 
what is supposed to be normal and what is invisible or silenced, making the familiar 
strange, reflecting on the discursive production of physical knowledge” (p. 126). In 
this way, Götschel also discusses how our understanding and storying of the world 
through physics sometimes relies on binary, heteronormative gender systems; 
reflective of Barad’s work to use queer to rethink the very ontology of physics 
(Barad, 2011).
14.2.3  Theories Used More Widely in Other Science 
Learning Contexts
In addition to these two theoretical vantage points, we note that there are a range of 
innovations that have been taken up elsewhere in both non-physics postsecondary 
science education and physics education at other levels, and here we gesture toward 
the possibilities for postsecondary physics education research by engaging with 
these rich bodies of work. Collectively these (along with the queer and critical race 
theory and Whiteness sections) share a willingness to look at physics as a system of 
knowledge that is part of larger social systems and to critically to engage with social 
justice in the context of physics education (Cochran et al., 2021).
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 9 =====
281
Well integrated into research on early-years learning contexts, posthumanism 
and other theories which include matter offer theoretical innovation for  
postsecondary PER by emphasizing the co-emergence of learning between learners 
and matter. Introducing this into theorizing of postsecondary offers mechanisms to 
engage with how, in contexts beyond the classroom, engagement and experience are 
often a priority. This is in direct contrast to the formal classroom where “often con-
cepts are afforded more ontological power and are considered more real than the 
lifeworld experiences of the learner” (Milne, 2019). Particularly rich in theorizing 
around elements of the natural environment, for example, in exploration of water by 
Elkin Postila (2022), or engaging learners in ethical education in science (e.g., 
Scantlebury & Milne, 2020), these approaches offer the potential to draw attention 
to dimensions of physics education practice that are currently under-theorized in the 
postsecondary domain. Such work directs our attention to the formation of identity 
through intra-action with matter (Barad, 2007), and in the social engagement with 
the nonhuman world. However, an emphasis on the genealogies of posthumanism as 
the mode of engaging with the interaction of human and non-human worlds in other 
science learning overlooks and erases theorizing by Indigenous scholars and with 
Indigenous knowers (Todd, 2016). For example,   the Turtle Island Institute (founded 
by Melanie Goodchild (Goodchild  2023)) supports a Virtual Teaching Lodge that 
engages in Indigenous-led teaching of science specifically beyond the university 
classroom; Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Astronomy project works with 
teacher education in the postsecondary context at the University of Melbourne 
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Astronomy, 2022).
Agitating for greater engagement in the implications of physics being part of a 
settler colonial project in the education that is provided about physics is part of 
activist work within the field (see Sect. 14.3: Methods and Practices for more 
details). Deliberate engagement with, and challenge to, entitlement to Indigenous 
land and access for physics research can be seen in relation to large astronomical 
science operations (e.g., Casumbal-Salazar, 2017; Neilson, 2019; Goodyear-  
Ka’ōpua, 2020; Maile, 2021). But, thus far, the impacts of including such critiques 
in physics education, for example, in the content of classroom work or ethical skills 
for engaging communities of practice, has been undertheorized in PER. Such work 
could unpack what work postsecondary learning does or could do to (re)shape 
beliefs that physics as a body of knowledge is modern, contemporary, progressive, 
future-oriented and that those attributes are good, desirable, and/or inevitable; high-
lighting where or how learners both within and the beyond the field are socialized to 
believe this to be the case. In this way, we call for innovative futures in physics 
education that move research past the support of colonial states and assimilatory 
equity that currently dominates the field. All of these critiques encourage us to ask: 
What will it take in PER to interrogate how colonial, capitalist, and extractivist 
practices, systems, and theories exist in physics?
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 10 =====
282
14.3  Methods and Practices of Physics Education
We highlight postsecondary contexts that expand the concept of “physics educa-
tion” to include learning beyond teaching in the classroom. Our contribution here is 
to move a focus on methods and practices of physics education in the university 
classroom context to more varied social contexts. We exemplify by one practice in 
the context of under-graduate students and one in the context of professional learn-
ing, but recognize that these practices also are powerful across contexts and that the 
distinction between “professional” and “student” is porous and not clearly defined.
14.3.1  Physics Learners: Mentorship and Training Programs
Socialization into the field of physics has been an important and long-standing 
focus of research in PER (e.g., Danielsson, 2012; Gonsalves, 2014), theorizing at 
how learners learn to belong in the research field. Socialization takes place in many 
venues. Beyond learning through university classrooms, mentorship and training 
programs can provide such socialisation events. A wave of programs focus on pro-
viding opportunities for more inclusive socialization for those who come from 
minoritized backgrounds into the field. However, even well-intentioned mentorship 
provided by people outside the community from which the junior participants come 
from, and especially that undertaken by White scholars, can potentially be alienat -
ing. Counter-narrative led research by Martinez-Cola (2020) demonstrates that 
Students of Color are subject to imbalance mentoring relationships that, especially 
in their worst cases, do not see challenging of community norms in developing a 
place within the community for the mentees, instead trying to fit those outside into 
existing norms. While there are some White mentors who act as “Allies” (as 
Martinez- Cola describes them) to disrupt community norms through inviting men -
tees to events, introducing them to their community, co-authoring with them, she 
makes the point that these are infrequent persons in the academy. Rather, many 
mentors “collect” students (then extractively utilize mentees for personal gain) or 
“nightlight” mentees (by shining guiding lights for mentees without recognizing 
systemic challenges) in mentoring relationships which socialize students in harm -
ful ways.
To support physics learners, developing communities can be vital. Community 
change can be supported, convened, led, and populated by the minoritized groups 
that are historically excluded. These projects offer a different idea about what it 
means to be socialized into the field, in what we might call “by-with-for PER proj-
ects,” led by community members, for community members, with community 
members as active agents in their development (an adaptation of Simon, 2016). For 
example, at the California Academy of Sciences, a summer intern program for queer 
youth, “STARS” (Striving for Trans Inclusion and Anti-Racism in Science Learning) 
lead by trans and/or BIPOC museum workers to forge paths that see queer identities 
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 11 =====
283
as part of postsecondary science fields. As an intern on the program, Eli Ramos 
(2021) gathered the experiences of their colleagues on this program. Ramos notes 
that many colleagues were united in their “ostracization by race or gender” from 
science community spaces prior to the program. However, STARS interns described 
how development “alongside other people of color and LGBTQ+ people has been 
instrumental to us” allowing them not to have “to explain the basics of my identity 
and justifying my personhood”—which “was a relief” (Ramos, 2021). Elsewhere, 
participants at Space Science in Context reported their experience of not having to 
explain or justify themselves in a conference setting (based on racialized, ableist, or 
misogynistic judgements) as being integral to finding a community in space sci -
ences that encouraged them to see they belonged in the field (Persaud & Armstrong, 
2022). Such experiences describe the relief of not having to do what Murray et al. 
have theorized as the additional “imposter work” that minoritized folks often under-
take to survive and thrive in postsecondary science education contexts (Murray 
et al., 2022) by being outside the social conditions that make them outsiders to the 
science community at large. This shift in focus from the individual to the system of 
relations that maintain the internalization of “feeling like a fraud despite one’s 
achievements” (p. 7) rejects the need for individualized success narratives that often 
belie the privileges that are required to experience overcoming such exclusions. As 
Hodari et al. (2022) urge in their paper on socialization in physics training it “costs 
us so little to counter those experiences with cues that tell them we are happy they 
[minoritized students] are there” (p. 21).
14.3.2  Physics Professionals and Communities: Reshaping 
Professionalism Through Community Building 
and Action
Other postsecondary physics learning spaces (re)develop norms within professional 
STEM communities, which are by members of the profession, for their peers, in 
community with them. Although the distinction is somewhat arbitrary from the sec-
tion (what does “to be within the field” mean as opposed to becoming part of the 
field, for instance), in this section, we focus on professional development and com-
munity building projects and programs. In their paper, Hodari et al. ( 2022) note 
while much research focuses on undergraduate contexts, late-postgraduate and 
postdoctoral positions in physics fields are key times where researchers are social -
ized into the field. It is during these periods that “historically marginalized scientists 
are often excluded or kept out of these professional networks that are tied to 
increased productivity, which in turn affects their professional success” (p. 4).
Thus, the development of space to reshape social norms of the field from within 
are vital, which can lead to relearning what participation within the professional 
physics field could be. These take a wide range of guises from labs within institu -
tions, to trans-national digital communities. From digital community building of 
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 12 =====
284
projects such as #BlackinSTEM, Particles for Justice ( n.d.), Pride in STEM ( n.d.), 
Shutdown STEM (n.d.), VanguardSTEM (2021) leading to off-line action, to proj-
ects such as the Astronomers for Planet Earth which encourages climate conscious 
research and conference participation (Burtscher et al., 2022); or to local institu -
tional LGBTQ+ STEM community action across science departments at UCL (Lock 
et al., 2025); it is possible to expand the focus on professional community change. 
We unite these projects in their work to support relearning behaviors within the 
postsecondary physics community, through supporting, validating, and focusing 
change in the community and institutions at large through reshaping ideas about 
how physicists can be within the community. In their work on the experiences on 
Women of Color in STEM, Ong et al. (2018) describe how such communities can be 
theorized as counter spaces for Women of Color, instrumental for “facilitating their 
educational preparation and readying them for careers and beyond” (p. 216).
14.4  Rethinking the Impacts of Informal Postsecondary 
Learning Contexts
While existing literature in the field addresses the impact of informal learning pri -
marily on the participants in such projects who are from “the public,” we here make 
an intervention to draw attention to the work that is being done by those developing 
informal learning practices and the opportunities that this provides to reshape their 
understandings and knowledge of physics. We focus particularly on reconceptual -
izing who is learning the practices through the example of University outreach and 
what is being learned through exploring innovative citizen science projects.
14.4.1  University “Outreach”
Engagement with informal learning in postsecondary physics contexts has been 
shown to impact university students’ identity work in their physics programs in 
ways which expand the sense of what physics identity is or ought to be. These pro-
grams can be meaningful opportunities for students to build community and find a 
sense of belonging within their university programs. Research investigating the 
impacts of university students’ experiences as facilitators of physics outreach proj-
ects suggests that informal physics learning experiences can have positive impacts 
on students’ identity work outside of the constraints that are usually found in aca -
demic physics settings (Fracchiolla et al., 2020). Participating in a physics outreach 
community of practice provides opportunities for students to be recognized as 
members in the physics community in new ways, and expanding their participation 
beyond the normative practices of university physics (Prefontaine et al., 2021). This 
is not limited to university students. Outreach practices of researchers also provide 
new spaces to negotiate their science identities through creating and sustaining 
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 13 =====
285
multiple science identities theorized as giving researchers the opportunity to experi-
ment with developing shifting and contingent identity performances in university 
science outreach (Davies, 2021). Additionally, research specifically investigating 
women’s involvement in facilitating informal physics programs found that partici-
pants gained increased opportunities for internal and external recognition, thus pro-
viding opportunities for them to “curate their own sense of expertise” which 
improved their confidence in their chosen major (Randolph et al., 2021, p. 363).
These programs also provide resources for youth who are engaged in learning 
that facilitates their own socialization into physics. For example, research into the 
significance of “university adjacent” informal physics learning programs suggests 
that university outreach programs provide numerous resources that contribute to 
youths’—especially young women’s—identity work vis-a-vis physics (Gonsalves 
et al., 2022). Programs identified as university-adjacent (such as outreach programs, 
internships, summer schools, and public lectures) can provide opportunities for 
youth to begin to see themselves as physics people, and to learn about the lives of 
physicists beyond the classroom or even the lab. While we acknowledge the impor-
tance of these practices to contribute to pluralizing the people who participate in 
physics, we also wish to point to these as often elite and difficult to access programs 
for many minoritized students.
14.4.2  Citizen Science
“Citizen science” designates a wide range of different activities involving public 
participation in science. This can include, for example, amateur naturalists collect -
ing observational data about birds (Parrish et al., 2019), people classifying images 
of galaxies (Reed et al., 2013; Lingard et al., 2020), or monitoring of radioactivity 
in food (Reiher, 2016; Andersson-Sundén et  al., 2019). Today, citizen science is 
typified by distributed fieldwork or crowd-sourcing of data analysis (McQuillan, 
2014), with the common goal of “educating” the public about science. Research in 
PER related to these activities have hegemonically, thus, looked at the “success” of 
various projects against such goals. But citizen science has an epistemically trans -
formative potential: challenging the very foundation of the modern regime of scien-
tific knowledge production where the work of professional scientists is separated 
from the lay public, who are understood as—at best—consumers of science. The 
involvement of lay people in science not only changes who participates in the 
knowledge production, it can also transform how this is done as well as where and 
why—including lay people in experimental research not just in collection of obser-
vations (Strasser et al., 2019). Strasser and colleagues instead attend to “striking” 
importance of the perceptive and affective qualities employed by participants during 
citizen science projects, despite “knowing that [these attributes’] exclusion was a 
key element in the formation of modern science, based on the ideal of objective, 
rational, and disinterested knowledge” (2019, p. 65).
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 14 =====
286
McQuillan (2014) takes this potential further, arguing for citizen science as 
nomadic science focused on the local, the situated, and the culturally reflective. In 
this nomadic science also lies a potential for community activism, to enact science 
as a bottom-up practice, attentive to local needs and practices (McQuillan, 2014). 
For example, the Public Lab ( n.d.) seeks to pursue environmental justice through 
community science and open technology. Through low-cost tools, people are able to 
participate in the building of community knowledge about environmental health 
based on physics experimental techniques (e.g., do-it-yourself spectrometers used 
to detect oil pollution). Another example of citizen science within physics is the 
Original Research By Young Twinkle Students (ORBYTS) program, where second-
ary school students have been involved in original research on exoplanets, super -
vised by PhD students and postdocs (Dunn, 2021). Part of the data used comes from 
data obtained by citizen astronomers, thereby linking junior research, school stu -
dents, and citizen scientists. One aim with the ORBYTS program is to by involving 
school students in state-of-the-art research empower them to participate in STEM 
and challenge ideas about who can be a producer of scientific knowledge (Sousa-
Silva et al., 2017).
14.5  Conclusions, Contributions to the Field, and a Call 
to Innovative Futures
Throughout this chapter, one of our overarching contributions has been to (re)con -
ceptualize what counts as education within the field of physics education research 
by introducing and highlighting theories, methods, and contexts that are a departure 
from hegemonic PER. In our selection of cases, we particularly ask what it means 
to think of education beyond the normative postsecondary contexts of the university 
classroom, with a greater focus on learning in its expansiveness to capture experi-
ences, knowledge transfers, skills, and behaviors. Not only does this transformation 
open a range of new practices and sites of subjectivities to the purview of PER, it 
also moves beyond a conceptualisation of postsecondary education that is narrowly 
focused on those for whom physics remains a central part of their lives. Instead, this 
view allows exploration of the value of understanding what physics learning might 
mean for those beyond the field. Thus, we call for innovative moves in postsecondary 
PER: from the individual to networks of relationships, from a specifically university 
classroom context to more varied social contexts, and from support of socializing 
people into physics more efficiently into critiquing colonial physics at its core. This 
transformation of physics education research and practices is a call to think criti -
cally not only about the sites of physics learning that are researched, but also the 
goals of the research practice. We call for innovative futures in PER that resist 
reproducing oppressive, colonialist, extractive cultures, or the goals of improving 
“diversity and inclusion” in physics, for example, and instead invest in imagining 
sociocultural change beyond increasing representation.
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 15 =====
287
References
#ShutDownAcademia #ShutDownSTEM. (n.d.). Retrieved October 19, 2022, from https://www.
shutdownstem.com/
Al-Kadhi, Amrou (2018). What quantum physics taught me about queer identity. BBC https://
www.bbc.co.uk/videos/c51yldgd2r7o (Accessed 12 October 2023)
Andersson-Sundén, E., Gustavsson, C., Hjalmarsson, A., Jacewicz, M., Lantz, M., Marciniewski, 
P., et al. (2019). Citizen science and radioactivity. Nuclear Physics News, 29(2), 25–28.
Armstrong, E. S. (2022). Towards queer tours of science and technology museums. Museums and 
Society, 20(2). https://doi.org/10.29311/mas.v20i2.3941
Armstrong, E. S., & Danielsson, A. T. (2023). Science Butch Blues. Queer-feminist science and 
technology studies forum, 8, 11–30.
Australian Indigenous Astronomy. (2022, July 8). Aboriginal and Torres strait islander astronomy. 
Retrieved October 19, 2022, from http://www.aboriginalastronomy.com.au/
Avraamidou, L. (2020a). Science identity as a landscape of becoming: Rethinking recognition 
and emotions through an intersectional lens. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 15 (2), 
323–345. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422- 019- 09954- 7
Avraamidou, L. (2020b). “I am a young immigrant woman doing physics and on top of that I am 
Muslim”: Identities, intersections, and negotiations. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 
57(3), 311–341.
Avraamidou, L. (2022). Identities in/out of physics and the politics of recognition. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 59(1), 58–94.
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter 
and meaning. Duke University Press.
Barad, K. (2011). Nature’s queer performativity. Qui Parle: Critical Humanities and Social 
Sciences, 19(2), 121–158.
Barthelemy, R. S. (2020). LGBT+ physicists qualitative experiences of exclusionary behavior and 
harassment. European Journal of Physics, 41(6), 065703.
Barthelemy, R. S., Swirtz, M., Garmon, S., Simmons, E. H., Reeves, K., Falk, M. L., et al. (2022a). 
LGBT+ physicists: Harassment, persistence, and uneven support. Physical Review Physics 
Education Research, 18(1), 010124.
Barthelemy, R. S., Hughes, B. E., Swirtz, M., Mikota, M., & Atherton, T. J. (2022b). Workplace 
climate for LGBT+ physicists: A view from students and professional physicists. Physical 
Review Physics Education Research, 18 (1), 010147. Retrieved from https://www.bbc.co.uk/
ideas/videos/what- quantum- physics- taught- me- about- queer- identit/p06ltbj1
Burtscher, L., Balaguer-Núñez, L., D’Orazi, V ., Barret, D., Beuchert, T., Janiuk, A., et al. (2022). 
Astronomy organizations should lead in our battle against the climate crisis. Nature Astronomy, 
6(7), 764–764.
Casumbal-Salazar, I. (2017). A fictive kinship: Making “modernity,” “ancient Hawaiians,” and the 
telescopes on Mauna Kea. Native American and Indigenous Studies, 4(2), 1–30.
Cochran, G. L., Hyater-Adams, S., Alvarado, C., Prescod-Weinstein, C., & Daane, A. R. (2021). 
Social justice and physics education. In Teaching and learning for social justice and equity in 
higher education (pp. 125–147). Palgrave Macmillan.
Danielsson, A. T. (2012). Exploring woman university physics students ‘doing gender’ and ‘doing 
physics’. Gender and Education, 24(1), 25–39.
Davies, S. R. (2021). Performing science in public: Science communication and scientific identity. 
Community and Identity in Contemporary Technosciences, 31, 207.
DeBoer, G.  E. (2013). Science for all: Historical perspectives on policy for science education 
reform. In Moving the equity agenda forward (pp. 5–20). Springer.
Delgado, R. (1995). The Rodrigo chronicles: Conversations about America and race. NYU Press.
Delgado, R., & Stefancic, J. (2017). Critical race theory: An introduction (V ol. 20). NYU Press.
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 16 =====
288
Dunn, W. (2021). A Lecture in 2 Parts: 1. ORBYTS: Inspirational Research Partnerships for 
School Students from Historically-Excluded Groups and 2. Extraordinary X-rays from the 
Outer Planets. In EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts (pp. EGU21-11236).
Elkin Postila, T. (2022). Stories of water: Preschool children’s engagement with water purification. 
Cultural Studies of Science Education, 17(2), 277–299.
Fensham, P. J. (1985). Science for all: A reflective essay. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 17 (4), 
415–435.
Fox, K. E. (1985). Reflections on gender and science. Yale University Press.
Fracchiolla, C., Prefontaine, B., & Hinko, K. (2020). Community of practice approach for under -
standing identity development within informal physics programs. Physical Review Physics 
Education Research, 16(2), 020115.
Gonsalves, A. (2014). “Physics and the girly girl—there is a contradiction somewhere”: Doctoral 
students’ positioning around discourses of gender and competence in physics. Cultural Studies 
of Science Education, 9, 503–521. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422- 012- 9447- 6
Gonsalves, A., & Danielsson, A. (2020). Physics education and gender: Identity as an analytic 
lens for research. Springer Press (183 pp.). Retrieved from https://link- springer- com.proxy3.
library.mcgill.ca/book/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 41933- 2
Gonsalves, A., Danielsson, A., Johansson, A., & Nyström, A.-S. (2022). Other spaces for youths’ 
identity-work in physics. Physical Review Physics Education Research, 18, 020118. (online).
Goodchild, M. (2023). Niigani Miinigowiziiwin (we Give These Gifts to the Future) (Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Waterloo).
Goodyear-Ka’ōpua, N. (2020). On the cattle guard. Biography, 43(3), 527–529.
Götschel, H. (2019). Teaching queering physics: An agenda for research and practice. In STEM of 
desire (pp. 125–145). Brill Sense.
Hasse, C. (2002). Gender diversity in play with physics: The problem of premises for participation 
in activities. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 9, 250–269.
Hazari, Z., Sonnert, G., Sadler, P. M., & Shanahan, M. C. (2010). Connecting high school physics 
experiences, outcome expectations, physics identity, and physics career choice: A gender study. 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 47(8), 978–1003.
Hazari, Z., Potvin, G., Lock, R. M., Lung, F., Sonnert, G., & Sadler, P. M. (2013). Factors that 
affect the physical science career interest of female students: Testing five common hypotheses. 
Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education Research, 9(2), 020115.
Henderson, C., & Thoennessen, M. (2022). Research on advancing equity is critical for physics. 
Physical Review Physics Education Research, 18(1), 010001.
Herrenkohl, L. R., Lee, J., Kong, F., Nakamura, S., Imani, K., Nasu, K., et al. (2019). Learning in 
community for STEM undergraduates: Connecting a learning sciences and a learning humani-
ties approach in higher education. Cognition and Instruction, 37(3), 327–348.
Hodari, A. K., Krammes, S. B., Prescod-Weinstein, C., Nord, B. D., Esquivel, J. N., & Assamagan, 
K. A. (2022). Informal socialization in physics training. Proceedings of the US Community Study 
on the Future of Particle Physics (Snowmass 2021) Preprint available: arXiv:2203.11518v2
Hyater-Adams, S., Fracchiolla, C., Finkelstein, N., & Hinko, K. (2018). Critical look at phys -
ics identity: An operationalized framework for examining race and physics identity. Physical 
Review Physics Education Research, 14(1), 010132.
Hyater-Adams, S., Fracchiolla, C., Williams, T., Finkelstein, N., & Hinko, K. (2019). Deconstructing 
Black physics identity: Linking individual and social constructs using the critical physics iden-
tity framework. Physical Review Physics Education Research, 15(2), 020115.
Isler, J.  C., Berryman, N.  V ., Harriot, A., Vilfranc, C.  L., Carrington, L.  J., & Lee, 
D. N. (2021). Defining the Flow—Using an Intersectional Scientific Methodology to Construct 
a VanguardSTEM Hyperspace. Genealogy, 5(1), 8. Retrieved from https://www.mdpi.
com/2313- 5778/5/1/8
Letts, W., & Fifield, S. (2019). STEM of desire: Queer theories and science education. Brill Sense.
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 17 =====
289
Lingard, T. K., Masters, K. L., Krawczyk, C., Lintott, C., Kruk, S., Simmons, B., et al. (2020). 
Galaxy Zoo builder: Four-component photometric decomposition of spiral galaxies guided by 
citizen science. The Astrophysical Journal, 900(2), 178.
Lock, S. J., Jones, E., Hellyer, R. J., & Armstrong, E. (2025). LGBTQ+ staff experiences at UCL: 
teaching, research and institutional culture. UCL, LESG.
Lövheim, D. (2016). Naturvetarna, ingenjörerna och valfrihetens samhälle: Rekrytering till teknik 
och naturvetenskap under svensk efterkrigstid (p. 260). Kriterium.
Lövheim, D. (2021). Cold War fostering of scientific elites: International Youth Olympiads in 
chemistry and physics 1967–1984. History of Education, 50(5), 685–703.
Maile, D.  U. (2021). On being late: Cruising mauna kea and unsettling technoscientific con -
quest in Hawai’i. American Indian Culture and Research Journal, 45 (1), 95–122. https://doi.
org/10.17953/aicrj.45.1.maile
Martinez-Cola, M. (2020). Collectors, nightlights, and allies, oh my. Understanding and 
Dismantling Privilege, 10(1), 61–82.
McCullough, L. (2004). Gender, context, and physics assessment. Journal of International 
Women’s Studies, 5(4), 20–30.
McQuillan, D. (2014). The countercultural potential of citizen science. M/C Journal, 17(6). https://
doi.org/10.5204/mcj.919
Milne, C. (2019). Intra-actions that matter: Building for practice in a liberal arts science course. 
In Material practice and materiality: Too long ignored in Science Education  (pp. 81–100). 
Springer.
Murray, Ó. M., Chiu, Y . L. T., Wong, B., & Horsburgh, J. (2022). Deindividualising imposter syn-
drome: Imposter work amongst marginalised STEMM undergraduates in the UK. Sociology, 
57(1), 003803852211173.
Nash, J.  C. (2011). Practicing love: Black feminism, love-politics, and post-intersectionality. 
Meridians, 11(2), 1–24.
Nasir, N. I. (2011). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth . 
Stanford University Press.
Neilson, H. R. (2019). Astronomy must respect rights of Indigenous peoples. Nature, 572, 312.
Orthia, L. A., & Roberson, T. eds., (2023). Queering science communication: representations, 
theory, and practice. Bristol University Press.
Ong, M., Smith, J. M., & Ko, L. T. (2018). Counterspaces for women of color in STEM higher 
education: Marginal and central spaces for persistence and success. Journal of Research in 
Science Teaching, 55(2), 206–245.
Parrish, J. K., Jones, T., Burgess, H. K., He, Y ., Fortson, L., & Cavalier, D. (2019). Hoping for 
optimality or designing for inclusion: Persistence, learning, and the social network of citizen 
science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(6), 1894–1901.
Particles for Justice. (n.d.). Retrieved October 19, 2022, from https://www.particlesforjustice.org/
Persaud, D. M., & Armstrong, E. S. (2022). Space science in context: Lessons learned and recom-
mendations for IDEA practice and beyond. LPI Contributions, 2679, 2067.
Pierce, C. (2012). Education in the age of biocapitalism: Optimizing educational life for a flat 
world. Springer.
Pollock, S. J., Finkelstein, N. D., & Kost, L. E. (2007). Reducing the gender gap in the physics 
classroom: How sufficient is interactive engagement? Physical Review Special Topics-Physics 
Education Research, 3(1), 010107.
Prefontaine, B., Mullen, C., Güven, J. J., Rispler, C., Rethman, C., Bergin, S. D., et al. (2021). 
Informal physics programs as communities of practice: How can programs support university 
students’ identities? Physical Review Physics Education Research, 17(2), 020134.
Prescod-Weinstein, C. (2020). Making Black women scientists under white empiricism: The 
racialization of epistemology in physics. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 
45(2), 421–447.
Pride in STEM. (n.d.). Retrieved October 19, 2022, from https://prideinstem.org/
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…

===== PAGE 18 =====
290
Public Lab: A DIY Environmental Science Community. (n.d.). Retrieved October 19, 2022, from 
https://publiclab.org/
Queer Scientists (n.d.) 500 Queer Scientists Visibility Campaign. https://500queerscientists.com/ 
(Accessed 12 October 2023).
Ramos, E. (2021). Towards museum inclusion . Museum education roundtable 
towards museum inclusion reflections from Exploratorium STARS internship pro -
gram comments. Retrieved October 19, 2022, from https://www.museumedu.org/
towards- museum- inclusion- reflections- from- exploratorium- stars- internship- program/
Randolph, J., Hay, E., Rethman, C., Erukhimova, T., Donaldson, J. P., & Perry, J. (2021, August). 
Impact of informal physics programs on female university students. In Proceedings of the phys-
ics education research conference (PERC) (pp. 359–364).
Rasmussen, K. C., Maier, E., Strauss, B. E., Durbin, M., Riesbeck, L., Wallach, A., et al. (2019). 
The nonbinary fraction: Looking towards the future of gender equity in astronomy. APC white 
paper submitted to the Astro2020 Decadal Survey Preprint available at arXiv:1907.04893.
Reed, M. J., Lardner, R. A., & Carney, K. (2013). An exploratory factor analysis of motivations 
for participating in Zooniverse, a collection of virtual citizen science projects . 2013 46th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 610–619). https://doi.org/10.1109/
HICSS.2013.85
Reiher, C. (2016). Lay people and experts in citizen science: Monitoring radioactively contami -
nated food in post-Fukushima Japan. Asien, 140, 56–73.
Richey, C. R., Lee, K. M. N., Rodgers, E., & Clancy, K. B. (2019). Gender and sexual minorities 
in astronomy and planetary science face increased risks of harassment and assault. Bulletin of 
the American Astronomical Society, 51(4), 0206.
Robertson, A. D., & Hairston, W. T. (2022). Observing whiteness in introductory physics: A case 
study. Physical Review Physics Education Research, 18(1), 010119.
Robertson, A. D., Vélez, V ., Hairston, W. T., & Bonilla-Silva, E. (2023). Race-evasive frames 
in physics and physics education: Results from an interview study. Physical Review Physics 
Education Research, 19(1),  010115.
Rosa, K., & Mensah, F. M. (2016). Educational pathways of Black women physicists: Stories of 
experiencing and overcoming obstacles in life. Physical Review Physics Education Research, 
12(2), 020113.
Sandlin, J. A., O’Malley, M. P., & Burdick, J. (2011). Mapping the complexity of public pedagogy 
scholarship: 1894–2010. Review of Educational Research, 81(3), 338–375.
Scantlebury, K., & Milne, C. (2020). Beyond dichotomies/binaries: Twenty-first century post 
humanities ethics for science education using a Baradian perspective. In Examining ethics in 
contemporary science education research (pp. 159–176). Springer.
Simon, N. (2016). The Art of Relevance Museum 2.0.
Sousa-Silva, C., McKemmish, L. K., Chubb, K. L., Gorman, M. N., Baker, J. S., Barton, E. J., et al. 
(2017). Original Research By Young Twinkle Students (ORBYTS): When can students start 
performing original research? Physics Education, 53(1), 015020.
Strasser, B., Baudry, J., Mahr, D., Sanchez, G., & Tancoigne, E. (2019). “Citizen science”? 
Rethinking science and public participation. Science and Technology Studies, 32, 52–76.
Strauss, B. E., Borges, S. R., Faridani, T., Grier, J. A., Kiihne, A., Maier, E. R., et al.. (2020). 
Nonbinary systems: Looking towards the future of gender equity in planetary science. A State 
of the Profession White Paper for the Planetary and Astrobiology Decadal Survey 2023-2032. 
Preprint arXiv:2009.08247v1.
Todd, Z. (2016). An indigenous feminist’s take on the ontological turn: ‘Ontology’ is just another 
word for colonialism. Journal of Historical Sociology, 29(1), 4–22.
Traweek, S. (1988). Beamtimes and lifetimes. Harvard University Press.
Traxler, A. L., Cid, X. C., Blue, J., & Barthelemy, R. (2016). Enriching gender in physics education 
research: A binary past and a complex future. Physical Review Physics Education Research, 
12(2), 020114.
E. S. Armstrong et al.

===== PAGE 19 =====
291
Open Access  This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and 
indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative 
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by 
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.
14 Theoretical and Methodological Innovative Futures for Physics in Postsecondary…
