===== PAGE 1 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
DOI 10.1007/s10701-017-0122-3
The Firewall Transformation for Black Holes and Some
of Its Implications
Gerard ’t Hooft1
Received: 23 April 2017 / Accepted: 30 October 2017 / Published online: 14 November 2017
© The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract A promising strategy for better understanding space and time at the Planck
scale, is outlined and further pursued. It is explained in detail, how black hole unitarity
demands the existence of transformations that can remove ﬁrewalls. This must then be
combined with a continuity condition on the horizon, with antipodal identiﬁcation as an
inevitable consequence. The antipodal identiﬁcation comes with a CPT inversion. We
claim to have arrived at ‘new physics’, but rather than string theory, our ‘new physics’
concerns new constraints on the topology and the boundary conditions of general
coordinate transformations. The resulting theory is conceptually quite non trivial, and
more analysis is needed. A strong entanglement between Hawking particles at opposite
sides of the black hole is suspected, but questions remain. A few misconceptions
concerning black holes, originating from older investigations, are discussed.
Keywords Black hole information · Antipodal identiﬁcation · Black hole interior ·
Time-like Moebius strip · Firewall transformation · Black hole microstates
1 Introduction
After at least four decades of intense studies all over the world, it has become evident
that the dynamical laws of space, time and matter will have to be reformulated at time
B Gerard ’t Hooft
g.thooft@uu.nl
https://www.staff.science.uu.nl/~hooft101/
1 Institute for Theoretical Physics, Utrecht University, Postbox 80.089, 3508 TB Utrecht,
The Netherlands
123

===== PAGE 2 =====
1504 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
and distance scales comparable to the Planck scale, 1,2
LPlanck = 1.6162 × 10−33 cm, TPlanck = 5.391 × 10−44 s,
MPlanck = 21.765 µg, EPlanck = 1.2209 × 1028 eV .
(1.1)
However, in spite of admirable advances in superstring theories [2], and competing
approaches such as loop quantum gravity [ 3,4], we still do not have completely con-
sistent models that elucidate Nature’s book keeping system [ 5] at this scale: what are
the physical degrees of freedom, how are they arranged in space, how do they evolve
in time, and to what extent are constraints on locality, unitarity, positivity, stability and
ﬁniteness obeyed? Which symmetries do we have, which of these are exactly valid,
and which symmetries are spontaneously or explicitly broken? How should we for-
mulate the boundary conditions? And so on. As we shall show, there are still surprises
to be expected.
The fact that our modern approaches fail was demonstrated embarrassingly clearly
when it was realised that there is aﬁrewall problem[6] in black hole physics. Actually,
this ﬁrewall problem was just one way of phrasing the information paradoxes in black
holes [7], and it demonstrates, once again, that some fundamental physical principles
must hold that are not understood at all by many researchers today.
Black holes are indeed the most manifest structures where our present understanding
is seen to be hopelessly inadequate. As was emphasised by the present author at several
occasions before [ 8,9], the best way to make further progress is therefore to address
black holes up front, demand laws of physics that guarantee logically comprehensible
and consistent behaviour of these structures, and inspect to what extent our present
formulations will have to be adjusted or sharpened.
The earliest ideas about the states black holes can be in, as deduced from Hawking’s
observation that black holes emit particles with what looks like a thermal spectrum,
were that black holes cannot be in pure quantum states, but will always be in mixed
states, such as what we have in thermal equilibrium. Requiring maximal accuracy in
formulating their evolution laws, however, forces us to search for formalisms in terms
of pure quantum states. This does come at a price to be paid. In the present work, we
show what is required to arrive at a description of black holes in terms of pure quantum
states. The price is new physics, as was emphasised earlier [ 8–12].
There is a number of points that we should keep in mind. One is that wild guesses
concerning possible answers, such as ‘novel uncertainty relations’, will be almost
fruitless, as history shows. The best thing to do is to split our problems into small
pieces, and try to address each of these small fragments of questions in turn. Every
now and then, such fragmented questions will lead to surprises. It helps enormously
if we can convince ourselves of the correctness of our partial answers, and it is these
that we should be able to use as new starting points for our next steps.
1 No assumptions are made concerning extra dimensions [ 1]. These would rearrange dynamical variables
in such a way that they each seem to occupy much more space in the physical dimensions. This would lead
to effective ultimate scales of physics different from, and less exotic than, ( 1.1). Our basic conclusions will
however not be affected.
2 In contrast, the Planck momentum has the remarkably mundane value of just over 6 .5k gm / s .
123

===== PAGE 3 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1505
In this paper, we shall primarily make use of a partial answer that we claim to
have arrived at recently [11,12]: the necessity of revising the boundary conditions for
Nature’s degrees of freedom at the horizon of a black hole, summarised in Appendix A.
Since our analysis started out with our desire for consistent descriptions of stationary
(or approximately stationary) black holes, it was not immediately clear how the revised
boundary conditions should have been enforced during the formation of a black hole,
but, in a somewhat formal fashion, one may well argue that, during black hole forma-
tion, the horizon starts out stretching over an inﬁnitesimally tiny region; it opens up at
a single point3 in space and time. At that single point, it now appears to be necessary to
revise the structure of this inﬁnitesimal horizon to obey the new boundary condition,
but since all this should happen at Planckian dimensions, the revision needed in our
laws of Nature here can easily be argued to have escaped our notice up to today; it
may be seen as merely a mild, point-like singularity at Planckian dimensions. 4 We
elaborate this further in Sect. 8.5.
After the horizon opens up, a black hole can grow quite big; the black hole horizon
area grows rapidly towards macroscopic sizes during collapse, and as our modiﬁed
boundary condition keeps track, it turns space and time into a non-trivial topological
manifold. Our new boundary condition must be locally imperceptible, but its impli-
cations will be sizeable. As a starting point we may suspect that the entire process of
the formation, evolution, and the ﬁnal explosion of a black hole may be seen as an
instanton event, an instanton that has a trivial Minkowskian boundary yet it is locally
non-trivial in a way that we shall explain (Sect. 8.3).
We emphasise that, nevertheless, our modiﬁed boundary condition will not affect
the visible properties of a black hole in the classical limit. Also, we shall ensure that
the modiﬁed boundary condition is of a kind that is not directly observable for a local
observer, that is, an observer who can only see his/her immediate environment. So what
we call ‘new physics’ is still completely in line with ordinary quantum mechanics and
general relativity.
The boundary condition that we shall arrive at is characterised as an antipodal
identiﬁcation. In short, what it means is that the region of space-time inside the horizon
is removed completely, as if by surgery, after which the edges are glued together by
identifying the antipodes. This is continued throughout the lifetime of the black hole.5
It is important, subsequently to insist that, locally, space and time remain smooth across
the seams, while particles, including the information they carry, can cross. The seams
must be locally invisible—only global observers notice this boundary condition. We
argue that the antipodal mapping is the only way to attach the edges together such that
strict geometrical conditions are obeyed.
3 If the collapse was in a spherical shell of matter, this point lies well inside the shell, surrounded by a
local vacuum. This makes it easy to study. One then might conclude that the horizon ﬁrst forms on a fractal
subspace of space-time, but since the scale at which this fractal extends may end up to be small even in
Planck units, we ignore this complication in this paper.
4 During a black hole’s ﬁnal evaporation event, the topologically non-trivial space-like features should
disappear the same way as they came.
5 Do keep in mind that, strictly speaking, the horizon is entirely timeless.
123

===== PAGE 4 =====
1506 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
It boils down to a single “new physics” ingredient in black hole physics as soon
as quantum effects are being considered. To explain this, let us deﬁne the asymptotic
region of space-time as the region |r|→∞ , which splits into ﬁve parts:
∞+, where in natural units t ≫| r|≫ M,
space-like inﬁnity ∞0 with |r|≫| t|,
the region ∞−, where −t ≫| r|≫ M,
and ﬁnally the two light cone regions J ± separating the previous three domains.
Then we impose:
When ﬁelds on a manifold are quantised, it is essential that the entire asymptotic
domain of the manifold maps one-to-one onto that of ordinary space-time, while
preserving the metric. It must be possible to ﬁnd time-like paths that connect all
space-time points in ∞+ to all points in ∞−
This condition is not obeyed by the standard, continuous extension of the classical
Schwarzschild metric: every space-time point in the physically observable part of the
universe it describes is mapped onto two points in the Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates.
These two points are always space-like separated from one another. If we would allow
this situation to describe a black hole, we would end up with two universes connected
by a worm hole, as is well-known. These two universes would communicate to one
another quantum mechanically (that is, they are entangled), which causes the well-
known violation of unitarity. We ﬁnd that this difﬁculty is completely resolved by
identifying points in regionI by their antipodes in regionII. It is a folding, which avoids
any singularity (cusp-like or otherwise). In contrast, such a folding, to be referred to
as antipodal identiﬁcation , would not be possible in ﬂat space-time without cusp
singularities, see Appendix A. Note that the r → 0 singularities in Schwarzschild
black holes, as well as the inner horizon in Kerr and Reissner Nordström black holes,
occur in a space-time region that is entirely avoided in our treatment. 6
As will be demonstrated (Sect. 3.1), mapping the Schwarzschild metric onto the
space-time metric of a local observer forces us to glue together regions in such a way
that time-inversion takes place. Inverting the time direction is associated with an inter-
change of creation operators and annihilation operators, 7 in the sense of Bogolyubov
transformations.8
We shall insist that we begin by limiting ourselves to soft particles , which are
deﬁned as particles whose gravitational ﬁelds are either negligible or sufﬁciently weak
to allow for a description in terms ofperturbative gravity. This will be further explained
in Sect. 3.1. We are dealing with an essential and highly non-trivial demand here, since
the time evolution may seem to turn soft particles into hard particles—particles which
6 We acknowledge the observation of a referee that the above was not formulated accurately in a previous
version of this paper, so that confusions could arise; presumably more accurate discussions are possible in
a mathematical language that was avoided here.
7 In an earlier version of this paper it was concluded that, therefore, at the horizon we must glue the vacuum
state onto a “completely full state”, but this does not seem to be necessary; we do perturbative quantum
ﬁeld theory near the vacuum state in all regions of the Penrose diagram. See the discussion in Sect. 3.1 and
Fig. 3 there.
8 Provided care is taken to maintain unitarity, see Footnote 17 in Sect. 5.
123

===== PAGE 5 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1507
do have sizeable effects on the curvature of space and time. These particles will have
to be transformed into something else, as we shall see. The gravitational ﬁelds of these
particles, in particular the hard particles, will be taken care of in due time. Thus, the
fact that we allow ourselves to have soft particles only in our Penrose diagram will be
justiﬁed a posteriori.
Crossing the horizon from a given point to its antipode will be associated with such
a time inversion, and as such also interchanges creation and annihilation operators.
This allows the embedding of a time-like Möbius strip in our space-time, and it has
the remarkable effect that the Hartle–Hawking state links positive energy particles at
the horizon with antiparticles at the antipodes, which again have positive energies,
resulting in entanglement between positive energy particles only, see Sect. 7.
Since quantum ﬁeld theories are CPT invariant rather than just T -invariant, we
expect that the different domains adjacent to a horizon in the Penrose diagram will be
visible to the outside observer through CPT inversions. Because of the CPT inversion,
the global, causal arrow of time no longer coincides with the local arrow of time.
This implies a departure from earlier ideas expressed by this author, called black
hole complementarity, where it was assumed that causal ordering should be kept
untouched. Black hole complementarity addressed the interior regions of the black
hole as representing particles emerging later, while in our new description, the black
hole simply has no interior at all. When putting everything together, one ﬁnds that this
latter formalism is far more satisfactory: nothing ever escapes to the interior region
of the black hole, since there is no interior region.
At ﬁrst sight, it may seem that our way of handling space and time near a black
hole, will make a decent quantum ﬁeld theoretic description of the elementary particles
hopelessly inadequate. However, as it turns out, the opposite is true: our apparently
drastic rearrangement of the space-time continuum is exactly what is needed to arrive
at pure quantum states for the black hole, and to obtain a unitary scattering matrix,
so as to eradicate both the black hole information problem and the ﬁrewall problem,
while meticulously respecting the laws of general relativity.
As our work is still in progress, there are numerous issues still remaining; we
discuss some of these as representing new challenges. Together, they constitute a new
and systematic strategy for future investigations.
We emphasise that, barring possible minor mistakes, 9 our conclusions are solid
and inevitable, comparable to the much more grandiose introduction of the theory
of general relativity itself, which may be seen as an inevitable description of the
gravitational force if one relies on special relativity at small scales and the equivalence
of gravitational and inertial masses.
We also emphasise the importance of applying our modiﬁed rules in the case of
the quantum black hole. At ﬁrst sight, the replacement of the analytic continuation of
Schwarzschild space-time by the one obtained by identifying antipodal points with
region II of the Penrose diagram, may seem to be a minor modiﬁcation, but it has big
effects. Formerly, the Hartle–Hawking vacuum used to be applied in such a way that
observers do not have access to the hidden sector, so that the resulting state become
9 This paper had to be rewritten several times because of small mistakes in earlier versions. Perhaps this is
to be blamed to the fact that it has only one author.
123

===== PAGE 6 =====
1508 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
a thermodynamically mixed state. In our description, this state remains a pure state
for the outside observer; the part that used to be hidden actually describes the other
side of the same black hole. Now that we have only pure states, the resolution of the
“information problem” is straightforward.
Our rules remove the ‘insides’ of a black hole.
2 Black Hole Penrose Diagrams
The Penrose diagram [ 13] of a space-time metric is obtained by choosing light cone
coordinates u+ and u−, such that g++ = 0 and g−− = 0, implying that these coordi-
nates are tangent to the local light cones. For black holes, the remaining two coordinates
are the angles θ and ϕ. Picturing the light cone coordinates as tilted by 45◦, one always
gets space-like coordinates running horizontally and time-like ones vertically, while
the local light cones10 are oriented everywhere as pictured in Fig. 1. In a Penrose dia-
gram, all time-like geodesics with constant angular coordinatesθ andϕ,g oi nav e r t i c a l
direction, more steeply than 45◦. Since one can keep these properties unaltered when
the coordinates u± are arranged to occupy compact domains, one can compress the
entire universe in compact Penrose diagrams. Thus, the location of time-like inﬁnity
(∞±) and space-like inﬁnity (∞) can be indicated in the diagram, see Fig. 1.
If all effects of matter that may have caused the black hole to form, in the near
or distant past, as well as matter originating from Hawking radiation, are ignored,
one gets the maximally extended Schwarzschild solution, Fig. 1a. By inspecting how
information spreads in such a universe, one then ﬁnds four distinct regions, labelled
as I, II, III and IV. Only regions I and II are connected to asymptotic space-like and
time-like inﬁnity, but they are only connected to each other through a two-dimensional
surface, the origin of the Penrose diagram; they have different asymptotic regions,
indicated as ∞, ∞± in region I, and ∞′and ∞±′in region II.
In the standard picture, nothing more is imposed such as antipodal identiﬁcation;
regions I and II could describe either entirely different universes, or perhaps different
parts of the same universe, separated in space- and/or time-like directions, by as many
light years as one can imagine. In contrast, regions II and IV are absent in Fig. 1b, c.
There, we see that they are replaced by region III, so that it is often concluded that
regions II and III actually describe the insides of the black hole, whatever it may be
that the insides of a black hole may look like. This is probably wrong, as we shall see.
We return to the relation between regions I and II later in this section.
First, we must dwell on an other urgent question. What exactly should it mean to
distinguish ‘eternal’ black holes from black holes that were once formed by gravita-
tional collapse of ordinary matter? In classical black holes, that is, black holes where
quantum mechanical effects are assumed to be insigniﬁcant (as would be normal prac-
tice in standard general relativity), such distinctions would be unnecessary, or even
meaningless. The differences between Fig. 1a, b, are only in their distant past, but not
10 In the θ,ϕ directions, the light cones may be more complicated; in the unphysical regions of the Kerr
and Kerr-Newman black holes, closed time-like curves may emerge. As these are located far beyond the
horizons, there will be no need to consider them here.
123

===== PAGE 7 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1509
III
IV
III
∞+
∞
∞− ′
∞+ ′
∞∞′
∞−
III
I
∞+
∞
∞−
Μ
III
I
∞+
∞
∞−
Η
Μ
IV I
∞+
∞
∞−
Μ
Η
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Fig. 1 Penrose diagrams for Schwarzschild black holes. a The “eternal” black hole, showing regions
I, II, III,a n dIV. Dotted line: Cauchy surface (see text). b A black hole originating from imploding matter.
Matter M causes curvature along the diagonal shown, rendering II and IV invisible. Dotted line: r = 0. c
Including the effect of Hawking radiation (H) making the metric regular at t →∞ , according to Hawking.
d The CPT image of situation c. Imploding matter and Hawking matter interchange places. Local light
cones everywhere are under 45◦ (cones shown)
in the present or the future. All no-hair theorems point to the verdict that black holes
will all look and behave identically, apart from three parameters, being mass, charge
and angular momentum [ 14,15].
Y et, when quantum mechanics comes into play, things do seem to be different.
Since quantum mechanics strongly indicates that black holes emit particles, the future
evolution of the Penrose diagram cannot quite be as in Fig.1a or b, but rather something
like Fig. 1c, as was advocated by Hawking [ 16–18]. There is a problem with that as
well, however. If we wish to describe all quantum states a black hole can be in, then
surely one should expect that the symmetries of the system before quantisation, should
also be reﬂected by the quantum system. This is not the case for Fig. 1c. Why is it
not symmetric under time reversal? General relativity and quantum mechanics both
are. One must conclude that we have not yet seen all possible Penrose diagrams; we
should also brace ourselves for diagram 1d.
How all these different possible Penrose diagrams can play their roles for black
holes is one of the subjects of this paper. In a sense, they may all be right, but then,
the theory claiming that they must represent the truth faithfully, cannot be correct.
Indeed, we shall propose an important modiﬁcation of how one should look at black
123

===== PAGE 8 =====
1510 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
holes. In this work, we make use of new transformations showing that all diagrams
in Fig. 1 can be used (see Sect. 5.1). One then ﬁnds that the maximal extension of
the Schwarzschild metric, shown in Fig. 1a, is the most useful one. It exhibits perfect
symmetries under the exchange of regions I and II and/or regions III and IV. These
symmetries are not only special for the Schwarzschild metric, they also hold for the
Reissner-Nordström, Kerr and the Kerr-Newman metrics. The most important reason
for us to insist on using the eternal diagram of Fig. 1a, is that only that diagram allows
us to use the analytic extension towards a domain describing all parts that we need of
the neighbourhood of the region where future and past event horizons cross. This is
exactly what is needed to apply the powerful laws of General Relativity right there.
In summary, the usual distinctions made between the Penrose diagrams a–d in Fig.1
can no longer be maintained when we do quantum mechanics. This is because, if we
want to consider Schrödinger equations to be applied at timet ≈ 0, we need the general
wave functions of all particles in the present, so that (in the Heisenberg picture) the far
past, as well as the far future, will consist of superpositions of all possible states. The
space-time metric of the diagrams in Fig. 1b–d, requires the momentum distributions
at very early and very late times to be precisely known, while the wave functions
used at t ≈ 0 will be too general superpositions of states. In particular, if we want
to consider a black hole in a pure quantum state such as the Hartle–Hawking state
at t ≈ 0, its initial state, at t →− O(M3) in Planck units, cannot be described as a
classically collapsing object. Similarly, since at t →+ O(M3), when the black hole
explodes, its standard description would be in terms of a density matrix; in our work
we would treat the Hartle–Hawking state as a pure quantum state, but this would
have to be replaced by quantum superpositions of explosions at different times. Due
to such difﬁculties, which are comparable to the measurement problem in ordinary
quantum mechanics, we shall ﬁnd that classical Penrose diagrams are unsuitable for
describing pure quantum states at times t when |t|≫ M log M in Planck units. We
shall establish new procedures to justify the use of the Penrose diagram for an eternal
black hole (Fig. 1a), with only soft particles added, being in a pure but generic quantum
state while |t|≪ M log M.
Now we can return to our promise to discuss the link between regionI and region II.
In this paper, we shall explain why antipodal points of the horizon have to be identiﬁed,
with the consequence that regions I and II refer to opposite hemispheres of one and
the same black hole. 11 In the entire spacetime domain covered by both I and II,a s
well as their close neighbourhoods, we have
r /greaterorapproxeql2GM . (2.1)
This is why it will never happen that two spacetime points that are much closer together
than 2GM , are postulated to be identiﬁed. 12 This implies that local space-time conti-
11 The possibility to have such an identiﬁcation was ﬁrst mentioned by Sanchez and Whiting [ 19,20]a s
far as the author is aware.
12 It does happen at the singularity (the wavy lines in Fig. 1), but the singularity is way beyond the inﬁnite
future for the distant observer, so it will not be given any physical signiﬁcance in this paper; the fact
that the singularity is far beyond the inﬁnite future makes it totally harmless in practice. This so-called
123

===== PAGE 9 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1511
Fig. 2 Local light cone
coordinates u± near the horizon.
The local time coordinate points
upward everywhere, but the time
coordinate for distant observers
goes up in region I a n dd o w ni n
region II. Also shown is a local
Cauchy surface. As the distant
time variable proceeds, particles
on this Cauchy surface move
upwards in I and downwards in
II (arrows)
distant
time
local time
III
u+
u−
nuity is not affected by the antipodal identiﬁcation on the black hole horizon—there
would have been such a problem if we would have tried an antipodal identiﬁcation in
locally ﬂat Minkowski space-time; in ordinary polar coordinates, a conical singularity
would arise near r ≈ 0. This is why antipodal identiﬁcation can only be considered
as a harmless (yet important) topological modiﬁcation if applied to exotic situations
such as these occur in the geometry of black holes.
The most delicate part of our new theory, however, is not the fact that we identify
antipodal points, and not even the fact that we transform away the bad or unwanted
regions of the Penrose diagram; it is the way in which particles are expected to transmit
the information they carry, across the horizon. Since this information is transmitted
entirely because of the gravitational back reaction, it is wrong to ignore that back
reaction altogether, as is often done.
3 The Horizon
In the Penrose diagrams of Fig. 1, it is often assumed that the time coordinate
proceeds forward (in this paper usually indicated as upward) everywhere. Indeed, this
is what one would expect if region II were assumed to describe ‘the inside’ of a black
hole. In our present picture, however, it will be seen to be mandatory to switch the
direction of time just in accordance with the global Schwarzschild time parameter t,
also when the quantum micro-states are discussed. This is because we wish to describe
how the black hole evolves as seen by a distant observer. Thus the evolution process
is postulated as indicated in Fig. 2.
Footnote 12 continued
cosmic censorship is often not understood by laymen mystiﬁed by black holes (providing references here
would be too embarrassing).
123

===== PAGE 10 =====
1512 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
In a local observer’s description, a Cauchy surface stretching all across the Penrose
diagram, can be postulated to contain only pure quantum states of elementary particles
(the dots in Fig. 2). If we omit the mutual gravitational interaction between these
particles, general relativity tells us precisely how the evolution of these particles
proceeds; in particular, they stay inside their regions I and II. We can use the Standard
Model to describe how their ﬁelds evolve. Note, at this point, that, as seen by a local
observer, the particles in region II will evolve backwards in time. We shall insist that
the evolution will be forwards in time as seen by distant observers.
Consider a particle with mass μ, close to both horizons, where we ignore local cur-
vature of the metric. Let its momentum in light cone coordinates be p = (p+, p−, ˜p),
where ˜p is the transverse component. On mass shell, we have
2p+ p− +˜p2 + μ2 = 0. (3.1)
The (non-gravitational part of) the evolution law is that time t generates Lorentz
transformations. Deﬁning the scaled time τ = t/4GM BH ,w eh a v e
˜p and m stay constant, p−(τ) = p−(0)eτ , p+(τ) = p+(0)e−τ . (3.2)
The gravitational interaction between particles of matter is much less trivial, how-
ever; it will have the effect of shifting particles around in directions along this Cauchy
surface, as we shall see, allowing them to cross the horizon without much ado. It will
be clear that this observation will be of crucial importance. In particular, we must
formulate our theory for the entire Cauchy surface, stretching over both regions I and
II (see dotted line in Fig. 1a).
3.1 Quantum States. Regions I and II. In- and Out-Particles. Soft and Hard
Particles
However, there is the apparent complication mentioned at the end of Sect. 1:i nr e g i o n
II, time, as seen by a distant observer, runs backwards. Particles, running backwards
in time, will be associated to quantum wave functions evolving as e+iEt instead of
e−iEt , and hence carry negative energies as seen by a distant observer. Nevertheless,
the distant observer will need to describe his world in terms of positive energy particles.
What happens, as it will turn out, is that, in region II, the energy as seen by the distant
observer is minus the energy experienced by an ‘observer’ who would look at region
II directly from region I. Curiously, we shall see that this topological twist in the
deﬁnition of the sign of the Hamiltonian, can be handled without any complications
in our new theory.
As stated above in this section, particles, or more precisely, the ﬁelds of the particles,
must be deﬁned both in region I and in region II. All these particles must be physical;
this is our ﬁrst departure from older wisdom. This is important, because both regions
I and II have their space- and time-like asymptotic domains at inﬁnity.
Next, we distinguish particles going in, henceforth referred to as in-particles, from
particles going out, the out-particles. In-particles cross the future event horizon (u− =
123

===== PAGE 11 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1513
0), at a position given by the light cone coordinate u+, out-particles cross the past
horizon (u+ = 0) at a point given by u−.I f u± > 0, we are 13 in region I,i f u± < 0,
w ea r ei nr e g i o nII. The distinction in- and out-makes sense as soon as particles move
nearly with the speed of light in the longitudinal direction; the transverse velocity, and
the mass, become negligible when they are sufﬁciently close to one of the horizons:
close to a horizon, one may neglect ˜p and μ, so that, according to Eq. ( 3.1), either
p+ = 0 (an in-particle), or p− = 0 (an out-particle).
Finally, we shall have to distinguishhard particles and soft particles. The distinction
will be frame dependent (we shall return to this point): a hard particle has its mass μ
and/or momentum |⃗p| of the order of, or beyond, the Planck mass. Soft particles have
masses and momenta that are negligibly affecting the curvature of the surrounding
metric.
Soft particles will be given by their ﬁelds, including ﬁrst time-derivatives where
needed, on the Cauchy surface (dotted line in Fig. 1a). Their interactions will be
described by whatever quantum ﬁeld theory is applicable in energy domains close to
the Planck scale, loosely indicated as ‘standard model interactions’. Their gravitational
interactions need not be ignored, but, being weak, may be addressed in terms of
perturbative gravity.
Hard particles are given by their geodesics. Again, we only need to consider them
when they go almost with the speed of light in the longitudinal direction. The interac-
tion between hard particles and soft particles also follows from standard theories: if
the hard particles are charged, the effects of the charges on the soft particles are readily
computed, and in this work we consider those interactions to be weak. Most important,
however, is the gravitational interaction between hard particles and soft ones. The hard
particles are hardly affected by the soft ones, but conversely, the soft particles feel the
presence of the hard ones mainly through their gravitational forces. These are of the
Shapiro type: soft particles are dragged along by the hard ones [ 21,22]. This effect
has been calculated and discussed in several of our previous publications [ 9–12,23].
Most importantly, this effect diverges as the momenta of the hard particles increase.
We now make an important restriction on our description of black hole micro-states:
we consider the Penrose diagram of Fig. 1a, with only soft particles added. Note that
it is consistent then to ignore the diagrams of Fig. 1b–d, because these contain hard
particles (both the imploding matter and the Hawking particles there were assumed
to affect the space-time curvature). We herewith insist that limiting ourselves to soft
particles only, sufﬁces to describe all black hole micro-states. What is meant by this
will become clear when we deal with the ‘ﬁrewall transformations’. For now, we note
that the soft particles in question are deﬁned on the Cauchy surface shown; if they
turn into hard particles elsewhere, this does not affect the state, but the effect must be
considered when the evolution operators are studied.
Soft particles can become hard during the evolution, Eq. ( 3.2). The soft-hard inter-
actions may have effects that are so large that soft particles may be moved around
from region I to points deep inside region II and vice versa. This is why we cannot
ignore region II. See also the discussion in Sect. 8.2.
13 Note that sign conventions for light cone coordinates are often chosen differently.
123

===== PAGE 12 =====
1514 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
(b)(a)
II
I
II I
II I II I
C e−βκ / 2 ⎪ − κ 〉II ⎪ κ 〉I C e−βκ / 2 ⎪ κ 〉II ⎪ κ 〉I
0
Fig. 3 Regions I and II of the Penrose diagram,a glued together locally smoothly, as seen by a local observer
who regards regionII as a continuation of regionI; b For a distant observer, the Hamiltonian density in region
I and at the antipodes, represented by region II, is positive. That observer would be tempted to time-reﬂect
region II. a Above: the Cauchy surface undergoes a Lorentz transformation, generated by L = HI − HII ,
when there is a time boost for the distant observer. Middle: according to local observers in region I,t h e
Cauchy surface in regionII moves backwards in time, and therefore the energies of the quantum states there,
are negative compared to the vacuum energy. The state shown here is close to the Hartle–Hawking state,
which is the vacuum according to local inertial observers. Under b, we see how this gives rise to positive
energy Hawking particles both in I and in II. Below: In the HH vacuum there are vacuum ﬂuctuations.
These have total energy = 0 according to a, while the Hawking particles in I and II all have positive energies
as seen by b
New in our theory will be the postulate that both regionsI and II describe physically
accessible parts of the same black hole (by applying the antipodal identiﬁcation), so
that pure quantum states of the local observer map onto pure quantum states of the
black hole as seen by a distant observer.
The dotted lines in Fig. 3 illustrate the fact that one might consider the energy levels
of region II as “nearly full” rather than nearly vacuum. Note that this picture applies
to soft particles only.
3.2 Hawking Radiation I
We end this section with rephrasing the standard physical features of Hawking radia-
tion. As we shall see, the usual arguments pertain in particular to soft particles. What
happens with hard particles will be exposed in Sect. 7.
123

===== PAGE 13 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1515
Locality in the Standard Model allows one to distinguish the ﬁelds that live in I
from the ﬁelds that live inII. If one uses creation and annihilation operators to describe
the quantum states in these regions, in terms of the ﬁelds in regions I and II, one ﬁnds
that the operators a and a† normally used by a local observer, now mix the ﬁelds in
region I with those in region II. To unmix them, one hits upon the necessity to perform
Bogolyubov transformations [ 9,24–26]. This means that the creation of a particle
according to a local observer, may result in a superposition of a particle created and
an (anti-)particle annihilated as seen by a distant observer. Thus, the distant observer
sees particles where a local observer sees none.
One ﬁnds that the vacuum state |∅⟩as seen by an inertial observer close to the
horizons, for distant observers takes the form
|∅⟩= C
∑
κ,n
e− 1
2βκ |κ, n⟩I |κ, n⟩II
= C
∏
ω
∑
Nω, nω
e− 1
2β Nω ω|Nω, nω⟩I |Nω, nω⟩II , (3.3)
where β is the inverse Hawking temperature, κ is the energy for the distant observer,
n is any other type of quantum number, and C is a normalisation constant. Nω is the
number of particles with energy ω. Since the generator of Lorentz transformations in
the u± direction (as seen by the local observer) is L = HI − HII , this vacuum state,
|∅⟩, is invariant under Lorentz transformations around the origin ( L|∅⟩= 0).
Eventually, however, region I and region II must be regarded in unison, so as to
assure that we are describing pure quantum states (duly entangled) only. One can
choose whether to apply this equation only to the in-particles, the out-particles, or
both.
The four special vacuum-like states a black hole can be in were aptly deﬁned by
Matt Visser [27]: he distinguishes
• The Hartle–Hawking [16–18] vacuum: the state described as a pure state according
to Eq. 3.3, that, according to a local, inertial observer, has both the in-particles
and the out-particles in the vacuum state: nothing in, nothing out, but the distant
observer has a bath of particles going in and out. These particles look thermal at
ﬁrst sight, but in our formalism, this is not an ordinary thermal bath: the particles
in one hemisphere will be strongly entangled with those in the other hemisphere,
so that, on total, we have a single pure state.
• The Boulware [28] vacuum: there is a pure vacuum at inﬁnity, hence no in-particles
and no out-particles for the distant observer,
• The Unruh vacuum: only the out-particles of a decaying black hole are seen, the
in-particles are absent, and
• The “V acuum cleaner vacuum”: the in-particles are in a Hartle–Hawking state, the
out-particles are absent.
In general, we consider these states only for the soft particles.
As Hamiltonian for a local, distant observer (an observer only looking at one
hemisphere), one can use the generator of the Lorentz transformation that keeps the
horizons in place: L = HI − HII .W eh a v e
123

===== PAGE 14 =====
1516 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
HI =
∫
x3>0
d3 ⃗xx 3H(⃗x, 0), HII =
∫
x3<0
d3 ⃗x |x3| H(⃗x, 0) ; x3 ≡ 1√
2(u+ + u−),
(3.4)
where H(⃗x, 0) is the Hamiltonian density at time t = 0.
We have, in the absence of gravitational interactions, [HI , HII ]= 0. The eigen
states of (HI , HII ) are the Boulware states (excitations from the Boulware vacuum
using ﬁnite products of creation operators), |κ1, n1⟩I |κ2, n2⟩II . Here, κ1 refers to the
total energy eigenvalue of HI , and κ2 is the energy eigenvalue of HII . However, the
Hartle Hawking state, representing the vacuum for the local observer, has both HI and
HII highly divergent; there are inﬁnitely many Boulware particles queuing up near
the horizon, but in such a way that HI − HII = 0 (due to Lorentz invariance, L = 0).
The apparent ambiguity of the sign of HII will later be seen to be due to the fact
that, if we follow a closed curve from I to II, the sign of the time coordinate ﬂips, as
in a Möbius strip (see Sect. 9); while the distant observer experiences a Hamiltonian
that looks as H = HI + HII , the observer who looks at the Hamiltonian from near
the horizon only, sees H = L = HI − HII .
As long as we look at soft particles, this local Hamiltonian is conserved in time.
However, soft particles may evolve into hard particles, and these can cross the horizon,
as we shall see. When we include the hard particles, we have to use HI + HII ,p l u s
an interaction part, as our Hamiltonian.
4 The Hidden Asymptotic Region at the Horizon
V ery near to the horizon, both HI and HII have an inﬁnite degeneracy of eigen
states. This would generate an inﬁnity in the number of micro-states, which has to be
addressed.
To describe the states |κ, n⟩as seen by a distant observer of a black hole, where
κ is the energy and n represents other quantum numbers, it is appropriate to use the
tortoise coordinates, ϱ and τ :
ϱ = 1
2 log
( r
2GM − 1
)
+ r
4GM = 1
2 log(xy )
τ = t
4GM = 1
2 log(x/y),
(4.1)
where x and y are the Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates, see Appendix A. The tortoise
coordinates ( 4.1) are useful because they reproduce the ﬂat space-time coordinates
asymptotically. In these coordinates, a massless scalar wave packet φ(ϱ, τ) obeys
∂2
τ φ =
(
∂2
ϱ + 2(2GM /r)2∂ϱ + (4GM /r)2 𝓁(𝓁+ 1)( 1 − 2GM /r)
)
φ. (4.2)
123

===== PAGE 15 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1517
Note that, near the horizon, the angular momentum term (and possible mass terms)
become insigniﬁcant. When the ﬁeld φ is properly normalised,14 the linear derivative
term turns into a potential term of lesser signiﬁcance, and we ﬁnd that plane waves will
propagate inwards and outwards with velocities less than 1 in the (ϱ, τ) coordinates.
Since ϱ goes all the way to −∞ , we have inﬁnite trains of plane waves going in and
out, inﬁnitesimally close to the horizon. This is our ‘hidden asymptotic region’.
In a ﬁrst approximation, the states |κ, n⟩ are obtained from the solutions of
φ(ϱ,τ) = e−iκτ φ(ϱ, 0), where κ = ∑
ω Nω ω, when each mode ω is occupied by Nω
particles. These states form the basis of states as experienced by the distant observer;
they contain N = ∑
ω Nω particles.
As in Sect. 3.2, one would now be tempted to use the Hartle–Hawking state ( 3.3).
The fact that there are inﬁnitely many modes at ϱ →+ ∞ is easy to understand;
this is due to the inﬁnite amount of space outside the black hole, so we can imagine a
cut-off by imposing boundary conditions of a large box surrounding the hole.
The limit ϱ →− ∞ is a different one and it is important.15 This hidden asymptotic
region is easy to interpret, but often, incorrectly, ignored: there are inﬁnitely many
modes ω describing particles queuing up at the horizon. It takes them forever to pass
the horizon, but they do not naturally reﬂect backwards. Imposing a cut-off there,
requires the following discussion [ 8]:
If we would keep all quantum states generated by the ﬁelds on the domain −∞ <
ϱ< 0, we would get a strictly inﬁnite spectrum of micro-states for the black hole,
which clashes with our physical expectation that the number of micro-states should
be ﬁnite and should agree with the thermodynamics of Hawking radiation. Both the
in-particles and the out-particles give inﬁnite numbers of micro-states near the horizon.
Equivalently, we can blame the inﬁnity to the simple fact that the vacuum state |∅⟩
is invariant under the subgroup of longitudinal Lorentz transformations, whereas, for
the local observer, this subset of the Lorentz group is non compact; Lorentz transfor-
mations generate inﬁnite sequences of states.
To adapt this situation to what we expect physically, we again have to modify the
theory. In-particles too close to the horizon should, somehow, be replaced by out-
particles, which must carry all information along. This could be achieved by erecting
a ‘brick wall’ [ 8], but that would be too drastic and too difﬁcult to justify physically,
while a better solution is at hand.
What we expect physically, is that there should be a boundary condition at some
large, negative value ofϱ, relating all in-particles to out-particles. This is the statement
that the process of formation and evaporation of a black hole is controlled by a unitary
scattering matrix S [9].
Note however, that not only standard theories are unable to determine the form of
S, but even the existence of such a matrix is often ignored [ 29].
14 When we write φ(r, t) = K(ϱ)φ(ϱ, τ), where, close to the horizon, K(ϱ) → eϱ, the ﬁrst derivative
term can be replaced by a potential term. This is the usual way to restore hermiticity of the Hamiltonian,
and with that, the restoration of the interpretation of |φ|2 as a probability distribution.
15 Later, these two inﬁnite domains will be found to be related. See end of Sect. 5.1.
123

===== PAGE 16 =====
1518 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
A way to phrase the new situation is to observe that our hidden asymptotic region
must be sealed off. We now describe a natural mechanism that was found to do exactly
that.
Since τ runs backwards in region II, states ψ as seen by a local observer are the
normal product of ordinary states in region I and the complex conjugates of ordinary
states in region II. This is why our ﬁrst idea [ 30] in 1984 was to propose that the two
regions I and II of the Penrose diagram, together represent states |ψ⟩⟨ψ|, or, elements
of the density matrix seen by the outside observer. This idea, however, also led to
difﬁculties: in Ref. [ 10], we found that there are direct transitions between states in
region I and states in region II, which would correspond to direct transitions between
bra- and ket-states, and as such clash with unitarity.
Our recent investigations [ 11,12] led to a hybrid theory—in a sense, we com-
bine the bra-ket idea of 1984 with the notion that the time evolution should be
unitary, i.e., it should not mix bra states with ket states. Our solution is not just
a wild theory or model of what could be a vague idea, but rather the contrary: it
follows by explicitly inspecting the equations after an expansion in spherical har-
monics. In terms of the spherical harmonics, our Schrödinger equation decouples
all 𝓁, m components from one another, so that the equations are simple and unique
differential equations in one space- and one time variable, with explicit solutions,
so that there can be no doubt about their correctness. The antipodal mapping that
connects regions I and II is seen to be inevitable. Let us continue describing the
physics.
Our explicit analysis invited us to introduce the notion of hard and soft particles.
The hard particles are inevitable because, due to the evolution law ( 3.2), p± can grow
or shrink exponentially as τ →± ∞ . However, both the mass μ and the transverse
momenta ˜p do not grow or shrink. If we decide from now on to keep (in natural units)
|˜p|≪ MPlanck,μ ≪ MPlanck,𝓁 ≪ MBH /MPlanck, (4.3)
then the only hard particles to keep track of have either |p−| > MPlanck (the hard
in-particles) or |p+| > MPlanck (the hard out-particles).
It just so happens that hard elementary particles have never been observed. In
describing our micro-states, we shall assume that they always can be omitted ,b u ti n
order to keep the hard in- and out-particles out of the way, “ﬁrewall transformations”
will be needed, as will be explained—the assumption will be veriﬁed.
The ﬁrewall transformations were in fact implicitly used to arrive at the unitary
matrix in Refs. [ 11,12] (see also Appendix B), as it connects only soft particles.
However, these particles are described in terms of their contributions to the energy
momentum distribution p±(θ, ϕ) or their contributions to the average position distri-
bution u±(θ, ϕ). What then remains to be done is to map these data onto the states
of Fock space in the Standard Model. This however will have to be left for future
investigations.
123

===== PAGE 17 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1519
5 The Correct Construction of the Micro-states
We shall only make use of conventional quantum ﬁeld theories when addressing soft
particles. To formulate a theory for the black hole micro-states, hard particles, embed-
ded in a non-trivial, curved background space-time, are to be eliminated as follows.
First, we deﬁne the quantum states in terms of only soft particles roaming around in
the metric of an ‘eternal’ black hole. Then, we show how to modify the evolution
laws such that the evolution operator remains unitary within this Hilbert space, 16 and
subsequently we can consider evolution over long time scales. To achieve the lat-
ter, text book physics needs modiﬁcation concerning the boundary conditions at the
horizon—in various ways.
Eventually, our description is intended to include black holes formed by the implo-
sion of matter, as well as the ﬁnal explosion of a black hole. But, to begin with, we
only include Hawking particles that are emitted during a time interval that is short
compared to M log M in Planck units, and soft particles entering the hole during the
same short period. This may seem to exclude black holes emitting Hawking particles
at much later times, and also all black holes with the history of an implosion at much
earlier times. These will be included however, through the ﬁrewall transformation, see
later (Sect. 5.1).
Hard particles with large values of ˜p and/or their masses μ, are strongly (that is,
exponentially) suppressed in the Hawking radiation, and usually not assumed to be
present in the in-states either. So as stated earlier, we ignore those.
At time scales much longer than M log M in Planck units, the Hawking particles
appear to generate ﬁrewalls: due to continued Lorentz contractions, the p± of these
particles would diverge so fast that their effects on the metric can no longer be ignored.
These are the hard particles that will be considered shortly.
Thus, as yet, neither are we concerned about the ancient history of the black hole,
nor about its distant future, and note that this is standard practice when describing
more conventional quantum processes: as soon as we have the complete set of states,
the evolution laws for short time intervals are all one needs to know, to uncover the
full time evolution features, by repeatedly applying the evolution laws found.
Having thus (temporarily) eliminated back reactions on the metric, we can now
safely employ the full Penrose diagram of a stationary black hole, the one shown in
Fig. 1a. We ﬁll it with soft particles only, so neither the imploding matter of the distant
past, nor the Hawking particles emitted in the late future, are visible.
To repeat: this description of the quantum states can only last for short time intervals.
If timeτ (as deﬁned in Eq. (4.1)) is allowed to become too large, then the in-particles are
seen to be boosted so much that they violate the no-back-reaction condition; similarly,
if we look at the far past, we see that the later out-particles obtain too much energy
there, so that they too, fall out of the allowed domain.
16 A Hilbert space that naturally must include all in- and out-particles in the black hole’s vicinity, but far
from the horizon.
123

===== PAGE 18 =====
1520 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
This is a problem, which can now be cured. Consider an operator creating an in-
going particle17 with a very modest amount of momentum p−. The quantity Gp μ is
so small that its effect on the curvature may be ignored. Now, as time τ proceeds, the
component p− of the momentum increases as
p−(τ) = p−(0) eτ , (5.1)
while the distance u+ from the past event horizon (deﬁned at the moment when the
particle crosses the future event horizon) decreases as
u+(τ) = u+(0) e−τ . (5.2)
Notice, that the uncertainty relation
δu+ δp− /greaterorsimilar¯h, (5.3)
is not affected by the time evolution.
We then arrive at the point where we can no longer ignore the back reaction.
Consider any other particle, a (Hawking) particle, going out. Its distance u− from the
future event horizon is shifted by the in-going object, in a way that can be computed
precisely. It is in fact the only component of the curvature caused by thep− particle that
we have to take into account. The shift δu−(θ, ϕ) depends on the location /Omega1= (θ, ϕ)
on the horizon, and was derived to be [ 23]:
δu−(/Omega1)= 8πGR −2 f (/Omega1, /Omega1′)p−,/Omega1 = (θ, ϕ) , /Omega1 ′= (θ′,ϕ ′) ;
(1 − /Delta1/Omega1) f = δ2(/Omega1, /Omega1′), /Delta1 /Omega1Y𝓁m(θ, ϕ) =− 𝓁(𝓁+ 1)Y𝓁m(θ, ϕ) ,
(5.4)
where R = 2GM BH and /Omega1′denotes the point on the horizon where p− enters.18
As described in Refs. [ 9–12], we use the fact that these equations are linear in the
momentum p− of the in-going particle. Repeat the argument for all particles that have
p− growing to values that become too large. They form a momentum distribution
p−(/Omega1)=
∑
i
p−
i δ2(/Omega1, /Omega1i), (5.5)
and the total shift of all out-going particle positions is
δu−(/Omega1)= 8πGR −2
∫
d2/Omega1′ f (/Omega1, /Omega1′) p−(/Omega1′). (5.6)
17 This is not exactly the creation operator a†(p), but an operator increasing the ingoing total momentum
by an amount (p), while keeping the norm of the state unchanged; hence, it is a unitary operator.
18 The equations depend on the units chosen. Since we work with the tortoise coordinates (4.1), the variables
u− and p− are dimensionless. In units where ¯h = c = 1, G has dimension length-squared.
123

===== PAGE 19 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1521
Next, we realise that the contributions of inﬁnitesimally smallp− values in a somewhat
more distant past can simply be chosen such that they generate the original positions
u− of all out-going particles. This argument justiﬁes the idea that we can simply
replace
δu−(/Omega1)→ u−(/Omega1), (5.7)
or, the average positions u −(/Omega1)of all particles leaving the black hole at any solid
angle /Omega1, are directly given by the momentum distribution p −(/Omega1′) on the in-going
ones.
And ﬁnally, it is tempting to perform a spherical wave expansion [10–12], to arrive
at the algebra:
u±(/Omega1)=
∑
𝓁,m
u𝓁m Y𝓁m(/Omega1), p±(/Omega1)=
∑
𝓁,m
p±
𝓁m Y𝓁m(/Omega1); (5.8a)
[u±(/Omega1),p∓(/Omega1′)]= iδ2(/Omega1, /Omega1′), [u±
𝓁m, p∓
𝓁′m′]= iδ𝓁𝓁′δmm′ ; (5.8b)
u−
out = 8πG/R2
𝓁2 + 𝓁+ 1 p−
in, u+
in =− 8πG/R2
𝓁2 + 𝓁+ 1 p+
out. (5.8c)
Three more steps are needed to arrive at a description of micro-states in terms of
soft particles only. First, we need to establish what exactly the operators p±
𝓁,m and u±
𝓁,m
mean, in terms of Standard Model particles. They are the spherical wave expansions
of the operators p±(θ, ϕ) and u±(θ, ϕ), which in turn describe the total-momentum
distribution and the average position operatorof in- and out-going particles across the
event horizon (speciﬁed at each solid angle/Omega1= (θ, ϕ) separately). In this quality, they
neatly obey our algebraic commutator equation ( 5.8b). This does mean that p− can
be interpreted as the T−− component of the energy momentum operator, integrated
over u+, and mutatis mutandis p+. For any quantum state in the Standard Model, we
can compute these operators, just as we can compute 19 the average position operators
u±(θ, ϕ).
However, the converse is more problematic. Our algebra dictates how the p− dis-
tribution of the in-particles dictates the u− distribution of the out-particles, and vice
versa. This only yields a unitary evolution lawif the Standard Model states are uniquely
described by these components of the energy momentum tensor.
This is not obvious, but in our earlier work [ 31,32] on the relation between the
black hole states and strings, it was noted that our theory is geometrically related to
string theory. Our operators p±(θ, ϕ) have the same form as string vertex insertions;
the horizon simply plays the role of a string world sheet. In string theory, the claim
that the quantum states are described by string vertex insertions, is considered quite
acceptable. We adopt the same verdict in the present formalism. 20
19 Note that, in such calculations, the partial wave expansion is not a quantum superposition of angular
momentum states, but a linear decomposition of operators. Thus, although our mathematics shows a strong
resemblance to the hydrogen atom, the physical machinery described here is different in important ways.
20 In fact, our algebra is closely related to the Virasoro algebra used in string theory [ 2], apart from two
subtleties: ﬁrst, our surface is a Euclidean one while the string world sheet is Minkowskian, which means
123

===== PAGE 20 =====
1522 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
IV
III
II I
∞+∞− ′
∞+ ′
∞∞′
∞−
(a)
IV
III
II I
∞+∞− ′
∞+ ′
∞∞′
∞−
(b)
Fig. 4 The Penrose diagram with soft particles added. a Possible locations of the in-particles. At positive
values of u− they enter the hole in region I, at negative u− they enter the hole in region II. b Showing
possible out-particles. If u+ > 0, they emerge in region I,i f u+ < 0, they emerge in region II
This leaves open the question how one arrives at the desired Standard Model quan-
tum state once Tμν is given. This is an important open question at this moment. Note
that, sooner or later, we should observe that globally conserved quantum numbers such
as baryon number, will be inadmissible in most black hole theories, and the question
will be raised how such constraints will arise in practice, and how they should be dealt
with.
All we can do at this stage is conjecture that the mapping from energy-momentum
density operators to Standard Model Fock space states, will be a unitary one. This
conjecture requires that, when enumerating the states, and when proper cut-offs are
used, the total number of relevant Fock space states should be equal to the number of
possible values for p± and u±.
The second step taken in this section concerns the physical interpretation of regions
I and II. The gravitational shifts δu−(θ, ϕ) described in Eq. ( 5.4), can easily be seen
to carry a particle over from region I to region II, or back (when an amount of p− is
annihilated). Consequently, our algebra ( 5.8) only closes properly if all in-particles
are allowed to superimpose states in I with states in II.T h e p− states are Fourier
transforms of the u+ states. These are sharply deﬁned only if the in-particle position
operators are allowed to have both signs; we should be allowed to have them enter
in I or in II or in a superposition of such states; we cannot restrict ourselves to one
sign of u+ only. The same must be true for the out-particles. In Fig. 4 the situation is
illustrated. Both the u± operators and the p± operators must be allowed to range from
positive to negative, in which case the different regions both get involved. So how can
we ensure unitarity in our system of quantum states?
The answer to this can only be that region I and region II must both represent
physical black holes. Now, if these were allowed to be different black holes, then it
would be inevitable to have cross-talk between these two, possibly widely separated,
Footnote 20 continued
that we have “strings” with an imaginary slope parameter α′, and secondly, the central charge is missing.
The central charge shows up when the Lorentz group is made complete; in our theory, transverse Lorentz
rotations have been disregarded, but they may well lead to the same complications as in string theory,
necessitating central charges.
123

===== PAGE 21 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1523
black holes, which would generate irreparable damage to any form of locality and
causality.21
It turns out that there exists exactly one clear and simple cure to this problem:
regions I and II represent the same black hole. Now if these would also be describing
the same spot on the horizon, then this would generate conical singularities at the
centre of the Penrose diagram. This would violate the principle of general relativity,
since physics at a conical singularity is different from the physics of locally regular
regions of space-time; we cannot allow this.
The correct answer must be that I and II represent different regions on the horizon
of the same black hole. This means that we must have a Z2 mapping of the horizon
onto itself: if we move from one spot to its Z2 image, we get the points connecting to
region II. The square of the mapping must be one, and there should be no ﬁxed point.
In Appendix B, we show that there is exactly one solution satisfying these constraints,
which is that this Z2 mapping is the antipodal mapping: moving from a ﬁxed point of
(θ, ϕ) from I to II or back, must correspond to a transition to the antipodal points:
(θ, ϕ) ←→ (π − θ, ϕ + π). (5.9)
Physically, such a space-time is remarkably regular. Since in all regions from which
information can reach us, the radial coordinate r obeys r ≥ 2GM BH , the points
that we identify never come closer than 2 πGM BH , so local observers never notice
anything unusual. In fact, one discovers two features that seem to be most welcome
in a quantum theory of general relativity:
(i) Every point in our physical space-time now represents exactly one point in the
Penrose diagram, not two, as we have in the conventional theory. Thus we uncov-
ered a principle that may be a necessary one for the quantum theory: When ﬁelds
on a manifold are quantised, it is essential that the entire asymptotic domain of
the manifold maps one-to-one onto that of ordinary space-time, while preserving
the metric. (see the explanation of this statement in the Introduction, Sect. 1:I t
must be possible to ﬁnd time-like paths that connect all space-time points in ∞+
to all points in ∞−). This is the way to eliminate all problems with unitarity.
(ii) All Cauchy surfaces must go through the origin of the Penrose diagram, so that,
at a given time slice, there is no “interior” region of the black hole. As we never
enter regions III or IV further than by an inﬁnitesimal amount, all time slices used
to describe black holes contain physically accessible points only (in the sense that
they are connected to the outside world by time-like geodesics, both to the future
and the past), with the exception of regions of measure zero (Fig. 5).
21 Often, it is brought forward that, therefore, these two black holes will be entangled. This would not be a
problem if the entanglement would be time-independent and hence not transmit information. In the present
case, such entanglement would be inﬂuenced by in- and out-going material, and this would violate unitarity
at the local scale. See Appendix B; ﬁnding such unitarity violation inadmissible, we searched for—and
found—a better solution.
123

===== PAGE 22 =====
1524 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
Fig. 5 The antipodal mapping illustrated on planet Earth. Figure at the right shows the map formed by
the antipodes of the ﬁgure at left, after rotating it 180 ◦ around the z-axis. Notice that the continents are
unfamiliar; they are parity-reﬂected
5.1 Quantum Clones
Now there is a third step to be taken. Looking at the in- and out-states of Fig. 4,
we see that, as time τ evolves, the in-states move further in, and the out-states move
further out. This means that the momentum of the in-states increases exponentially as
time runs forward, and for the out-states the momenta increase in the backwards time
direction. In both time directions, therefore, we encounter hard particles (as deﬁned
in Sects. 1 and 4). The description of the micro-states as in Fig. 4, using soft particles
only, therefore only works for time scales of the order of GM BH in natural units.
If we want to cover larger time domains, our algebra ( 5.8) comes to the rescue. It
states that, if in-momenta p− become large, then the out-distances u− will increase
exponentially as well. Similarly, the p+ momenta of the out states follow the u+
positions of the in-states. Soon, the point will be reached that we are describing particles
whose coordinates u±(θ, ϕ) are so large that they have left the scenery of the black
hole. Such particles may be ignored. Note, that removing these particles that are far
away now, allows us to redeﬁne the black hole mass by subtracting the mass of the
distant particles from the original expression. Thus, the black hole mass varies in time
as expected physically.
Now comes something very important: the coordinates u± are directly related to
the momenta p± according to Eq. ( 5.8c) in the algebra ( 5.8). They do not represent
different states, but refer to the same quantum states. What used to generate cloning
problems now works as desired: the coordinates u− and p− are redundant, we only
need one of the two to specify the quantum state. Similarly, we need either u+ or p+
to describe a single quantum state. To be able to ignore the gravitational back reaction,
it is best to use these substitutions to obtain momenta p when they are small, and/or
coordinates u when they are big.
If we disregard particles that are too far separated from the black hole, we must,
at the same time, disregard the high momentum particles to which they are linked
according to Eq. ( 5.8c). This is how we remove the particles that cease to be soft.
We can also phrase this is as follows: the hard in-particles, with values p−(/Omega1)
for their momenta, are equally aptly described as if they were the soft out-particles,
123

===== PAGE 23 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1525
with p− replaced by u−, in accordance with the algebra ( 5.8). The hard in-particles
are quantum clones of the soft out-particles. The appropriate way to describe Hilbert
space of all allowed states is to remove all particles with p± exceeding some bound,
by replacing them by the corresponding soft particles, for whichu± is now big enough
to consider it as departed from the black hole.
It was these “hard” particles that generated “ﬁrewalls” in earlier investigations [ 6].
Now we see that there is a natural way to remove them. They are removed because
they represent quantum states that can be better described as states containing soft
particles sufﬁciently far away from the black hole’s horizon.
Thus we replace all hard particles by soft ones, which also replaces in-particles
by out-particles, and generates, in fact, the scattering matrix relating in- to out-. We
refer to this transformation as the ‘ﬁrewall transformation’. it is what we alluded to
earlier: ﬁrewalls can be systematically and completely removed. Thus, our description
of matter in terms of soft particles only, is validated a posteriori. As this includes the
early matter particles that formed the black hole through an implosion, we see that now
also our use of the eternal Penrose diagram, Fig. 1a, is justiﬁed. See also Footnote 15
in Sect. 4: the hidden asymptotic region near the two horizons is linked to the physical
asymptotic region inﬁnitely far away from the black hole.
6 Novel Aspects of this Theory
There is a number of important points that must be mentioned. We noted that the
coordinates u±(θ, ϕ), when positive, refer to region I and when negative refer to
region II, the antipode of I. Something similar happens to the momenta. Upon careful
examination of the algebra, we see that when a particle with momentum p− enters
the black hole in region I, it has the same effect as a particle with momentum −p−
entering at the antipodal point. Here also, one must avoid double counting. If these two
conﬁgurations lead to the same coordinate conﬁguration for the out-going particles,
then they must represent the same state. Thus, the momentum entering a point (θ, ϕ)
on the horizon always equals minus the momentum entering at the antipodal point.
It is the demand that the u± variables, by deﬁnition, have opposite signs in region I
and region II, from which we infer that, in the spherical wave expansion, only the odd
values of 𝓁contribute.
This does not lead to any direct contradiction; physical particles can enter the black
hole from both sides independently. This is because the energies κ, as experienced
by the outside observer, are something totally different from the momentum variables
p±, which are the ones observed by the observer near the intersection of future and
past event horizon. What one has to keep in mind is that, every in-going and out-going
particle, enters or leaves at a different point (θ, ϕ) on the horizon. This is so because
all in- and out-particles carry exactly one u± coordinate, which is allowed either to
be positive or negative, but not both. A particle with positive u+ enters in region I,
and negative u+ in region II. The momenta p− are then ill-deﬁned because of the
uncertainty relation. In the momentum frame, positive p− means either a positive
contribution in region I or a negative contribution in region II. The energies κ are
deﬁned for regions I and II separately. At all κ, the wave functions in regions I and II
123

===== PAGE 24 =====
1526 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
are different, so that the energy distribution over the horizon is an arbitrary function
of θ and ϕ. The ﬁrewall transformation helps us to transform away states where either
one u coordinate is too small or one of the momenta p is too large (both in Planck
units).
Another important point is that the spherical wave expansion mixes up positive and
negative signs (every Y𝓁,m function swings from positive to negative values), so as
soon as we look at deﬁnite (𝓁,m) states, we mix up particles at one hemisphere with
particles at the other hemisphere.
The energies κ are the energies associated to the external time variable t. In our
dynamical equations, these energies are conserved regardless whether parts of a wave
switch from region I to II or back. Thus, total energy will be conserved, in spite of the
sign switch of local energies discussed in Sect. 3.2.
The mode with 𝓁= m = 0 does not exist, as we just noted that 𝓁has to be odd.
This implies that we cannot handle a single ‘dust shell’ entering (or leaving) the black
hole. What this really means is that such a ‘dust shell state’ is ill-deﬁned. The dust
shell actually consists of myriads of ‘dust particles’, each of which being allowed to
be in a number of different quantum states. If a dust particle enters at one solid angle
(θ, ϕ), no particle is allowed to enter exactly at its antipode. It is perfectly allowed to
enter at any other point very close by—but not too close. 22
The energies of the in- and out-going particles, as observed by the external observer,
refer to the plane waves in terms of the tortoise (Eddington-Finkelstein) coordinates
(4.1). These tortoise coordinates commute with the sign operators σ±, since, close to
the horizon, we have
u± = σ±eϱ±
. (6.1)
Thus, at every point on the horizon (Footnote 22) we will see just one particle entering
or leaving, either at (θ, ϕ) or at its antipode, but not at both.
The energy κ for each particle is independent of the local momenta p±, and can
always be kept positive. Smearing the energies equally over all allowed solid angles
gives us a dust shell, where “dust” indeed stands for very many particles.
The Hamiltonian Hτ is the operator that causes the operators p− and u− to increase
exponentially with τ , while p+ and u+ should decrease exponentially. The operator
that does this is the dilation operator. At each 𝓁and m, we have (close to the horizon):
Hτ = L = HI − HII = 1
2(u+ p− + p− u+) = p− u+ + 1
2 i
= i
(
p− ∂
∂p− + 1
2
)
=− i
(
u+ ∂
∂u+ + 1
2
)
=− i ∂
∂ϱ,
(6.2)
where the symmetrisation, which led to the terms ± 1
2 i, was needed to keep the Hamil-
tonian hermitian.
22 The total number of points to be considered on the horizon will equal 𝓁max(𝓁max + 1),w h e r e𝓁max
is the cut-off for the spherical waves, as the transverse momenta there reach the Planck value. Since
𝓁max = O(MBH ) in Planck units, this happens to be of the order of the total number of Hawking particles
emitted by the average black hole [ 33, G. Dvali, personal communication].
123

===== PAGE 25 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1527
It was observed by Betzios et al. [ 34], that this dilaton Hamiltonian in the variables
u± and p± can be transformed into an apparently more conventional form, being the
inverted harmonic oscillator. Rather than ellipses, the classical orbits in this potential
are hyperbolas in phase space. An orbit may or may not bounce against the top of the
potential, and on that it will depend whether a dynamical variable ends up in the same
region or in the antipodal region of phase space.
We keep our own notation. In a given spherical wave, energy eigenstates with energy
κ𝓁m have wave functions of the form
ψ → Ce iκ𝓁m ϱ. (6.3)
In a quantum ﬁeld theory, when disregarding the interactions, the Hamiltonians in
regions I and II are [9] (Note the discussion on the sign of HII at the end of Sect. 3.1):
HI =
∑
i
∫ ∞
0
dω
∑
𝓁,m
ω aI †
𝓁m(ω) aI
𝓁m(ω),
HII =
∑
i
∫ ∞
0
dω
∑
𝓁,m
ω aII †
𝓁m (ω) aII
𝓁m(ω), (6.4)
where the ﬁrst summation symbol stands for the summation over different possible
ﬁeld types I. The operators aI and aII are superpositions of the usual creation and
annihilation operators of the ﬁeld theory through a Bogolyubov transformation [ 24–
26].
Observe that, in Eq. ( 6.4), both HI and HII are non negative, while Eq. ( 6.2) can
have any sign. This has to be taken into account when mapping our states |κ𝓁m⟩onto
the Standard Model states, a procedure that has not yet been elaborated to the author’s
satisfaction.
One more remark here about the sign ﬂip of HII . At ﬁrst sight it looks as if the
sign of this part of the Hamiltonian makes our theory inconsistent. Y et no problems
were encountered in the explicit calculations. There is a good observation to be made
to reassure us at this point. The crossing of the horizon, as described by the S-matrix
also given in Appendix B, involves a substitution of the kind p ↔ u, or, a Fourier
transformation. As is well known, replacing p with u also replaces i by −i.N o w
the matrix also contains terms on the diagonal, and these would generate the wrong
sign. However, these terms are suppressed by factors e−πκ , so they cannot affect
the signs. What counts, eventually, is that the matrix is unitary and the energy is
conserved.
6.1 The Black Hole Interior
The antipodal identiﬁcation holds in particular for points situated on the horizon,
i.e., the points at the centre of the Penrose diagram, Fig. 1a. Outside the horizon,
the points in region I are identiﬁed with the antipodal points of region II.T h i s
123

===== PAGE 26 =====
1528 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
means that the observable points outside the horizon (all living in region I), are not
identiﬁed.
Nevertheless, the antipodal identiﬁcation implies one important modiﬁcation of our
interpretation of the black hole metric, as compared to earlier work: the states |κ, n⟩I
and |κ, n⟩II both refer to matter particles outside the horizon, so that the HH state
(3.3) is a single, pure state. This does away with the information problem and the
unitarity problem in a radical fashion. Unitarity holds iff the regions I and II together
represent the state the black hole is in.
Where then is the interior of the black hole? There is no interior. All equal-time
lines (for the external observer) cross the centre point of the Penrose diagram, which
is the intersection of future and past horizon, a space with measure zero. This means
that, if one would move faster than the local velocity of light (that is, on a space-like
geodesic), one could hop from a point on the horizon to its antipode instantly. It is as
if, in 3-space, a sphere of radius RBH = 2GM BH has been excavated, after which the
antipodal points are glued together. In a conformal model, one could identify
⃗x ≡− R2 ⃗x/|x|2. (6.5)
Notice, that this effectively just removes all points ⃗x with |⃗x| < R. Notice also, that
the transformation in ( 6.5) does not invert the parity of local displacements d ⃗x.
In ﬂat space-time, the transformation in Eq. ( 6.5) may seem to violate special
relativity because two space-like separated points are identiﬁed. In the black hole, there
is no local or global violation of special or general relativity. This we say because, on
a time-like geodesic, the time it takes to reach a point at distance ε from the horizon,
takes an amount of time that diverges as | log ε|. Once we reach the Planck scale,
information can cross the horizon as it is spread over the Fourier transform of an
out-going signal. Therefore, we can say that if we try to send information from some
point r = a to its antipode, the trip through the horizon takes an amount of time of
the order of R log[(a − R)/R], while the detour around the black hole takes time of
the order of π R, where R = 2GM BH is the radius of the horizon. So the detour is
actually faster.
Even if our identiﬁcation would suggest that one can beat the local velocity of
light, this would still not have to violate special relativity because we have a prefer-
ence frame induced by the background metric. We brieﬂy continue on this subject in
Appendix B.
The only ‘inside’ region would be regions III and IV. For the outside observer,
however, these would be regions where his time coordinate is ‘beyond inﬁnity’, or
‘before minus inﬁnity’, and therefore these regions are unphysical for the outside
observer.
A different—but equivalent—way of saying this is that regions III and IV of the
Penrose diagram of the eternal black hole, contain just quantum clones of the particles
in regions I and II. A Cauchy surface must cover regions I and II or be replaced partly
to go through III or IV, but care must be taken not to count any physically relevant
degree of freedom more than once. This should be guaranteed if the Cauchy surface
is space-like everywhere.
123

===== PAGE 27 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1529
6.2 The Central Singularity
Eventually, however, the antipodal identiﬁcation does have an effect on the singularity
structure of the black hole space-time. At all space-time points on, or in the immediate
neighbourhood of, the horizon, antipodal points are all separated from one another by
distances close to π RBH . Therefore, the identiﬁcation is smooth and regular every-
where near the horizon.
Only at the plane r = 0, the effect of the antipodal identiﬁcation will be more
profound. The metric actually already has a singularity there, since, near the origin,
its r component takes the shape −C d(r 3/2)2 (being time-like in this region). The
two branches here must again be identiﬁed antipodes, so that, perhaps, r 3/2 is a more
natural coordinate. Note however, that we have cosmic censorship in the Schwarzschild
metric: the r → 0 singularity occurs when, according to outside observers, time would
be beyond inﬁnity, so that no physical clashes occur at ﬁnite time. See Footnote 12.
7 Hawking Radiation II
Although one might still express some doubts about the true nature of Hawking par-
ticles at opposite sides of the black hole, we have noted that, applying Eq. ( 3.3)t o
describe them, suggests a strong entanglement. This then would lead to a prediction,
if ever experiments could be done with radiating black holes. We now shall explain
our prediction that, if at one point (θ, ϕ) on the black hole horizon a Hawking particle
is detected in spite of being suppressed by some fairly large Boltzmann factor e−β E ,
then its anti-particle should emerge at the antipode without any further suppression.
The situation can be read off from the diagrams on the lowest line of Fig. 3a, b.
Fig. 3a is how one usually understands the emergence of Hawking radiation from local
vacuum ﬂuctuations at the horizon. A particle (upwards arrow) is created together
with its antiparticle (arrow down). Any quantum numbers are arranged as following
the arrows, so that the antiparticle has opposite quantum numbers—it is a C inversion
of the particle. When we ﬂip it back (b), we would be tempted to make another C
inversion, so that one might expect a particle at the point ⃗x to be emitted together with
the same particle at −⃗x. This is what we expected in Refs. [ 11,12].
However, the points −⃗x are parity reﬂections of the point ⃗x. Indeed, if one would
consider the map of planet Earth generated by the antipodes of the conventional map,
one would notice it to be parity reﬂected. Quantum ﬁeld theory of the elementary
particles is not invariant under parity P, but only under the combination CPT, where
C is charge conjugation and T is time reﬂection. Consequently, the parity image of a
Hawking particle might not even exist (think of left-handed neutrinos). Thus, if parity
is inverted, we expect the left-handed neutrinos to be replaced by right-handed ones.
In addition, time must be reﬂected, but this is easy to interpret: the Hawking particles
stay on one trajectory while the local time parameter ﬂips from one sign to the other,
so time reversal should not affect the particles. 23
23 But this does mean that, at both sides of the horizon, we see the entangled particles at different times,
as if t2 =− t1. Consequently, the particles will not behave identically. As soon as they left the horizon, one
particle might decay differently from the other.
123

===== PAGE 28 =====
1530 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
We conclude that Hawking particles at opposite points of the black hole are each
other’s CPT reﬂections. Our conclusion at present is:
Hawking particles emerging from the black hole horizon are 100% entangled:
if a particle emerges that is strongly suppressed by the thermal Boltzmann factor
e−E/kTHawking , then at the antipode the antiparticle emerges with 100% probability,
and in particular, with no further Boltzmann suppression at all. Locally,w es e ea
perfect thermal mixture with Hawking’s expression for the temperature, but globally
not: the two entangled particles together are suppressed by exactly one Boltzmann
factor e−E/kTHawking , while in a thermal state one would have expected the square of
that.
The subject of the entanglement of antipodal Hawking particles is still under inves-
tigation. It is also not yet clear how the actual value of the Hawking entropy can
be deduced from the micro-states in this scheme. Locally, close to the horizon, we
do expect Hawking’s original value for the temperature to emerge, although, due to
the entanglement, and our general philosophy that provides the black hole with pure
quantum states, the entire black hole is not thermal at all.
8 Modiﬁcations of More Conventional Views; Misconceptions and
Criticism
In discussions, the author became more aware of the thorny points in our arguments.
Some of these we now discuss.
8.1 The Approximations Made
Two simpliﬁcations were assumed, in order to make our calculations possible. First,
we ignored non-gravitational interactions, in particular electromagnetism. Actually,
with some extra effort, electromagnetism can be included, but since the ﬁne structure
constant α is not inﬁnitesimally small, higher order corrections would become more
problematic. Electromagnetism can be included by treating it as a gravitational force
in a compactiﬁed 5th dimension. It produces extra components to our algebra [ 9].
Primarily, this and other standard model interactions would have to take place during
the short time interval when an out-going particle meets an in-going one. As long as
these effects are perturbative and renormalizable, we expect them to be small. In any
case, most other treatments of black holes also disregard such effects. A systematic
study of standard model interactions at the black hole horizon will be interesting
and important, but we expect the basic features discussed here not to undergo major
changes due to these.
A second approximation made was that we ignored gravitational interactions in
the transverse direction: these cause in- and out going particles to shift sideways. As
long as 𝓁 ≪ 𝓁max, these corrections are also expected to be small, but as soon as 𝓁
approaches its maximal value, of the order of MBH in Planck units, this effect cannot
be ignored; indeed, it is assumed to be responsible for the existence of an upper bound
123

===== PAGE 29 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1531
for 𝓁. So, our approximations become less accurate for spherical waves approaching
this limiting value.24
For lower values of 𝓁, however, we expect our results to be quite accurate. It was
claimed that our result was a “merely classical approximation” [ 35], but then this
would apply equally to the spherical wave expansion of the standard hydrogen atom,
since also there, the photon, responsible for the e2/r potential, is a quantum object.
As in the hydrogen atom, also the gravitational potential between in- and out-going
matter can be treated as if it were classical. In any case, the operators arising from it
are commuting, and that is what counts.
8.2 The Penrose Diagram
In many treatises about black holes, fundamental distinctions are made between the
Penrose diagrams Fig. 1a–c, while Fig. 1d is rarely mentioned. Outside the past hori-
zon, region I represents the surrounding universe; it is the same in all these diagrams.
Regions II, III, and IV are different. These differences come about because matter
going in along the past event horizon, or emerging along the future event horizon, is
either omitted or included in the picture. The fact that both quantum mechanics and
general relativity are symmetric under time reversal, while the purported solutions are
not, was rarely regarded as an oddity.
In most other branches of physics, it is customary that the laws of evolution only
refer to the state the system is in at the same moment, not to its distant past history, nor
to what is to be expected in the distant future, yet in black hole physics, often different
laws are expected, depending on whether we are dealing with a black hole with a
collapse in its past, or with an “eternal black hole”, or whether Hawking radiation in
the distant future will get entangled one way or another. This cannot be right.
In our approach, it is crucial that the black hole carries no memory of how and when
it came into being, nor is it affected by whether or not it will evaporate or accumulate
more mass in the distant future. We emphasise that we only wish to study the evolution
laws for a black hole during relatively short periods of time, so short that neither matter
going in, nor matter going out has had time to accumulate on the horizons; we claim that
the effects of these distant areas in time should be irrelevant. This makes sense when
we realise that the complete Hilbert space is spanned by having only soft particles on
the Cauchy surface (dotted line) in the Penrose diagram of Fig. 1a at all times. As soon
as the time evolution turns a soft particle into a hard one, the ﬁrewall transformation
can be applied to replace it by its quantum clone, a soft particle again.
We have seen that the momentum p−(θ, ϕ) going in, is linked, one-to-one, with the
positions of particles going out. Either the u coordinates, or the p operators, sufﬁce
to characterise the states, just as what we have for the positions x and the momenta p
for ordinary quantum particles. If, in a given spherical harmonic wave conﬁguration
(𝓁,m), we Fourier transform the momentum wave operator of an in-particle, we get
24 These waves would have to accommodate for details of Planckian dimensions; one might expect string
theories to deal with them, in principle, but in our formalism, the Planck domain of our theory has not yet
been carefully examined.
123

===== PAGE 30 =====
1532 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
the quantum clone of the out-particle wave with the same harmonic wave numbers
(𝓁,m). A particle going in region I, lives on in region III, while a particle entering in
region II l i v e so ni nr e g i o nIV. Thus we can say that, if we work with the eternal metric
Fig. 1a, regions III and IV are quantum clones of regions I and II. For the outside
observer, no contradiction arises since that observer has no access to regions III and
IV. We can also say that regions III and IV are our universe at an exotic time t “beyond
±inﬁnity”.
It is very important to consider carefully how the gravitational back reaction should
be represented in the Penrose diagram. In the diagram depicted in Fig.1b, the particles
contributing to the original collapse were taken to be classical; they strongly affect
space-time curvature, allowing for the Minkowski geometry at epochs before the
black hole was formed, but the Hawking particles, which all together represent as
much energy as the imploding particles did, here seem to leave no trace. This is
actually defendable: the Hartle–Hawking state is a single quantum state , which, for
a local observer falling in, is indistinguishable from the vacuum state—hence, no
gravitational effect.
However, the Hawking particles can emerge in multitudes of modes, basically
forming what looks like a thermal ensemble, so we do not want to represent them as a
single mode, but in terms of as many quantum states as one can imagine coming out.
These states cannot all be identiﬁed to the vacuum state, so the Penrose diagram must
be something else as well. Hawking had proposed Fig 1c. But why this asymmetry
under time reversal? This asymmetry is linked to the fact that not all information that
went into the black hole was expected to come out. Most researchers today think that
that is not evidently correct.
Our way to treat in-going and out-going matter, entirely symmetrically under time
reversal, forces us to use more general wave functions for the out-going material,
which means that the asymptotically far parts, as depicted in Fig 1b–d, actually should
form quantum superpositions, for which Penrose diagrams are not suited. This is why
we advocate to stick to soft particles, added any way we like in Fig 1a, after which we
leave it to the ﬁrewall transformation to continue our quantum states to (much) later
or earlier time epochs.
8.3 The Black Hole’s Global History as an Instanton
Eventually, what one wishes to describe is the black hole’s entire history in terms of
wave equations, from initial collapse all the way to the ﬁnal explosion. This is what
was considered to be the black hole scattering matrix; the idea was that the black
hole here acts as a virtual intermediate “particle”. When we consider the entire event
as a tunnelling event, the picture may be seen as an instanton. The dominating parts
of tunnelling amplitudes can be derived from classical equations in Euclidean space,
which is why classical solutions in Euclidean space, in particular those that obey
topologically non-trivial boundary conditions, are often considered with interest in
particle physics. The instanton that would be of relevance for the black hole would
be one where a region is excavated from a topologically trivial domain of Euclidean
space, after which antipodal points on its boundary are identiﬁed [ 34].
123

===== PAGE 31 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1533
Wick rotating back to Minkowski space, we ﬁnd that the black hole still behaves as
an instanton with the same internal boundary condition. The antipodes in question are
antipodes both in space and in time, although one has to keep in mind that, formally,
time stands still at the horizon. This means that the ﬁrewall transformation procedure,
linking the positions u of in- and out going particles, applies in one stroke to all
particles entering and leaving the black hole during its entire life time. It is in the
inﬁnitesimal neighbourhoods of the horizons where we see that time is also inverted.
8.4 The Spherical Dust Shell
As was stated at the beginning of Sect. 6, we only allow in- and out-going shells in
the form of spherical harmonics with odd values for 𝓁. This also raised objections.
A black hole with perfect spherical symmetry should form if the collapse starts with
a perfectly spherical collapsing shell, that is, only the wave with 𝓁 = 0 is excited.
What happens with such a black hole? Hawking’s derivation of its perfectly thermal
spectrum seems to be immaculate.
Hawking’s result however is a statistical one. He could not derive any pure quantum
state. This means that, regarding pure states, the collapsing shell must have myriads
of pure states to choose from. This agrees with our general procedure. All odd values
of 𝓁, as long as 𝓁<𝓁 max (see Footnote 22), participate. Y et we can neither put all
u+
𝓁m equal to zero, nor all u−
𝓁m , since in these cases, p−
𝓁m or p+
𝓁m would tend to inﬁnity;
these would have to be removed by our ﬁrewall removing transformation. If, on the
other hand, u−
𝓁m would be put equal to inﬁnity, so that all p+
𝓁m vanish, then we would
be dealing with particles far away from the black hole. These particles, no longer of
physical interest, formally blur our pure quantum states; averaging over them might
reproduce Hawking’s thermal state, so again, there is no immediate conﬂict.
How the local momentum distributions p± are distributed over the spherical waves,
as opposed to the energy distribution κ(θ,ϕ) , is further discussed in Sect. 6.
We conclude that the pure, spherical dust shell is unsuitable to serve as a model for
a single quantum state of a black hole.
8.5 Black Hole Formation Through Collapse
An objection sometimes brought forward is that our approach does not explain how a
black hole forms by collapse. By time reversal symmetry, this complaint should also
apply to the ﬁnal stages of the black hole evaporation process. We seem to be focussing
only on small changes taking place when a black hole captures or emits amounts of
matter small compared to the total black hole mass.
Indeed, our theory is not completely ﬁnished. When a large amount of matter is
captured or emitted, the total black hole mass before and after, should be different.
How to accommodate for this was not yet studied in much detail in our theory, but we
can make some general remarks.
As is well-known, in classical physics, black hole collapse is accompanied by a
horizon opening up at one or several points in space-time. In the spherically symmetric
case, one only has one such point. Behind that point, call it O, there is a small region
123

===== PAGE 32 =====
1534 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
where the horizon takes the shape of a future-directed light cone. Behind that horizon,
we have the region from which no signal can escape to inﬁnity. In every respect, this
region is to be regarded as a ‘region III’ opening up. As stated in Sect. 8.2,r e g i o nIII is
a quantum clone of regionsI and II. This means that we should use tortoise coordinates
surrounding the point O. We can now consider a space-like sphere of inﬁnitesimal
size d r ,a tam o m e n td t after the space-time point O, where again we identify the
antipodes. While more particles cross the horizon inwards, we continue to describe
the evolution process as before, but because much more matter moves inwards that
outwards, the black hole rapidly grows towards its ﬁnal size and mass.
What we see here is, that we can apply our procedures from here on to describe an
evolving quantum state. The actual process of growth was not yet fully described in our
procedures, but this is a complicated non-stationary background that requires further
work. What we do see is that our principle of antipodal identiﬁcation begins while the
black hole still is inﬁnitesimal in size, or more likely, it is of Planckian dimensions.
This is one of the glimpses of our ‘new physics’; the only thing not understood about it
today, is how it starts up in the Planckian domain, a domain that is still little understood
as of this day. Once we have antipodal identiﬁcation, this identiﬁcation continues to
apply for the entire lifetime of the black hole, and no further new physics is needed to
understand that.
Two important remarks about black hole growth: the total number of partial wave
modes (𝓁,m), is limited by a maximal value,𝓁max ≈ MBH in Planck units. This means
that there is approximately one particle (or wave) entering the horizon (or leaving) per
unit surface area in Planck units [ 33, G. Dvali, personal communication]. We could
turn this observation around and deﬁne the horizon area as being equal to the total
number of (𝓁, m) modes, in units yet to be derived. As more spherical waves enter, or
as more particles enter, the black hole then automatically grows.
Combine this observation with the fact that, at the intersection point of future and
past event horizons, the outside observer’s notion of time is not directly applicable.
This point is eternal; it assembles all particles coming in and all particles going out
during the entire lifetime of the black hole. During this long period, the black hole
mass may have varied wildly; whenever an out going particle has moved out of the
black hole’s vicinity, one naturally deducts its mass-energy from the total mass of the
system, to observe a new mass value for the hole itself, and the converse action is
applied when particles enter.
Thus, the ﬁrewall transformation comes with an adjustment of the black hole total
mass value, and with that, with the actual horizon area deﬁning the radius R in the
transverse directions, such as it occurs in our algebra, Eqs. ( 5.4) and ( B.1).
Our second remark is that the increase or decrease of the black hole mass itself will
be taken care of automatically when we realise that the black hole is actually made
of the in- and out-going particles. After the ﬁrewall transformation, we see particles
going out. They originated from spots inﬁnitesimally close to the horizon, at which
time the energies κ were deﬁnitely included in the black hole mass parameter MBH ,
and the total ﬂux of its gravity ﬁeld. As an out-going particle moves further out, the
moment comes that it should no longer be considered as part of the black hole. As
measured by the total ﬂux of gravity, one must subtract the mass-energy κ of the out-
123

===== PAGE 33 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1535
particle from the black hole mass value: MBH ⇒ MBH −κ. So from this kinematical
point of view the total mass of the black hole will be taken care of automatically.
9 Conclusions
What is agreed upon by many investigators, is that ‘new physics’ is needed to resolve
the information paradox and the quantum cloning problem, which led to the necessity
to take ‘ﬁrewalls’ seriously. We do claim to have arrived at ‘new physics’, but, perhaps
surprisingly, our approach does not require any modiﬁcations either in general relativ-
ity or in quantum mechanics. Our ﬁrst ‘new physics’ step is to add an extra condition
to constrain the allowed general coordinate transformations (see Sect. 5):
When ﬁelds on a manifold are quantised, it is essential that the entire asymptotic
domain of the manifold maps one-to-one onto that of ordinary space-time, while
preserving the metric.
This does not hold for the Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates (they are one-to-two), which
is why unitarity seems to be violated there. The cure is simple, but leads to important
new space-time features: an element of a Z(2) subgroup of O(3) has to be chosen to
identify pairs of points in the Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates. As to how the identiﬁ-
cation should take place, we have no choice: the only element of the O(3) space-time
symmetry group that obeys our requirement of also keeping our coordinates singular-
ity free, is the element −I of O(3), yielding the antipodal identiﬁcation (as explained
in Appendix B). The fact that the arrow of time ﬂips at the horizon—and with that,
the sign of the Hamiltonian—seems to be no major obstacle. To understand what is
going on, the expansion in spherical harmonics is essential.
We had found that the ﬁrewall problem is a serious complication when one attempts
to deduce the quantum properties of black holes from standard physical theories such
as general relativity and quantum ﬁeld theory. The problem could not be easily solved
by declaring ﬁrewalls to be unphysical; as was noted by several authors, one would
“need new physics for that”. Many authors leave it at that. However, the roots of a
solution were already present in our early papers [8,9,31,32], though not very explicit.
The fact that this remained unobserved makes me suspect that, although these papers
were cited, they were not carefully read. 25
A much more satisfactory answer was found more recently [10–12]: if one expands
the in-going and out-going matter in spherical harmonics, then at given 𝓁,m, par-
tial differential equations in one space- and one time dimension are obtained, which
can be solved by the average undergraduate student. One then notices the effects of
gravitational back reaction much more explicitly: in-going waves are transmuted into
out-going waves. The Hamiltonian near the horizon is simply the dilation operator,
− 1
2(u · p + p · u), where u is the position of the in-going wave and p its momentum.
This implies that u shrinks towards the horizon exponentially in time, while p blows
up.
25 They were certainly summarised incorrectly.
123

===== PAGE 34 =====
1536 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
The gravitational back reaction links the in-going wave to the out-going wave, by
interchanging momentum and position.Thus, for the out-going wave, the Hamiltonian
is + 1
2(u · p + p · u), so that u blows up and p shrinks. The fact that u expands means
that these waves quickly depart from the horizon, and subsequently from the black
hole itself.
Thus our second ‘new physics’ step amounts to identifying the position operators
for the out-going wave with the momentum of the in-going one. Thus, the particle
going out is a quantum clone of a particle going in. To avoid double counting, we
must keep either the in-going particle (in the from of a spherical wave) or the out-
going one, but not both. Replacing in-going by out-going or vice versa is what we
call the ‘ﬁrewall transformation’. It results in a picture where all hard particles (in the
longitudinal direction) can be replaced by soft ones.
Note that the spherical harmonics used here refer to operator distributions, not
directly to wave functions (as in the hydrogen atom). The spherical harmonics refer
to particle distributions, so surely all particles here are highly entangled, but since we
have the explicit equations, there is no need to worry that ‘entanglement’ would lead
to any further problems here; all quantum states involved are in a well-deﬁned basis
of their Hilbert space, and how they evolve is uniquely determined, see the scattering
matrix in Appendix B.
We emphasise that the wave functions we introduced on the variables u±
𝓁,m and/or
p±
𝓁,m (obeying the usual commutation rules for positions and momenta) cannot and
should not be ‘second quantised’. This is because u±(θ, ϕ) already represent the aver-
age positions of all particles at (θ, ϕ), and p±(θ, ϕ) represents the total momentum
there (as seen by a local observer close to the horizon).
Note also, that the antipodal identiﬁcation of the points on the intersection of future
and past horizon, is a crucial condition for the wave functions to remain pure. We
described the entanglement between Hawking particles emerging at antipodal points.
This is arguably the most novel aspect of our ‘new physics’.
A mathematical curiosity is the fact that the antipodal identiﬁcation comes with
time inversion ( T ), besides parity ( P) and charge conjugation ( C). In space-time,
consider a closed trajectory (not a geodesic) generated by a point that travels in outside
space, ﬁrst making a big circle fragment from a point on the horizon to its antipode,
then hopping back from the antipode to the point where it started. Projected on the
horizon, the neighbourhood of this trajectory forms a Möbius strip. Indeed, antipodal
identiﬁcation has turned the horizon into a (non orientable) projective plane, allowing
Möbius strips to be planted on it.26 Curiously, our Möbius strip is also time-like: going
around it once causes the time coordinate to be inverted.
In other proposals for the resolution of the information paradox [ 36], the points we
noted were not observed, so that many mysteries were encountered that could not be
resolved [7].
On the other hand, we do not claim that all mysteries are resolved now. A systematic
procedure must be found for a one-to-one mapping of the states generated by the
26 Acknowledging a remark by Glynn, who also emphasises that it should actually be called a “Listing
strip” : “Listing did more in the foundations of topology than Möbius”.
123

===== PAGE 35 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1537
spherical waves of momentum distributions and positions, onto states of the Fock
space of a quantum ﬁeld theory (some grand uniﬁed version of the standard model,
relevant in the vicinity of the Planck scale, simply referred to as “standard model”
elsewhere in this paper). It is here that the machinery of string theory might be of
much help.
An other point where our theory becomes vague is where the Planckian dimensions
are reached. Usually it is assumed that string theory will provide all the answers, but
string theory did not tell us about gravitational back reaction or antipodal identiﬁcation,
so we respectfully conclude that string theory is not fool-proof. 27
Acknowledgements The author thanks G. Dvali, S. Mukhanov, S, Giddings, S. Hawking, N. Gaddam,
O. Papadoulaki, P . Betzios, A. Franzen, F. Scardigli, D. Glynn, an unnamed referee, and many others, for
discussions, questions and remarks.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-
tional License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Appendix A: The Antipodal Identiﬁcation for Kruskal–Szekeres
Coordinates
The Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates (x, y,θ ,ϕ ) are deﬁned by
xy =
( r
2GM − 1
)
er/(2GM ),
x/y = et/(2GM ), (A.1)
where r and t are the usual Schwarzschild coordinates, and θ and ϕ are unchanged.
In terms of these coordinates, the usual Schwarzschild metric is found to be
ds2 =− dt2 (
1 − 2GM
r
)
+ dr 2
1 − 2GM
r
+ r 2d/Omega12
= 32G3 M3
r e−r/(2GM ) dx dy + r 2d/Omega12 ; d/Omega12 ≡ dθ 2 + sin2 θ dϕ2. (A.2)
These coordinates are useful because they do not exhibit any manifest singularity
at r = 2GM .
The point emphasised in this paper is that every point (r, t) in the Schwarzschild
space-time is associated to two points in the Kruskal–Szekeres notation: (r, t) corre-
sponds both with (x, y) and (−x, −y). This situation requires extra attention when
quantised ﬁelds are considered in this metric. Usually, the points (x, y,θ ,ϕ ) and
27 Having said that, we do not wish to imply that string theory would be wrong; rather, we did not make
use of it in our analysis. There is also the possibility that revised versions of string theory will enter: strings
with a calculable, and purely imaginary, string tension parameter α′.
123

===== PAGE 36 =====
1538 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
(−x, −y,θ ,ϕ ) are assumed to be two different spots in space-time. When the space-
time is disturbed by matter falling in or coming out, the points (−x, −y,θ ,ϕ ) seem
not to be there, but region III is there: x > 0, y < 0, and it is tempting to extend
space-time further. In our discussion, we consider states where soft particles roam
about in a background not disturbed by matter at all, so it would include region II
(the region x < 0, x < 0). This is a new representation of the black hole states, but
we notice that it over-counts. To cure this shortcoming, we identify points, by the
identiﬁcation
(−x, −y,θ ,ϕ) ≡ (x, y,π − θ, ϕ + π), (A.3)
which we can also account for by stating that we constrain ourselves to (0 ≤ θ<π ,
0 ≤ ϕ<π ), imposing ( A.3) as a boundary condition.
On the intersection of the future and the past event horizon, x = y = 0, this turns
the sphere into a projective sphere (a sphere with antipodal points identiﬁed), but
when (x, y) ⁄= (0, 0), this is better to be seen as an identiﬁcation of region II with
region I. Since far from the black hole we only have region I, so this leaves the entire
Schwarzschild space-time unchanged in the asymptotic domain; our identiﬁcation just
drops region II. Thus, our identiﬁcation poses no restriction on the states seen by an
observer in the visible part of the universe; it does imply that, in this representation of
black holes, the invisible part is absent, or equivalently, it is identiﬁed with the visible
part.
In case black holes carry electric charges and/or angular momentum, the Reissner
Nordström solution, the Kerr and the Newman et al solutions apply. These have also
regions V, VI and more, which do also contain asymptotic domains, but these regions
lie either in the inﬁnite future or the inﬁnite past, so that they will play no role in our
analysis. The Kerr and Newman solutions do require extra attention as the horizon
rotates with super-luminal speeds, although we do not expect the need for major
modiﬁcations of our analysis for these cases.
The singularity at r = 0 in the Schwarzschild metric and the inner horizon(s) in the
Reissner-Nordström, Kerr and Newman solutions do become slightly more complex
when our antipodal identiﬁcation is applied, but this does not harm the theory because
these singularities are shielded by the ﬁrst horizon. They belong in regions where time
goes beyond inﬁnity or before minus inﬁnity, where our theories need not be applied
ever,
We emphasise that, locally, we do not deviate from that standard Schwarzschild
metric, its Kruskal–Szekeres extension, or its Penrose diagram, but globally our mod-
iﬁcation is signiﬁcant; it leads to big deviations from what was once thought to be
a thermal state, and to new entanglements among the Hawking particles. Also we
emphasise that our way of identifying antipodes does not lead to any singularity. This
is because for all physical values of r , its value is bounded by 2 GM − ε where ε
is small. Singularities would only occur when r tends to zero. For the black hole,
the region where this happens is unphysical; this would not have been the case if we
assumed such an identiﬁcation in ﬂat space-time. In a polar coordinate representation
of ﬂat space-time, this identiﬁcation would indeed generate cusp-like singularities.
123

===== PAGE 37 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1539
Appendix B: Locality Violation for Entangled Black Holes
Some authors brought forward a slogan “ER=EPR”, meaning that the Einstein Rosen
bridge yields entanglement as in the Einstein–Rosen–Podolsky set-up: the ER bridge
is then assumed to connect different black holes. In the present theory, we claim
that the ER bridge does not explain the phenomenon of entanglement, but it does
lead to entanglement between the different black holes, to the extent that it causes a
violation of locality, or local unitarity, unless the bridge connects a black hole with
itself. Furthermore, general relativity and unitarity demand the absence of singularities
on the horizon, so that we are only left with exactly one option: the ER bridge connects
the antipodes on the horizon.
The violation of locality, in the case of different black holes, can be demonstrated
explicitly. In all quantum ﬁeld theories that were successful in the Standard Model,
locality amounts to the demand that two localised operators O1(x(1)) and O2(x(2))
must commute,[O1, O2]= 0, if x(1) and x(2) are space-like separated points in space-
time. Suppose that region II of a black hole would refer to another black hole (with
exactly the same mass, charge, and angular momentum) that is space-like separated
from the ﬁrst one. Locality then demands that operators on black hole (1) should all
commute with the operators on black hole (2), but we now show, that for regions I and
II, this is not the case.
Assume that the two black holes we start from, are not entangled, so we can call
this state | I ⟩|II ⟩. Now assume that we drop a particle at a position u+ in black hole
region I. This we describe as the product state | I +{ u+}in⟩|II ⟩. It evolves into a
state | I, II +{ p+}out⟩. This is a wave of particles going out in a state where it is
a superposition of positions in black hole I and black hole II. To get the position u−
for the out-particle, we have to Fourier transform the in-particle state {u+}in, and this
Fourier transform covers both regions I and II, as was calculated explicitly in Refs.
[11,12].
The scattering matrix S for the energy eigen modes |κ⟩was derived in the spherical
wave expansion:
S =
(αβ
βα
)
= e− πi
4√
2π /Gamma1(1
2 − iκ)
( 8πG/R2
𝓁2 + 𝓁+ 1
)−iκ (
e− 1
2 πκ ie+ 1
2 πκ
ie+ 1
2 πκ e− 1
2 πκ
)
, (B.1)
where R is the black hole radius,G is Newton’s constant,𝓁the partial wave coefﬁcient,
κ the wave number on the tortoise coordinates, also corresponding to the energy for
the external observer; /Gamma1(x) is Euler’s gamma function. The two elements of the wave
function on which this matrix acts, correspond to regions I and II of Penrose diagram.
One easily checks that unitarity holds, SS † = I, only if we do include the off-
diagonal elements of the matrix, which are indeed dominant if the energy κ> 0. One
must conclude that, if the in-going particle enters exclusively in regionI, the out-going
signal is a superposition of a signal going out in region I and a signal in region II.
Symbolically:
|in⟩=| I +{ u+
in}⟩ |II ⟩, |out⟩= α|I +{ u−
out}⟩ |II ⟩+ β|I⟩|II +{ u−
out}⟩,
123

===== PAGE 38 =====
1540 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
(B.2)
where |α|2 +| β|2 = 1,β ⁄= 0.
Consider now the effects of an annihilation operator aI acting on the added particle
in regionI and a similar operatoraII for regionII.A sw es e ei nE q .(B.1), the coefﬁcient
α tends to zero if κ is large, so let us take the simpliﬁed case α = 0,β = 1. In that
case, consider the state |I⟩|II ⟩. We can create an in-going particle in region I,a f t e r
which an out-going particle in region II can be annihilated. Conversely, if we ﬁrst
annihilate the out-going particle in region II, we get zero because the in-going particle
was not yet created. Hence
aII a†
I |I⟩|II ⟩=| I⟩|II ⟩, a†
I aII |I⟩|II ⟩= 0 →[ aII , a†
I ]| I⟩|II ⟩⁄= 0.
(B.3)
If regions I and II would refer to black holes that are far separated, in particular
space-like, then the non-vanishing commutator assures that a signal can be sent. In
conventional quantum ﬁeld theories, space-like separation always guarantees that com-
mutators vanish. This is why we maintain that regions I and II should not be taken to
refer to widely separated black holes.
What if they would refer to the same black hole? One could still ask, what if the
two points considered are space-like separated? In that case, two observations can be
made:
1. The two points are in the curved space-time background of a stationary black hole.
If signals could be transmitted faster than light between these points, there would
as yet be no clash with special or general relativity because we have a preference
frame: the frame where the black hole is at rest. However,
2. The particle going in region I needs a sizeable amount of time to reach the vicinity
of the horizon, and after showing up in regionII, the emerging particle also requires
a large amount of time to creep out. Both time lags areO(MBH log MBH ) in Planck
units, which goes to inﬁnity in the classical limit. In practice therefore, these points
are time-like separated.
We conclude that locality forbids that regions I and II in Eq. ( B.1) refer to different
black holes, but allows for the possibility that we are dealing with one and the same
black hole, even if the points on the horizon are antipodal.
The mapping must refer to different points on the horizon. Why are they antipodal
points? The answer to this is that the mapping must preserve the metric, so it is an
element of O(3). Applying it twice must give the original point, so it is an element
of a Z2 subgroup of O(3).A sa n O(3) mapping, its eigenvalues are therefore ±1. If
any of its eigenvalues would be +1, there would have been an invariant point, which
would generate a conical singularity on the horizon. If we demand the absence of
such singularities, we can only have all eigenvalues equal to −1. This is the antipodal
mapping.
One might observe that, actually, time is inverted as well (see Sect.8.3), so we have
the element −I of SO (3, 1). It is still a special element in this group, but in Euclidean
space, this element is homotopically identical to the identity itself. This is why any
123

===== PAGE 39 =====
Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542 1541
theory that can be analytically continued to Euclidean space, automatically obeysCPT
symmetry. The antipodal identiﬁcation is symmetric under CPT.
References
1. Arkani-Hamed, N., Dimopoulos, S., Dvali, G.R.: The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a
millimeter. Phys. Lett. B 429, 263 (1998)
2. Green, M.B., Schwarz, J.H., Witten, E.: Superstring Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(1987)
3. Rovelli, C., Smolin, L.: Knot theory and quantum gravity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 1155 (1988)
4. Rovelli, C., Smolin, L.: Loop space representation of quantum general relativity. Nucl. Phys. B331,
80 (1990)
5. ’t Hooft, G.: Nature’s Book Keeping System. A Contribution to the Collection: Space, Time, and
Frontiers of Human Understanding. arXiv:1605.00027
6. Almheiri, A., Marolf, D., Polchinski, J., Sully, J.: Black holes: complementarity or ﬁrewalls? JHEP
1302, 062 (2013). arXiv:1207.3123
7. Polchinski, J.: The black hole information problem. arXiv:1609.04036 (2016). Accessed 13 Sept 2016
8. ’t Hooft, G.: On the quantum structure of a black hole. Nucl. Phys. B256, 727–745 (1985)
9. ’t Hooft, G.: The scattering matrix approach for the quantum black hole: an overview. J. Mod. Phys
A11, 4623–4688 (1996). arXiv:gr-qc/9607022
10. ’t Hooft, G.: Diagonalizing the black hole information retrieval process. arXiv: 1509.01695
11. ’t Hooft, G.: Black hole unitarity and antipodal entanglement. Found. Phys. 49(9), 1185–1198 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-016-0014-y . arXiv:1601.03447v4
12. ’t Hooft, G.: The quantum black hole as a hydrogen atom: microstates without strings attached. e-Print:
arXiv:1605.05119 (2016)
13. Penrose, R.: Conformal treatment of inﬁnity. In: de Witt, C., de Witt, B. (eds.), Relativity, Groups
and Topology, pp. 563–584. Gordon and Breach, New Y ork (1964); republished Gen. Rel. Grav. 43,
901–922 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10714-010-1110-5
14. Misner, C.W., Thorne, K.S., Wheeler, J.A.: Gravitation, pp. 875–876. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco
(1973). ISBN 0716703343
15. Bekenstein, J.D.: Nonexistence of baryon number for black holes. II. Phys. Rev. D5, 2403–2412 (1972)
16. Hawking, S.W.: The unpredictability of quantum gravity. Commun. Math. Phys. 87, 395 (1982)
17. Gibbons, G., Hawking, S.W.: Cosmological event horizons, thermodynamics, and particle creation.
P h y s .R e v .D15, 2738 (1977)
18. Hartle, J.B., Hawking, S.W.: Wave function of the universe. Phys. Rev. D 28, 2960 (1983)
19. Sanchez, N.: Semiclassical quantum gravity in two and four dimensions. In: Carter, B., Hartle, J.B.
(eds.), Gravitation in Astrophysics. Nato Science Series B. Cargèse (1986)
20. Sanchez, N., Whiting, B.F.: Quantum ﬁeld theory and the antipodal identiﬁcation of black-holes. Nucl.
Phys. B 283, 605–623 (1987)
21. Aichelburg, P .C., Sexl, R.U.: On the gravitational ﬁeld of a massless particle. Gen. Relativ. Gravit. 2,
303 (1971)
22. Bonnor, W.B.: The gravitational ﬁeld of light. Commun. Math. Phys. 13, 163 (1969)
23. Dray, T., ’t Hooft, G.: The gravitational shock wave of a massless particle. Nucl. Phys. B253, 173
(1985)
24. V alatin, J.G.: Comments on the theory of superconductivity. Nuovo Cimento 7, 843 (1958)
25. Bogoljubov, N.N.: On a new method in the theory of superconductivity. Il Nuovo Cimento (1955–1965)
7, 794–805 (1958). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02745585
26. Bogoliubov, N.: On the theory of superﬂuidity. J. Phys. 11, 23 (1947)
27. Visser, M.: Gravitational vacuum polarization. In: Proceedings of the Eighth Marcel Grossmann Con-
ference on General Relativity (Jerusalem, Israel, June 1997). arXiv: gr-qc/9710034
28. Boulware, D.G.: Quantum ﬁeld theory in Schwarzschild and Rindler spaces. Phys. Rev. D 11, 1404
(1975)
29. Hawking, S.W.: Breakdown of predictability in gravitational collapse. Phys. Rev. D 14, 2460 (1976)
30. ’t Hooft, G.: An ambiguity of the equivalence principle and Hawking’s temperature. J. Geom. Phys.
1, 45–52 (1984)
123

===== PAGE 40 =====
1542 Found Phys (2017) 47:1503–1542
31. ’t Hooft, G.: Strings from gravity. In: Brink, L., et al. (eds.) Uniﬁcation of Fundamental Interactions,
Proceedings of Nobel Symposium 67, Marstrand, Sweden, 2–7 June 1986. Physica Scripta, vol. T15,
pp. 143–150 (1987)
32. ’t Hooft, G.: The black hole interpretation of string theory. Nucl. Phys. B335, 138–154 (1990)
33. Dvali, G.: Non-thermal corrections to hawking radiation versus the information paradox. Fortsch. Phys.
64, 106–108 (2016). arXiv:1509.04645
34. Betzios, P ., Gaddam, N., Papadoulaki, O.: The black hole S-matrix from quantum mechanics. JHEP
1611, 131 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2016)131 ; e-Print: arXiv:1607.07885
35. Mersini-Houghton, L.: Entropy of the information retrieved from black holes. Class. Quantum Gravity
33(13), 137001 (2016). arXiv:1511.04795
36. Hawking, S.W.: The information paradox for black holes. arXiv: 1509.01147. Accessed 3 Sept 2015
123
