===== PAGE 1 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams
M. Astaschov, 1 S. Bhagvati, 2 S. Böser, 1 M. J. Brandsema, 3 R. Cabral, 4 C. Claessens, 5 L. de Viveiros, 2
S. Enomoto, 5 D. Fenner, 1 M. Fertl, 1 J. A. Formaggio, 6 B. T. Foust, 7 J. K. Gaison, 7 P. Harmston, 8
K. M. Heeger, 9 M. B. Hüneborn, 1 X. Huyan, 7 A. M. Jones, 7 B. J. P. Jones, 10 E. Karim, 11 K. Kazkaz, 12
P. Kern, 1 M. Li, 6 A. Lindman, 1 C.-Y. Liu, 8 A. Marsteller, 5 C. Matthé, 1 R. Mohiuddin, 13 B. Monreal, 13
B. Mucogllava, 1 R. Mueller, 2 A. Negi, 10 J. A. Nikkel, 9 N. S. Oblath, 7 M. Oueslati, 4 J. I. Peña, 6 W. Pettus, 4
R. Reimann, 1 A. L. Reine, 4 R. G. H. Robertson, 5 D. Rosa De Jesús, 7 L. Saldaña, 9 P. L. Slocum, 9 F. Spanier, 14
J. Stachurska, 6, 15 Y.-H. Sun, 13 P. T. Surukuchi, 11 A. B. Telles, 9 F. Thomas, 1 L. A. Thorne, 1 T. Thümmler, 16
W. Van De Pontseele, 6 B. A. VanDevender, 5, 7 T. E. Weiss, 9 M. Wynne, 5 and A. Ziegler 2
(Project 8 Collaboration)
1)Institute for Physics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany
2)Department of Physics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
3)Applied Research Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
4)Center for Exploration of Energy and Matter and Department of Physics, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405, USA
5)Center for Experimental Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics and Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA
6)Laboratory for Nuclear Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
7)Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99354, USA
8)Department of Physics, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
9)Wright Laboratory and Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
10)Department of Physics, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
11)Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
12)Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
13)Department of Physics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
14)Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
15)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Ghent University, 9000 Gent, Belgium
16)Institute of Astroparticle Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
(*Electronic mail: chmatthe@uni-mainz.de)
(Dated: 13 March 2025)
A calorimetric detector for minimally disruptive measurements of atomic hydrogen beams is described. The calorimeter
measures heat released by the recombination of hydrogen atoms into molecules on a thin wire. As a demonstration, the
angular distribution of a beam with a peak intensity of≈ 1016 atoms/(cm2s) is measured by translating the wire across
the beam. The data agree well with an analytic model of the beam from the thermal hydrogen atom source. Using the
beam shape model, the relative intensity of the beam can be determined to 5% precision or better at any angle.
I. INTRODUCTION
The work presented in this paper was carried out in the
context of development of an atomic tritium source for the
Project 8 experiment,1,2 which aims to employ atomic tritium
in combination with the novel technology of Cyclotron Ra-
diation Emission Spectroscopy 3 to achieve a neutrino mass
sensitivity of mβ < 40meV /c2. As an intermediate goal an
atomic hydrogen source capable of producing on the order
of 1019 atoms/s is being developed, which will eventually be
adapted to become the atomic tritium source.
As part of this effort, detectors capable of monitoring the
resulting atomic hydrogen beam will be required. Tradition-
ally this could be achieved using a high resolution quadrupole
mass spectrometer (QMS). However, situations are antici-
pated in which a QMS would not be ideal, in particular in the
presence of high magnetic fields and tight space constraints.
To complement measurements with a QMS in such cases, we
are developing a calorimetric wire detector, which measures
the heat of atoms recombining into molecules.
The concept of using such detectors for atomic hydrogen
beams has previously been explored 4,5. A thin wire is strung
across the beam, such that it intercepts a small slice of the
beam. A sizable fraction 6 of the atoms that hit the wire stick
to its surface, where they can recombine into molecules, re-
leasing 4.46 eV per molecule7. A portion of this energy is ab-
sorbed by the wire causing a slight heating, which can be de-
tected by measuring the corresponding increase in resistance.
An advantage of the wire calorimeter method is that, by
using very thin wires, the detection of the beam can be ac-
complished without meaningfully disturbing the beam. This
is useful for online monitoring a beam that may continue to
be used for its primary purpose downstream of the detec-
tor. The wire detector can also be used at higher pressures
than are required for mass spectrometry. This is desirable
when scaling to more intense hydrogen beams without a com-
mensurate increase in pumping on the vacuum system. The
Project 8 experiment will eventually employ strong magnetic
fields2,which will cause large issues for the sensitivity of a
QMS8 due to the free electrons and ions involved in its op-
eration. It is expected that the wire detector should operate
largely unaffected by magnetic fields, though this has not yet
been shown experimentally. Finally, wire detectors can be
built on a very thin supporting structure, such that they may
arXiv:2501.01268v2  [physics.ins-det]  12 Mar 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 2
be employed in confined spaces, where fitting a QMS might
be challenging.
The calorimetric wire detector used in this study, depicted
in Figure 1, consists of a 5µm thick gold-coated tungsten wire
that is strung across a 20mm wide gap. On each side of the
gap, the wire is mounted on the aluminum nitride PCB by sol-
dering it to copper traces leading to the readout electronics.
The thickness of the wire was chosen to be the thinnest that
could be readily procured and assembled into the detector. A
thinner wire has higher base resistance as well as a lower heat
conductivity such that, for a given heating power, temperature
changes to the wire and resulting resistance changes are max-
imized. For the same reason a longer wire to further increase
the aspect ratio of the detector is preferable. The length of the
wire used here was chosen to fit within the space available in
the vacuum chamber and to pass through a CF40 flange.
The wire resistance is measured by applying a constant cur-
rent to the wire and recording the voltage drop over the wire
with a digital multimeter. The wires typically have a room
temperature resistance of≈ 65 Ω rising to as much as 100 Ω
during operation.
FIG. 1: On the left is a view into the vacuum chamber
containing both the hydrogen atomic beam source (HABS)
and the wire detector. The HABS can be seen to be glowing
as it does when operated at high temperatures. The z-axis,
along which the wire detector can be moved, is indicated. A
frontal view of the wire detector is shown on the right. Three
wires are attached to the detector board for redundancy. The
rearmost wire is used for all the data presented in this paper.
The detector PCB is mounted on a z-translator stage9, such
that the wire can be scanned across the hydrogen beam. About
31 mm of travel is available within the confines of the vacuum
chamber. This travel covers roughly -15° in one direction and
+30° of the beam in the other direction of the capillary axis,
as seen from the wire’s location. Approximately 25% of par-
ticles emitted from the capillary are in this region, and the
beam intensity drops to ≈ 40% of its maximum intensity at
20° off-center at the settings presented later in this paper. Due
to an aperture, the beam is cut off beyond 26° allowing for
measurements with the wire fully outside of the beam.
We have successfully used the wire detector to measure the
relative intensity profile of an atomic hydrogen beam con-
taining of order 10 16 atoms/(cm2s), using a number of data-
driven corrections to extract a small heating signal in a com-
plex thermal environment. We have compared the measured
profile with theoretical models of the source and found them
to be in agreement.
The paper is divided as follows: we begin with a descrip-
tion of the hydrogen beam we use (Section II), followed by
the calibration of the wire detector (Section III). Then an ex-
planation of various effects influencing the wire detector’s re-
sistance will be discussed (Section IV) and the method for ex-
tracting the atomic hydrogen signal from the raw data will be
described (Section V). Finally, the reconstruction of the rela-
tive beam intensity distribution based on data will be demon-
strated (Section VI). Multiple appendices are attached to pro-
vide more detail on selected specifics.
II. HYDROGEN BEAM
A. Source
For development work, including the results presented here,
we use a commercially available "Hydrogen Atomic Beam
Source" (HABS) 10. This is a thermal hydrogen dissociator
manufactured by MBE Komponenten GmbH that produces
atomic hydrogen by passing a flow of molecular hydrogen
through a tungsten capillary that is heated to around 2200 K11.
The hydrogen flow through the source is controlled by a mass
flow controller 12 in the range of 0 .002− 20 standard cubic
centimeter per minute (sccm). Before entering the source, the
gas flows through a purifier13 which removes any water, oxy-
gen or hydrocarbon contaminants.
The HABS capillary is located 35 mm above the wire de-
tector. At the settiKazngs used in the work presented here, 1
sccm of H2 flow at 2200 K, the source produces a beam inten-
sity of order 10 16 atoms/cm2s.11 In the ideal case where all
atoms landing on the wire recombine, releasing 4.46 eV per
molecule, this corresponds to a heat load of about 4mW /cm2
or total of 4 µW along the length of the wire.
Hydrogen is emitted from the HABS as a diverging beam,
with an initially undetermined fraction of dissociation 14.
Since the wire is not a point detector, it always integrates a
portion of the beam along its length. The change in beam in-
tensity along this length must be modeled.
We derive the HABS beam output intensity distribution
jHABS based on a theoretical model 15 modified by the setup
geometry. As it will be defined, jHABS is the probability den-
sity per unit angle [1/sr] of finding a particle which leaves
the HABS capillary at a certain angle from the capillary axis
downstream of the copper cooling shroud covering the HABS.
Figure 2 illustrates the geometry of the HABS. The capil-
lary forms an initial beam which is then modified, when parts
of it are obscured by the copper shroud. We call the fraction of
the capillary which is visible under a viewing angle θ relative
to the capillary axis gvisible(θ ). This functions as a geometric
correction factor to the initial output intensity distribution of

===== PAGE 3 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 3
the capillary jnorm(θ;leff) such that
jHABS(θ;leff) = jnorm(θ;leff)· gvisible(θ ). (1)
This does include an implicit assumption that gas exiting the
capillary has a uniform density across the exit plane. This may
not be exactly true, and Monte Carlo simulations indicate this
may change the effectiveg factor by a few percent, depending
on the actual gas density distribution. Absent a fully-fledged
model for the gas density distribution in the exit plane of the
capillary, for the purposes of this paper, we will assume it to
be a uniform distribution, such that every point in the capillary
exit plane emits gas with equal intensity.
FIG. 2: A sketch of the geometry of the HABS copper
shroud, which partially and then fully obscures the capillary
from which the hydrogen beam originates. The inside edge
of the penumbra is located at 19.4° and the outside edge at
26.2°. Beyond the outside edge no portion of the beam is
expected to be visible (umbra). The angle θ is always
measured between the capillary axis and a line drawn from
the center of the capillary at its front face. Additional
clarification on the coordinate definitions is available in
Appendix D.
As described in the following text, we construct
jnorm(θ;leff) such that it is a normalized probability density
function. Normalization is useful, since the total flow of
molecular hydrogen through the source capillary is known and
controlled by a mass flow controller.
We start from the theoretical model of beam intensity from
a cylindrical capillary, which is adopted from literature and
denoted with j. Refer to Tschersich et. al. 15 for a compre-
hensive explanation. j is a function with a single dimension-
less shape parameter called the effective length, leff, which
describes the effective ratio of length to diameter of the capil-
lary. leff differs from the physical aspect ratio of the capillary
if gas flow through the capillary is large enough, such that the
flow cannot be approximated as transparent molecular flow
along the entire length. All gas flows used in our study are
large enough that leff is much shorter than the physical length
of the capillary.
j(θ ) = jd(θ ) + jw(θ )
with jd(θ ) = cos(θ )·U(β )
and jw(θ ) = 4
3π

1− 1
2leff+1

1
leff
cos(θ )2
sin(θ ) (1−V (β ))
+

1− 1
2leff+1

cos(θ )(1−U(β )),
(2)
where



U(β ) = (2β− sin(β ))/π
V (β ) = sin(β )3

θ < arctan(1/leff)
U(β ) = V (β ) = 0 otherwise
(3)
and β (θ ) = arccos(leff· tan(θ )). (4)
Figure 3 shows how j and gvisible evolve with angle. j falls
off to reduced intensities as the angle increases, decreasing
more sharply for larger leff. gvisible acts as a window function
with a smooth transition from fully visible at small angles, to
partially shadowed, to fully obstructed at larger angles.
We normalize the intensity profile j by the integral over the
emittance hemisphere
jnorm(θ ,leff) = j(θ ,leff)
R π
2
0
R 2π
0 j(θ ,leff)sin θdθdϕ
, (5)
It should be noted here that since j is also a function of
the effective length leff the normalization integral has to be re-
calculated for every leff. The normalization as described here
results in the integral of jnorm over the hemisphere being equal
to one.
Z π
2
0
Z 2π
0
jnorm(θ ,leff)sin θdθdϕ = 1. (6)
Normalized this way, jnorm can be treated as a probability
density function for the emission of any single gas particle.
After multiplication with gvisible(θ ), jHABS(θ;leff) is of
course no longer normalized to 1. This is the intended be-
havior, as we can measure how many particles flow through
the capillary, but we cannot directly measure how many make
it out of the copper shroud.
B. Modeling expected power
This section will show that a given model for the beam
shape such as jHABS from Eq.(1) could be integrated to pre-
dict the absolute expected heating power received by the wire.

===== PAGE 4 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 4
(a) The relative output intensity j as a function of angle from the
capillary axis. j converges to the Lambert cosine law for small leff,
equivalent to a zero length aperture. For large leff it becomes a more
centrally focused beam.
(b) The fraction of the capillary opening that is visible to an observer
(in this case the wire) from the angle θ. At high angles the copper
shroud surrounding the HABS capillary obscures first part and then
the entire opening, leading to reduced hydrogen flux at those angles.
FIG. 3: The two beam shaping components of jHABS(θ;leff) are plotted as a function of angle. On the left the shape of the
beam as it exits the source capillary, and on the right the multiplicative geometric modification functiongvisible that is caused by
the exit aperture of the HABS shroud. The final combined beam shape, for parameters matching measurements presented later
is shown in Figure 10.
However, due to some poorly-known parameters we only
carry out part of the integration and leave the overall heat scal-
ing as a free parameter.
The recombination intensity Irec is the power density per
unit solid angle [W/sr] from recombination heating on a sur-
face exposed to an atomic hydrogen beam. It can be expressed
as
Irec = Φmol· 2αdissoc· jHABS(θ;leff)· γrec· βrec· Erec
2 , (7)
where Φmol is the flow of molecules per second into the
source, and αdissoc is the fraction of these which are disso-
ciated into atoms in the source. γrec is the likelihood for an
atom that hits the wire to recombine on it, βrec is the fraction
of the recombination energy that is transferred to the wire if
a molecule is produced, and Erec is the total energy released
when two hydrogen atoms recombine into a molecule.
The values ofαdissoc, γrec, and βrec are all initially unknown.
They are difficult to disentangle with currently available data.
Some values for the recombination parameters are available
from literature 16, but with large uncertainties, and it is un-
clear if they are directly applicable. Due to the degeneracy
caused by including all three as separate parameters, for the
purposes of a fit model, all such purely multiplicative pa-
rameters will be combined into a single scaling parameter
A = Φmol· 2αdissoc· γrec· βrec· Erec
2 . A is then implicitly a com-
plex function of gas flow, source and wire temperature, as well
as wire surface properties. However, as long as these are con-
stant for the dataset which a fit is applied to, the complexities
will be absorbed into the fit parameter.
Due to the parameter degeneracy within A, no determina-
tion of the total atom flow, Φat = Φmol· 2αdissoc, produced by
the source will be attempted in this paper. Efforts presented
here are focused on determining the relative angular output
distribution of the source jHABS(θ;leff).
The recombination intensity can be expressed using A as
Irec = A· jHABS(θ;leff). (8)
Using the definition for beam intensity given in the equa-
tion above, a parametric model for the heating power due to
recombination measured by the wire calorimeter can be de-
fined. This takes the form of integrating Irec over the surface
of the wire:
Prec(zpos;leff,A) =
A
Z
wire
dx jHABS(θ (x,zpos);leff)· η(x)· cos3(θ (x,zpos)

, (9)
where η is the relative sensitivity of the wire to heat depending
on location (see Appendix B), and x is the position along the
length of the wire over which the integration is performed.Prec
is evaluated as a function of zpos, the position along the z-axis
at which the wire is placed. θ can be calculated as a function
of the Cartesian coordinates (x,y,z) per their definition shown
in Appendix D. The multiplication with cos 3(θ (x,zpos)) re-
sults from the transformation between Cartesian and spherical
coordinates.

===== PAGE 5 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 5
This yields a model for the signal expected on the wire
detector, which can be fit to data as will be shown later. It
has two principal parameters: the scaling parameter A and leff
which describes the shape of the distribution.
III. CALIBRATION
In order to convert between changes in wire resistance and
the heating power causing them, a calibration of the detector
is performed by running an increasing series of currents over
the wire. Since input voltage ( V ) and current ( I) through the
wire are independently measured, both the resistance, as well
as a direct measurement for the electrical power imparted to
the wire via Joule heating ( Pel = V· I) is performed simulta-
neously.
To produce a calibration function, a 4th order polynomial
function of resistance is fit to the calibration data as shown
in Figure 4. A 4th order polynomial is chosen because the
highest-ordered effect is that of thermal radiation (frad defined
in Section IV), which scales with the 4th power in tempera-
ture, and because it empirically fits the data to about 1 part in
one thousand over the resistance range used in our measure-
ments. This means potential systematic calibration errors due
to the parametrization of this fit are significantly smaller than
the statistical errors on beam measurements of about 1% in
the best case (see Figure 6).
The calibration function k can then be expressed as the
derivative of the fit function
k(R′) = dP
dR

R′
, (10)
such that
∆Pcalib(R′, ∆R) = dP
dR

R′
· ∆R, (11)
where ∆P is the change in heating power supplied to the wire
required to produce a small change in measured wire resis-
tance ∆R away from an initial resistance R′. The choice of
local calibration around an initial R′ rather than a global cali-
bration is taken, as the initial resistance is subject to changes
due to background effects, for example due to a change in
the temperature of the surrounding apparatus. In practice the
changes in resistance due to the atomic beam are always small,
so the implicit locally linear approximation made when using
the local slope approximation is justifiable.
When taking data with an external heat source like the
beam, we additionally need to account for the feedback Joule
heating due to the measurement current.
Pf b = I2· ∆R. (12)
With a constant measurement current I, an externally
caused resistance change ∆R will result in additional electrical
power draw and therefore heating of the wire, which needs to
be subtracted to arrive at the measured external heating Pmeas
Pmeas = ∆Pcalib− Pf b (13)
= k(R′)· ∆R− Pf b (14)
=
 
k(R′)− I2
· ∆R. (15)
With the typical operating current I of 1 mA this results in a
correction of−1 µW/Ω.
Finally an additional percent-level correction based on the
fact that electrical heating power is non-uniformly distributed
along the wire due to the temperature gradient is applied. De-
tails about the derivation are discussed in Appendix C.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 6
(a) Electrical power supplied to the wire plotted over the resistance the
wire reaches when heated with that power. The data is fitted with a 4th
order polynomial. The data deviates from the fit function used towards
the upper end of the range measured; however deviations are never
more than 1.5 per thousand and so are accepted in the current analysis.
The significant deviation in the data point at 90 Ω is unexplained, and
we treat it as an aberration. It has no significant effect on the fit.
(b) Calibration function k extracted from the slope of the
power-resistance curve. The local approximation of the slope ∆P/∆R
is calculated between adjacent data points and shown to illustrate the
scatter. The outlier at 90 Ω causes the local approximations to
fluctuate significantly, but the fit curve which is used for further
analysis suppresses this effect.
FIG. 4: Calibration curve produced by varying electrical power supplied to the wire and measuring the resulting wire
resistance. The measurement is realized by changing the current across the wire from 0.9mA to 1 .6mA in 0 .01mA steps. The
resulting range of wire resistances corresponds to the range observed when heating the wire with external sources, primarily the
thermal radiation from the HABS when heated to 2200 K.
IV. SIGNAL COMPONENTS
In this section we will discuss a finite-element thermal
model of the wire which illustrates the scaling of various heat
fluxes on the temperature - and by extension resistance - of the
wire, although it is not ultimately used as an input to our data
analysis. The simulation is realized as Python code available
on GitHub17.
The wire is divided into a number of segments of equal
length and the heat flow f between these elements is com-
puted with the following equation (for each time step):
ftot = fel + frec + fbeam_gas + fbb
− frad− fconduction− fbkgd_gas, (16)
This is the heat flow per unit length ( [ f ] = Power
Length), where
fel is due to electrical current, frad is due to radiation (emis-
sion from the wire and absorption from the surrounding cham-
ber), fconduction is due to thermal conduction along and out
of the wire, fbeam_gas is due to the kinetic energy of atoms
and molecules in the beam, frec is due to the recombination
of hydrogen atoms on the surface of the wire, fbb is due to
the blackbody radiation from the glowing hot HABS, and
fbkgd_gas is due to interactions with the background gas in the
chamber. The equations describing each individual compo-
nent can be found in Appendix A.
Integrating any of these heat flows fx over the length of the
wire yields Px, the total heating (cooling) power due to this
source (sink).
frec contains information about the amount of atomic hy-
drogen that is in the measured beam and is therefore the com-
ponent of interest for this paper. The procedure for extracting
it from the raw signal is detailed in the following subsections.
From the net heat flow the temperature change per time step
is calculated
∆T = ftot· ∆t
ρ· A· c (17)
where ρ is the density of the wire material, A is the cross sec-
tional area, c is the specific heat capacity of the material, and
∆t is the length of one time step in the simulation. The sim-
ulation is run for a number of steps, until ∆T converges to 0,
i.e. thermal equilibrium. The 1
e equilibration time constants
τ are typically between 0.3s to 0 .5s depending on the precise
parameters used, so we run simulations for at least ten sim-
ulated seconds to ensure full equilibration. The resistance of
the wire can then be calculated from the resulting tempera-
ture distribution, given the temperature-dependent resistivity
coefficient of the wire material.
Figure 5 shows the heat flows after equilibrium has been
reached for typical settings for gas flow (1 sccm) and HABS
temperature (2200 K). It illustrates the relative size of the ef-
fects impacting the wire temperature. Most important to note

===== PAGE 7 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 7
is, that both the fel and fbb are significantly larger than the
heat sources frec and fbeam_gas caused by a typical beam. This
means that both must be extremely well-stabilized to be able
to see the beam signal among small fluctuations in larger ef-
fects.
FIG. 5: Comparison of the scale of the various simulated heat
flow components at the time of equilibrium over the extent of
the wire. Sources which transfer heat into the wire are plotted
with solid lines, while sinks that remove heat from the wire
are drawn in dashed lines. Note that the heat sinks are
subtracted in Eq. (16), and therefore cancel out a heat source
of equal size in this plot. The hydrogen beam selected for
this simulation contains 1 sccm of molecular hydrogen at
2200 K with a 10% dissociation rate into hydrogen atoms.
The beam width is chosen to be consistent with beams at this
flow rate as will be measured later in this paper.
Fluctuations in fel are minimized by using a highly stable
power supply18, capable of stabilizing the 1 mA measurement
current running across the wire to better than 10 −5 relative
fluctuations. To minimize fluctuations in fbb the HABS is op-
erated on a PID-controlled loop stabilizing the readout of an
internal thermocouple in close proximity to the HABS capil-
lary.
However, it has not been feasible to model all effects im-
pacting the wire with sufficient precision to formulate a rela-
tionship for extracting beam heating power from wire resis-
tance directly. In part this is due to the great number of mate-
rial and surface properties that enter into the model, many of
which are only available with insufficient precision. Even the
ostensibly simple calculation of the wire’s baseline resistance
at room temperature turns out to be problematic, because the
manufacturer only guarantees the diameter of the wire to a
10% precision. This is further complicated because a gold-
coated tungsten wire is used, where the exact impact of the
coating on wire resistance is difficult to model with great con-
fidence. Exact measurements of the sticking fractions and ac-
commodation coefficients for fbeam_gas and frec are very chal-
lenging to determine with sufficient precision16. Additionally,
changes in chamber temperature not modeled here also cause
changes in wire resistance larger than that of the expected sig-
nal.
Ultimately, this simulation is used to inform the interpreta-
tion of the data but not to directly derive a beam signal from
wire resistance. Instead an indirect extraction of the signal
(Section V) is used along with a calibration scheme (Section
III) for correlation of wire resistance to incident power mea-
sured.
V. SIGNAL EXTRACTION
A. Primary signal extraction
The beam heating effects on the wire (fbeam_gas and frec) can
be quite small, on the order of 10−9− 10−6 W. Since the wire
is subject to external temperature drifts, signals are extracted
as a relative measurement by periodic switching between the
"beam on" and "beam off" states, to allow for constant com-
parison against the drifting background. An example of this is
shown in Figure 6, where a typical hydrogen beam is cycled
on and off every 5 minutes by opening and closing a pneu-
matic valve in the gas supply. For each 5 minute section only
the last two minutes of data are used to allow for equilibration.
This data is marked orange in the plot. Then three 5 minute
sections are combined in an "off"-"on"-"off" pattern. The two
"off" sections allow for fitting the background trends and then
determining the average difference ∆R when the beam is "on"
in the central 5 minute section. For background subtraction,
a quadratic function is fit to the data, with an additional ∆R
offset factor only applied to the "beam on" data.
Rfit(t) =
(
c0 + c1t + c2t2 if "beam off"
c0 + c1t + c2t2 + ∆R if "beam on" , (18)
Tracking the change in resistance in the "beam off" state,
as the flow switching method does, practically eliminates any
slow-changing background effects. The measurement turns
into a comparison of two values, where the only variable is
hydrogen flow through the HABS. This eliminates the need to
model effects such as fel, fbb which are not affected by hydro-
gen flow directly with great precision in order to extract the
much smaller beam-related effects.
We do not attempt to model the equilibration process of
each cycle, as it is a potentially complex superposition of ther-
malization processes of various components (wire, detector
board, vacuum chamber), as well as the equilibration of gas
flow after switching, all of which take place over different
time scales. From the simulation and measurements not pre-
sented here, it is known that the wire temperature equilibrates
on the scale of a few seconds, while the detector PCB tem-
perature has been measured to take tens of minutes to reach
full equilibrium. The 5 minute cycle is a compromise in let-
ting the fast processes that affect the wire directly equilibrate,
while not waiting for all components to fully thermalize over

===== PAGE 8 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 8
FIG. 6: Example of signal extraction for the wire positioned
centrally in the beam at z = 1.5mm, with the HABS at
≈ 2200K and a flow of 1 sccm. The flow is cycled on and off
8 times. For each cycle the difference in resistance when the
flow is on is extracted using a fit to a subset of the data after
equilibration, marked in orange. Fits are applied individually
to every set of three 5 minute segments in an beam off-on-off
pattern.
e.g. one hour, because the ability to background-subtract un-
intended external temperature drifts would be lost. The par-
tial inclusion of background temperature equilibration is un-
desired but not easily avoidable. It represents a systematic
overestimation of the true signal on the order of 20%. Since
our model in Eq. (9) includes a scaling parameter A, for the
purposes of this paper this systematic will simply be absorbed
by A. This is yet another reason why an absolute calibration
is difficult to achieve, but the effects on measuring the beam
shape in terms of relative flux, as shown in Section VI, should
be minor.
The flow switching method enables checking for repeata-
bility and stacking of multiple measurements to increase SNR.
With 8 such repetitions, signals as small as∆R = 2m Ω (equiv-
alent to ≈ 13nW, or ≈ 1014 atoms/(cm2s)) have been re-
solved with an SNR of µ∆R
σ∆R
≈ 4.
After ∆R is extracted, we use Eq. (15) to calculate Pmeas,
the net heating power responsible for the resistance change.
B. Secondary signal extraction
The result of primary signal extraction is the net heating
power as derived from the net change in resistance. In a sec-
ond extraction step, the atomic hydrogen recombination heat-
ing frec must be extracted from the net heating power.
The assumption is made that the components remaining in
the signal are Pmeas = Prec + Pbeam_gas− Pbkgd_gas. The other
components listed in Eq. (16) ought to be eliminated by the
flow switching scheme of the primary signal extraction.
With the HABS actively putting gas into the vacuum cham-
ber the background pressure is typically ≃ 2× 10−5 mbar at
the 1 sccm flow that is used for measurements presented in
this paper. Assuming that the background gas component is
in thermal equilibrium with the walls and has no atoms in
it due to the recombination and thermalization on the cham-
ber walls, it will provide a constant cooling effect. The hot
molecules in the beam in contrast will deposit power increas-
ing with temperature. One source of non-linearity that needs
to be accounted for is the non-trivial scaling of the heat capac-
ity of molecular hydrogen with temperature19 CV,H2(T ).
To extract just the power due to recombination, equivalent
measurements are taken at three HABS temperature setpoints
Tlow,Tmid,Thigh. Tlow is chosen as room temperature, Tmid at
≈ 1277K, high enough to see the effects of fbeam_gas but low
enough that no atomic hydrogen will be produced, and Thigh
is chosen to be≈ 2211K, the highest reliably reachable tem-
perature with the hardware employed. The precise numerical
values of the temperatures seem arbitrary, because they are the
conversion of flat thermocouple voltages which are used for
stabilization. While the stabilization is quite good, the abso-
lute conversion should be taken as no more than 5% accurate,
as precise calibration of capillary temperature measurements
remains a challenge.
The measurements at Tlow and Tmid are the minimum num-
ber of points required to scale the effects of fbeam_gas−
fbkgd_gas to what they should be at Thigh. The scaled effect is
subtracted from the raw measurement to obtain the extracted
recombination heating power
Prec(Thigh) =Pmeas(Thigh)− (a·CV,H2(T )· Thigh + b) , (19)
where Pmeas is the heating power extracted via Eq. (15), as
described in Section III, at each of the temperature setpoints.
a and b are determined by fitting
PH2 = (a·CV,H2(T )· T + b) (20)
to the Tlow and Tmid measurement for every zpos the wire is
placed at. This amounts to an extrapolation and subtraction of
the non-recombination background effects, primarily heating
from hot but undissociated H2 molecules in the beam.
Figure 7 illustrates such a fit using a dataset with higher
resolution in HABS temperature at a single wire z-position.
The temperature scan is performed twice at each temperature,
once scanning up in temperature once going down. In the ex-
ample, Eq. (20) is applied to the data below a temperature
cutoff of 1600 K to ensure none of the measured power is due
to atomic H. The model describes the data below the cutoff
well, but with discrepancies not fully explainable by statistic
fluctuation. These may be partially the a result of imperfect
calibration of the temperature axis. Work on improved tem-
perature determination is ongoing, but not presented in this
paper. Beyond that, Eq. (20) may not fully capture all tem-
perature dependencies if further parameters in Eq. (A6) carry
significant temperature dependence. For example, previous
work we have carried out, but not yet published, suggests a

===== PAGE 9 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 9
FIG. 7: Power detected on the wire after primary extraction
(Pmeas) at 1sccm for a fixed z-position over a range of
temperatures. The temperature scan is performed twice in
this dataset for each temperature position, once scanning up
in temperature and once down. A fit based on Eq. (20) is
applied to data points below the temperature cutoff
Tcutoff = 1600K. Below this temperature no dissociation of
hydrogen is expected, and therefore no contribution of
atomic hydrogen to the heat detected on the wire.
limit of the temperature dependence ofαEmol. of at most 5% in
our temperature range.
A choice of only three representative temperature points is
made to minimize total required data taking time. Since full z-
scans of the resolution presented in Figure 8 require 80 hours
of data taking per temperature, using high resolution in tem-
perature as well quickly becomes operationally prohibitive.
Based on the dataset presented in Figure 7 we estimate the
three temperature point method introduces roughly an addi-
tional 5% uncertainty on the extracted Prec compared to doing
a full resolution fit when the baseline between the chosenTlow
and Tmid is at least 500 K.
Eq. (19) describes the procedure by which measurements
at multiple temperatures can be combined to extract only the
heating due to hydrogen recombination. This recombination
heating is used in this work to trace the relative flux density
of atomic hydrogen. Therefore the preceding section has de-
scribed the prescription for using a wire calorimeter as a de-
tector for atomic hydrogen, so long as the assumptions that
were made are valid.
VI. APPLICATION TO DATA AT 1SCCM
As a demonstration, the methods described in the previ-
ous sections are applied to data taken by sweeping across
the hydrogen beam with the wire detector by means of the
translation stage on which it is mounted. Figure 8 shows
data taken when flowing 1 sccm (4.48× 1017 molecules/s) of
hydrogen through the HABS at three capillary temperatures
Tlow∼ 298K, Tmid∼ 1277K and Thigh∼ 2211K. The range
of z-positions represents the full range available in the lim-
ited space of the vacuum chamber. To avoid an impact of
time-dependent effects over the measurement period of many
hours, data at the different positions are acquired in non-
consecutive order.
FIG. 8: Power detected on the wire after primary extraction
(Pmeas) at 1sccm for room temperature, a non-dissociating
medium temperature, and a high temperature where atom
production is expected. These data sets are then used in the
secondary extraction procedure, to yield the effect of
recombining atoms on the surface. Negative detected powers
indicate a net cooling of the wire, which is identified with the
cooling due to gas pressure increase in the detector chamber
induced by gas flow from the source. ( fbkgd_gas).
As seen in Figure 8, room temperature measurements ini-
tially yield a negative net heating power. This is because at
this low temperature the beam imparts no significant heating
to the wire, but it still fills the vacuum chamber with gas such
that the pressure rises. This room temperature background gas
cools the wire, since the wire reaches≈ 70◦ C in the center due
to being heated by the measurement current. Both effects are
described in Section IV.
At medium temperatures (1277K in Figure 8) there is a
slight heating on the order of 300nW which can be seen to
be higher when the wire is centered under the source ( zpos≈
1.5mm). This can be accounted for by a beam of hot molecu-
lar H2 which transfers some of its thermal energy to the wire
when hitting it ( fbeam_gas).
Finally at high temperatures (2211K in Figure 8) larger
than the dissociation threshold temperature, the beam contains
a fraction of atomic hydrogen. This is the primary signal we
are looking for, and can account for the much larger µW-scale
peaked signal in the high temperature power data plotted in
blue. The high temperature dataset shows a larger signal than
can be explained by the increased thermal "beam gas" heat-
ing indicating the detection of recombination heating due to

===== PAGE 10 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 10
atomic hydrogen.
These three data sets are combined using the procedure de-
scribed in Section V B using Eq. (19) to determine the heating
power due to recombination heating alone. This is plotted in
Figure 9.
The model from Eq. (9) is then adapted for fitting to the
extracted recombination power data. An offset power P0, to
account for a residual background, as well as a positional off-
set z0 are introduced. The necessity of this can be seen in
Figure 8, where the zero of the z-axis does not initially line up
with the center of the beam. The resulting final fit function is
given by
Prec(zpos + z0;leff,A,P0) =
A
Z
wire
dx jHABS(θ (x,zpos + z0))· η(x)cos3(θ (x,zpos + z0)

+ P0 . (21)
Figure 9 shows the fit applied to the final extracted data.
As previously described, the parameter A is effectively just a
vertical scaling parameter, while P0 and z0 translate the fit in
x and y direction. This leaves leff as the sole free parameter
governing the shape of the beam’s distribution.
FIG. 9: Extracted heating power attributed to recombination
(Prec) for a flow of 1sccm at 2211K source temperature,
shown over the range of positions the wire was placed at.
The optimized beam shape model is plotted alongside.
This fit yields a value for the shape parameter leff, which
allows us to reconstruct the beam intensity profile at the exit
of the HABS. The resulting jHABS as per Eq. (1) is shown
in Figure 10 alongside an error band. The error band results
from calculating jHABS(leff) for the values leff shifted up and
down by the fit error onleff. The error band deviation is zero at
the center and at the edges by construction of the model, since
it only shows relative flux. Any changes in flux scaling (errors
in A) and background offset (errors in P0) are external to this
model. They would be important for a measurement of abso-
lute flux, but not relative flux as is presented in this work. This
example demonstrates that the procedure presented allows for
measuring the shape of the original beam to better than 5%
relative precision at any point along the distribution.
FIG. 10: Reconstruction of the underlying beam shape model
jHABS, including both the effects of the theoretical beam
shape emitted from a long tube, as well as the truncation of
the edges due to shadowing of the beam by the source
shroud, both as described in Section II. The uncertainty on
the extracted beam model is illustrated by propagating the fit
errors for the beam shape parameter leff through the model.
The errors on leff allow for a reconstruction of the beam as it
exits the HABS to better than 5% relative precision at any
point along the distribution.
VII. EFFECTIVE LENGTH OVER FLOW
The same three temperature scan procedure as illustrated in
Section VI has been performed for beams at 0.05 sccm and 0.2
sccm flow. This provides overlap with the lower flow regimes
probed by Tschersich et al 14. Values for leff listed in Table I
of that work are compared to the ones produced by this work
in Figure 11. Extending the range of flows measured with the
wire detector is the subject of ongoing work.
The two works provide values that are roughly compati-
ble. In either case the effective length of transparent flow is
measured to increase with lower flows, which matches expec-
tations, as lower flows correspond to lower densities in the
capillary. The exact quality of the comparison is hard to de-
termine. Tschersich et al. do not quote errors on their leff.
Additionally while their source is very similar to the source
used in this work (Section II) and indeed is a prototype of the
same, it is not exactly equivalent, especially in the precise ge-
ometry of its housing. They also operate their source at higher
temperatures, although we do not expect this to have a signif-

===== PAGE 11 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 11
FIG. 11: Comparison of fit parameter leff at three different
flows using the methods described in this work to values
from Table I in Tschersich et al. (2000)14. No error
estimation is available for the sourced leff values. Plots
showing fits in this work for 0.05 sccm and 0.2 sccm are
available in Appendix E. The orange error bar is the span of
leff when datasets at different temperatures are used to
determine PH2 (see Appendix F) for details).
icant direct effect on leff.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The performance of the wire detector was demonstrated by
measuring the relative intensity profile of the beam from this
source. An independent absolute intensity measurement is not
yet attempted, due to an undetermined proportionality factor
for the fraction of available energy from recombination that
is transferred into the wire. It has been demonstrated that
a calorimetric wire detector can be used to measure hydro-
gen beams on the order of 10 16 atoms/(cm2s) with signifi-
cant SNR ( µ∆R
σ∆R
≈ 50). It is possible to reconstruct the un-
derlying shape of the hydrogen beam emitted from a capil-
lary based on a theoretical model, showing that remaining un-
certainties are reasonably constrained. Good agreement with
the theoretical model for the relative distribution of the beam
was demonstrated. This constitutes an independent confirma-
tion of this model as well as the suitability of the calorimetric
wire detector for further development in characterizing hydro-
gen beam sources. The beam shape parameters determined
with the method described in this work are compared to those
from measured for a similar source using a QMS by another
group14 and are found to be compatible.
Appendix A: Wire heating component equations
This section is a glossary of equations used in the simula-
tion of the wire detector. All quantities fx are power densities
(power per unit length [W/m]) due to various effects that im-
pact the wire.
- fel: Heat due to electrical current.
fel = I2· R(Ti)/l (A1)
where I is the current, R(Ti) = ρ·l/A· (1 +a)· (Ti−Tref) is the
resistance of the segment i, and l is the length of the segment.
ρ is the specific resistance, A denotes the cross-sectional area
of the wire and a is the temperature coefficient of resistivity.
Ti is the temperature of segment i and Tref is the reference
temperature at which ρ is quoted.
- frad: Heat transfer through radiation (emission and ab-
sorption from surroundings).
frad = π· dwire· σ· ε· (T 4
i − T 4
bkgd) (A2)
where dwire is the diameter of the wire, σ is the Stephan-
Boltzmann-constant and ε is the emissivity of the wire sur-
face. The emissivity is not precisely known from literature,
and the value therefore has to be tuned using a calibration
scheme. π·d·l is the surface area, and divided byl just results
in π· d. Tbkgd is the temperature of chamber which gives of a
background of blackbody radiation.
- fconduction: Heat transfer through conduction.
fconduction = k(Ti)· (Ti−1− Ti) + (Ti+1− Ti)
l · A
l (A3)

===== PAGE 12 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 12
where k is the heat conductivity coefficient and A is the cross
sectional area of the wire. This is the second-order central
difference approximation, which calculates the local curvature
in the temperature profile by comparing to the temperatures of
the neighboring segments Ti−1 and Ti+1.
- fbkgd_gas: Heat transfer due to interactions with the gas
remaining in the vacuum chamber.
fbkgd_gas = αE· πdwire· p
4
s
1
kBmTbkgd
(A4)
·
CV (Ti)Ti−CV (Tbkgd)Tbkgd
NA

≈ αE· πdwire· 5p
4
s
kB
m
(Ti− Tbkgd)2
Tbkgd
, (A5)
where αE is the energy accommodation coefficient of molec-
ular hydrogen on the wire, p is the pressure in the chamber
containing the wire detector, kB is the Boltzmann constant, m
is the mass of a hydrogen molecule, CV (T ) is the heat capac-
ity of the gas (molecular hydrogen in this case), and NA is the
Avogadro number. αE describes the fraction of available ki-
netic energy that is transferred to the collision surface and is
set to 1 in the example shown in Figure 5.
- fbeam_gas: The heat transfer from the kinetic energy of
atoms and molecules in the beam hitting the wire.
fbeam_gas = fat + fmol, (A6)
fat/mol = nat/mol· dwire· αEat/mol·CVat/mol(Tat/mol)· (Tat/mol− Ti)
(A7)
where n is flow density [particles/(cm2s)] and αE is the en-
ergy accommodation coefficient andTat/mol is the temperature
of the gas coming our of the source. In the example presented
in this paper the gas temperature is assumed to be equal to the
source temperature.
- frec: Heat transfer due to the recombination of hydrogen
atoms from the beam on the wire.
frec = jHABS(θ (i);leff)· Φat· γrec· βrec· dwire· Erec
2 , (A8)
where jHABS is the shape function of the beam evaluated at the
angular position θ (i) of the wire element, Φat is the total flow
of atoms in the beam (atoms/second) andErec is the energy re-
leased when two hydrogen atoms recombine into a molecule.
γrec is the likelihood of an atom which hits the wire to re-
combine on the wire, βrec is the fraction of the recombination
energy which is transferred to the wire in case of a molecule
is produced. These last two parameters are poorly constrained
but some rough values are available in the literature16. For the
example shown in Figure 5 γrec and βrec are set to 1, since it
will later simply become part of the fit parameterA. Choosing
the factor 1 minimizes the atom flux required to explain the
recombination signal that is measured, allowing for the de-
termination of a lower limit on the atoms actually produced.
This is desirable because producing a large number of atoms
is a requirement for the goals of the Project 8 collaboration.
- fbb: Blackbody radiation from the HABS.
fbb = ε· σ· T 4
HABS· AHABS
l· dwire
4πr2
HABS
1
l , (A9)
where σ is the Stephan-Boltzmann-constant, ε is the emis-
sivity and AHABS is the area of the source visible to the wire,
rHABS is the distance to the HABS from the wire. The frac-
tion of AHABS
4πr2
HABS
yields the portion of the field of view as seen
from the wire which is glowing hot at source temperatures.
Appendix B: Wire sensitivity
Using the simulation described in Section IV, a test heating
power can be applied to an arbitrary point of a simulated wire
in thermal equilibrium. By calculating the total resistance of
the wire with and without the test point source, the change in
resistance due to the test source is determined. The position at
which the test source is applied is then shifted along the wire,
until a sample is generated at every segment of the simulated
wire. This allows for determining the relative effect of a heat-
ing power based on the location at which it is applied to the
wire. The absolute size of the simulated ∆R signal is deemed
unreliable at worse than 10% accuracy, however the relative
effect size should be much better than that.
In practice, a simulated 1 µW point source is applied along
the wire and ∆R induced in the wire resistance is recorded.
The values of ∆R are then normalized by the average value
∆Ravg yielding the relative wire sensitivity
ηwire(xi) = ∆R(xi)
∆Ravg
(B1)
with xi the position of the wire of segment i at which the sim-
ulated point heat source is applied.
Sensitivity is highest in the center of the wire with steepen-
ing decline to the ends of the wire. The change in local wire
sensitivity is caused by the fact that the temperature profile is
curved leading to places where (primarily) thermal conduc-
tion is more or less effective at carrying extra heat out of the
wire. Figure 12 shows the value of the relative wire sensitivity
along the wire.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 13
FIG. 12: Normalized local wire sensitivity ηwire. A larger η
indicates a larger resistance change for a given change in
input power. Sensitivity is highest in the center of the wire
with steepening decline to the ends of the wire.
When using the wire this means that the part of the beam
hitting the center of the wire has a disproportionate effect.
This is accounted for by interpolating over the ηwire(xi) of
each segment and including the resulting function ηwire(x) in
the signal model given in Eq. 9.
Efforts to directly measure the wire sensitivity using a laser
as a point source of heat are ongoing, but not included in this
publication.
Appendix C: Correcting calibration for temperature
distribution and resulting wire sensitivity
The calibration method initially assumes that the wire is
heated equally in all places by the measurement current. This
is incorrect, but a convenient approximation, because only the
total resistance of the wire is measurable and therefore only
an approximation for its average temperature can be derived.
A better approximation can be obtained, by simulating the
wire behavior.
The finite elements simulation results in a prediction for the
wire temperature profile in response to the heating due to the
measurement current, shown in Figure 13.
FIG. 13: Simulated temperature profile along the wire at
1mA measurement current. The maximum of the wire
temperature is reached in the center of the wire at just under
70 °C. There is a roughly 45 °C temperature difference to the
edges of the wire.
Of course the real calibration measurement already in-
cludes these effects. What remains for us is to correct the as-
sumption, that k as calculated above is the average conversion
factor for ∆R to power. As calculated, it is actually already the
conversion factor weighted for the unequally distributed heat-
ing power. To get back to the average conversion factor for
a flat input power the effect of the additional central heating
needs to be removed.
The difference in global calibration factor based on the real
input power distribution and a flat input power can be inter-
preted as a correction factor c, the quotient of the integrals
over the power distribution weighted by ηwire along the wire
c =
R
wire I2Rdens(T (x))· ηwire(x)dx
R
wire I2 Rtot
lwire· ηwire(x)dx , (C1)
which simplifies to
c =
R
wire Rdens(T (x))· ηwire(x)dx
Rtot
lwire
R
wire ηwire(x)dx . (C2)
and finally
c =
R
wire(1 + a· ∆T (x))· ηwire(x)dxR
wire ηwire(x)dx , (C3)
where a is the temperature coefficient of resistivity and ∆T =
T (x)− Tavg. Tavg being the average wire temperature that
would result in it having a total resistance of Rtot . The correc-
tion resulting from a simulation at 1mA is c = 1.0228, mean-
ing that the calculated ke f f = c· k is too high by this factor
compared to the equally distributed heating power assump-
tion. The accuracy of this correction depends on the accuracy

===== PAGE 14 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 14
of the simulation, but since it is a fairly small correction, even
large inaccuracies in the simulation on the order of 10% would
only translate into part per thousand level changes to the cali-
bration factor k.
Appendix D: Axes definition
FIG. 14: Half-sphere axes definitions. The HABS capillary is
indicated by the orange tube. The wire is oriented parallel to
the x-axis in the wire plane. It can be moved in the
z-direction by a translation stage. The distance to the
capillary in the y-direction is fixed.
Appendix E: Effective length over flow
This section contains the plots of extractedPrec for 0.2 sccm
and 0.05 sccm along with fits. The method is equivalent to the
three-temperature-point method demonstrated for a flow of 1
sccm in Section VI. The resulting values for leff are included
in Figure 11.
FIG. 15: Extracted heating power attributed to recombination
(Prec) for a flow of 0.2sccm at 2211K source temperature,
shown over the range of positions the wire was placed at. The
optimized beam shape model is plotted alongside. PH2(Eq.
(20)) was determined using z-scans 1277 K and 298 K.
FIG. 16: Extracted heating power attributed to recombination
(Prec) for a flow of 0.05sccm at 2211K source temperature,
shown over the range of positions the wire was placed at. The
optimized beam shape model is plotted alongside. PH2(Eq.
(20)) was determined using z-scans 1277 K and 298 K.
Appendix F: Systematic errors from temperature selection
For the 1 sccm flow setting we took additional z-scans at
additional intermediate temperatures below the dissociation
threshold. Additional scans were not taken for every flow set-
ting due to time constraints in the availability of the setup.
Each of the z-scans with 38 positions requires about 80 hours
to measure with the procedure presented in Figure 6, such that

===== PAGE 15 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 15
the 6 datasets in Figure 17 represent over 20 days of runtime
alone. The three-temperature-point method presented in this
paper is a deliberate minimum of runtime, to make it possible
to search in other parts of the parameter space, such as flow.
FIG. 17: Power detected on the wire after primary extraction
(Pmeas) at 1sccm for an extended range of source
temperatures. All datasets below 1600 K are below the
dissociation threshold and measure a pure H2 beam. These
data sets are then used in the secondary extraction procedure,
to yield the effect of recombining atoms on the surface.
Negative detected powers indicate a net cooling of the wire,
which is identified with the convection cooling due to gas
pressure in the detector chamber ( fbkgd_gas).
We use the additional z-scans to gauge possible system-
atic deviation in fit parameters due to the arbitrary choice of
temperatures below the dissociation threshold we used to fit
Eq. 20. The secondary extraction procedure (Section V B)
is performed using all possible combinations (containing be-
tween 2-5) of the non-dissociating temperature setpoints (the
set 1518 K, 1277 K, 1022 K, 739 K, 298 K). The sole disso-
ciating temperature setpoint 2211 K must of course always be
included as Thigh. The resulting extracted powers are then fit
with Eq. 21. The resulting leff fit parameter of all 26 combi-
nations is shown as a histogram in Figure 18. The result of
the three-point-method as used in this paper is shown in green
along with its error band. Similarly the result of the extraction
and fit based on all 6 available datasets at once is shown in
blue. The extracted recombination power and its fit are shown
in Figure 19. The value of leff = 4.48± 0.37 is statistically
compatible with the three-point-method result previously dis-
cussed.
This histogram is an imperfect proxy for systematic error
due to temperature setpoint selection. The entries are clearly
not entirely statistically independent as only 6 independent
datasets exist. It is therefore unsurprising that the histogram
does not approximate a normal distribution well. Neverthe-
less it illustrates that three-point-method using the 2211 K ,
1277 K and 298 K datasets presented in this work is a rea-
FIG. 18: Histogram of fit parameter leff when using all
possible combinations of the sub-dissociation datasets to fit
PH2 (Eq. (20)). The results of the fits using all available sets
at once (Figure 19) and the three-temperature-method as
presented in Section VI are displayed with error bands.
sonable expedient. For the systematic error bar displayed in
Figure 11 we use the span of all results for leff after excluding
the outlier at 5.24. This outlier is produced when extrapolating
from the 1277 K and 1022 K datasets. It is perhaps unsurpris-
ing, that using datasets that are adjacent in temperature are
more prone to large variation due to their shorter temperature
baseline. The resulting span range for is 3.79 to 4.67, which
leaves the three-point-method result of leff = 4.20± 0.22 well
centered within. This span is plotted in orange as a systematic
error bar in Figure 9.

===== PAGE 16 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 16
FIG. 19: Extracted heating power attributed to recombination
(Prec) for a flow of 1sccm at 2211K source temperature,
shown over the range of positions the wire was placed at.
The optimized beam shape model is plotted alongside.
PH2(Eq. (20)) was determined using all available z-scans
below the dissociation threshold: 1518 K, 1277 K, 1022 K,
739 K and 298 K.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the
following sources: the Cluster of Excellence "Precision
Physics, Fundamental Interactions, and Structure of Mat-
ter" (PRISMA+ EXC 2118/1) funded by the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) within the German Excellence
Strategy (Project ID 39083149); the U.S. Department of En-
ergy Office of Science, Office of Nuclear Physics, under
Award No. DE-SC0020433 to Case Western Reserve Uni-
versity (CWRU), under Award No. DE-SC0011091 to the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), under Field
Work Proposal Number 73006 at the Pacific Northwest Na-
tional Laboratory (PNNL), a multiprogram national labora-
tory operated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC05-76RL01830, under Early Ca-
reer Award No. DE-SC0019088 to Pennsylvania State Uni-
versity, under Award No. DE-SC0024434 to the University of
Texas at Arlington, under Award No. DE-FG02-97ER41020
to the University of Washington, and under Award No. DE-
SC0012654 to Yale University; the National Science Foun-
dation under Grant No. PHY-2209530 to Indiana Univer-
sity, and under Grant No. PHY-2110569 to MIT; the Karl-
sruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) Center Elementary Parti-
cle and Astroparticle Physics (KCETA); Laboratory Directed
Research and Development (LDRD) 18-ERD-028 and 20-
LW-056 at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL),
prepared by LLNL under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344,
LLNL-JRNL-868753; the LDRD Program at PNNL; and Yale
University.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflicts of Interest
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.
Author Contributions (CRediT)
C. Matthé: Conceptualization, Methodology (lead), Data cu-
ration, Formal analysis (lead), Investigation (lead), Software,
Validation (lead), Visualization (lead), Writing – original draft
(lead), Writing – review & editing (lead).
S. Böser: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project ad-
ministration, Resources, Supervision.
M. Fertl: Funding acquisition, Resources.
L. A. Thorne, D. Fenner, M. B. Hüneborn, M. Astashov, P .
Kern, A. Lindman, B. Mucogllava: Investigation (support-
ing).
S. Enomoto, N.S. Oblath, W. Pettus, M. Astashov, A. Lind-
man, L. A. Thorne: Software, Data curation.
B. J. P . Jones , R. G. H. Robertson , B. Mucogllava ,
M. Wynne, L. A. Thorne, T. E. Weiss, W. Pettus, M. Oues-
lati, J. A. Formaggio , A. Lindman , M. J. Brandsema ,
A. L. Reine: Review & Editing.
K. Kazkaz: Review & Editing, Validation (supporting).
All other authors: Review & Editing (supporting).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
1A. Ashtari Esfahani et al., J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 44, 054004 (2017).
2Project 8 Collaboration, A. Ashtari Esfahani et al ., “The project
8 neutrino mass experiment,” Snowmass Proceedings (2021),
10.48550/ARXIV .2203.07349.
3B. Monreal and J. A. Formaggio, “Relativistic cyclotron radiation detection
of tritium decay electrons as a new technique for measuring the neutrino
mass,” Physical Review D 80 (2009), 10.1103/physrevd.80.051301.
4V . A. Trofimov, A. A. Vassiliev, A. I. Kovalev, and P. A. Kravtsov, “A
two-coordinate detector for a beam of atomic hydrogen or deuterium,” In-
struments and Experimental Techniques 48, 122–126 (2005).
5D. Ugur, A. J. Storm, R. Verberk, J. C. Brouwer, and W. G. Sloof, “Quan-
tification of the atomic hydrogen flux as a function of filament temperature
and H2 flow rate,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum,
Surfaces, and Films 30 (2012), 10.1116/1.3700231.
6A. Winkler, “Interaction of atomic hydrogen with metal surfaces,” Applied
Physics A: Materials Science & Processing 67, 637–644 (1998).
7C.-F. Cheng, J. Hussels, M. Niu, H. Bethlem, K. Eikema, E. Salumbides,
W. Ubachs, M. Beyer, N. Hölsch, J. Agner, F. Merkt, L.-G. Tao, S.-
M. Hu, and C. Jungen, “Dissociation energy of the hydrogen molecule
at 1e-9 accuracy,” Physical Review Letters 121 (2018), 10.1103/phys-
revlett.121.013001.
8S. U. A. H. Syed, S. Maher, and S. Taylor, “Quadrupole mass filter oper-
ation under the influence of magnetic field,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry
48, 1325–1339 (2013).
9McAllister Bellows-sealed Linear Translator (CF 40).
10Https://www.mbe-komponenten.de/products/mbe-components/gas-
sources/habs.php.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Calorimetric Wire Detector for Measurement of Atomic Hydrogen Beams 17
11K. G. Tschersich, J. P. Fleischhauer, and H. Schuler, “Design and charac-
terization of a thermal hydrogen atom source,” Journal of Applied Physics
104 (2008), 10.1063/1.2963956.
12Alicat Model: MCE-20SCCM-D-DB15K.
13Entegris GateKeeper MC1-904F.
14K. G. Tschersich, “Intensity of a source of atomic hydrogen based on a hot
capillary,” Journal of Applied Physics 87, 2565–2573 (2000).
15K. G. Tschersich and V . von Bonin, “Formation of an atomic hydrogen
beam by a hot capillary,” Journal of Applied Physics84, 4065–4070 (1998).
16G. A. Melin and R. J. Madix, “Energy accommodation during oxygen atom
recombination on metal surfaces,” Trans. Faraday Soc.67, 198–211 (1971).
17https://github.com/christianmatthe/wire_detector.
18Keithley SourceMeter 2400.
19NIST https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C1333740&
Type=JANAFG&Table=on#JANAFG.
