===== PAGE 1 =====
Lecture #1: Background 
READINGS AND FIGURES 
Readings: Frisk, Chapter 1, sections 1.3 and 1.4; Chapter 2, sections 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4.  
Figures used: COA, Figures 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.5 
--------------------------------------------------------- 
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES 
 The first two pages of the notes are my own answers to two important questions about any 
scientific/engineering topic: 1) why bother and 2) what’s new? Though ocean acoustics is now a rather 
mature field, there are still many new applications and science questions, as shown in these pages. 
 The next pages are from Frisk, Sections 1.3 and 1.4.  
 In Section 1.3, Frisk  shows the basic time dependent wave equation (Eq. 11), the stratified 
medium wave equation (Eq. 12), and the reduced wave equation or Helmholtz equation (Eq. 13). These 
fluid medium equations are the basic ones for underwater acoustics. (The fluid assumption is generally a 
good one. The only big exceptions are sea ice and hard rock sea bottoms, such as in fjords). The simple 
messages from these equations are: 1) the basic equation for acoustics is a simple, second order, linear 
partial differential equation, 2) the ocean and seabed are stratified to first order, so that one can often 
work with constant density layers, and 3) one can Fourier decompose the wave equation, and work with 
one frequency at a time via the Helmholtz equation. This makes computations simpler, and then one can 
simply add the fields at each frequency to create a broadband field at the end. 
 In section 1.4, Frisk shows the equivalence of the Helmholtz equation and the time independent 
Schoedinger equation, something that one might think to be of only academic interest at first, but which 
is actually quite important. This equivalence lets one use the large array of analysis techniques that have 
been developed in the context of quantum mechanics, such as WKB theory, mode theory, scattering 
theory, and so on. The analogies to quantum mechanical systems are very close in many ways, and many 
researchers have exploited this. 
The next few pages are my own descriptions of the first few figures from COA (Figs 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 
1.5. The message in all these figures is that, to quote the old Marshall McLuhan phrase, “the medium is 
the message.” The complexity of the ocean and seabed medium, and also the general lack of detailed 
information we have about details down to the fine level needed for “exact” acoustics calculations, is 
really the main thing that keeps ocean and seabed acoustics interesting. The physical oceanography, the 
geology, and the biology of the ocean all affect acoustics, and a large amount of effort is spent in either: 
1) obtaining adequate knowledge of the ocean to input into the wave equation for forward problems, or 
2) figuring out what the ocean and seabed are from acoustic (and other) data using inverse methods. A 
take-away message here is that if one wants to seriously pursue ocean acoustics, knowledge of the 
oceanography, biology, and geology of the ocean is needed, and not just a frill. 
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
The last part of lecture #1 is a quick ride through Chapter 2 of Frisk, in which he shows basic 
solutions for the 1D, 2D, and 3D wave equations, in rather general form. Sections 2.1 – 2.3 are very basic 
reviews of the 1D and 3D wave equations and their solutions (linear and spherical waves, and should be 
purely a review of old results at this level. The 2D wave equation result, curiously, is the most interesting 
insofar as this course is concerned. That is because the 3D wave equation collapses to a 2D wave 
equation when the ocean is stratified, and thus cylindrically symmetric. The 2D wave equation in 
cylindrical coordinates is actually one that has the most immediate uses in ocean acoustics. Section 2.4 
discusses the radial part of the 2D solution in cylindrical coordinates, which just turns out to be the 
familiar Bessel’s equation. The exact and asymptotic forms of the solution are shown, and a little 
emphasis made that the spreading law is cylindrical (intensity falls as R, not R^2). 
  
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
2.682 Acoustical Oceanography
Spring 2012
 
 
 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
