===== PAGE 1 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS
JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Abstract.Weprovethatanyclosedorientablehypersurfaceinacontactmanifoldofdimensionfive
orgreaterisisotopictoarobustlynon-convexhypersurfaceviaanarbitrarily𝐶 0-smallisotopy. This
strengthensarecentresultofthefirstauthorandyieldsastrongcounterparttothegroundbreaking
density theorem of Honda-Huang and Giroux. This is proven by combining a new convexity
obstructionviaheteroclinicsandrecentadvancesinrobustheterodimensionaldynamicsduetoLi-
Turaevtoproducearobustdeconvexifyingplug, whichisalocalandrobustconvexityobstruction.
1.Introduction
A hypersurface in a contact manifold isconvexif there exists a contact vector field that is
everywhere transverse to the hypersurface. Convex surface theory was originally pioneered by
Giroux[26],whoestablishedseveralfundamentalpropertiesofconvexsurfacesandappliedthem
to resolve (in dimension three) a question of Eliashberg-Gromov [18] on the existence of contact
Morse functions. Convex surfaces subsequently developed into a core tool in low-dimensional
contact topology, with many fundamental applications (cf. [20–22,31,32,35–37]). We refer the
reader to the monograph of Etnyre [19] for a more comprehensive reference.
Inhigherdimensions,convexhypersurfacetheoryhasonlyrecentlygainedtractionduetothe
groundbreaking work of Honda-Huang [33,34]. Applications have included the completion of
thehigher-dimensionalGirouxcorrespondencebyBreen-Honda-Huang[13]. Acentralquestion
in all of these works regards the abundance of convex hypersurfaces. More precisely, we have
the following question about density and genericity [34, Remark 1.2.4] or [44].
Question1(Density/Genericity).Areconvexhypersurfacesdense(orevengeneric)inthespace
of closed oriented hypersurfaces in any contact manifold in the𝐶𝑘-topology?
One of the fundamental results of Giroux [26] states that convex surfaces are𝐶8-generic in
dimensionthree,andthemainresultsofHonda-Huang[33]establishedthe𝐶 0-densityofconvex
hypersurfaces in any dimension. On the other hand, it was long conjectured that Question 1
should have a negative answer in the𝐶8-topology beyond dimension three. This longstanding
problem was finally resolved by the first author [14] who recently proved the following result.
Theorem 2.[14] There is a closed oriented hypersurfaceΣin any contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qof dimension
five or greater that cannot be approximated by convex hypersurfaces in the𝐶2-topology.
The work [14] applied a tool from partially hyperbolic dynamics, namely Bonatti-Diaz blenders
[7–10], to construct a closed hypersurface in any contact manifold with𝐶2-robustly transitive
characteristic foliations. Any such hypersurface is also𝐶2-robustly non-convex, since a convex
hypersurface cannot have transitive characteristic foliation. These results revealed a connection
between the topology of hypersurfaces in contact manifolds and partially hyperbolic dynamics.
In this paper, we develop these connections further by establishing a general relationship
between robust non-convexity in contact topology and robust heterodimensional dynamics (cf.
Bonatti-Diaz[9]). Asanapplication,weuserecentworkofLi-Turaev[38]toconstructrobustand
local obtructions to convexity, yielding the following dramatic strengthening of Theorem 2.
Theorem 3(Main Result).Any closed orientable hypersurfaceΣin a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qof dimen-
sion five or greater is isotopic to a𝐶2-robustly non-convex hypersurface via a𝐶0-small isotopy.
This resolves a conjecture [14, Conjecture 20] of the first author, and proves that the failure of
Question 1 is extreme. Moreover, this work points to a connection between the convex/non-
convex dichotomy and the program of𝐶1-generic dynamics advocated by Bonatti [6].
1
arXiv:2607.03649v1  [math.SG]  4 Jul 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
1.1.Heteroclinic Cycles And Robust Heterodimensional Dynamics.We start by discussing
the key concepts involved in robust heterodimensional dynamics. Recall that asingular line field
𝐿on a closed manifold𝑀
is an equivalence class of smooth vector field up to rescaling by a positive smooth function. A
singular line field may be viewed as a 1-dimensional foliation with singularities, or as a flow
modulo reparametrization. In this paper, we will formulate many concepts using singular line
fields instead of vector fields or flows, since this is the dynamical structure associated to a
hypersurface in a contact manifold. Fix the following terminology.
Definition 4(Heteroclinic Cycle).Aheteroclinic cycle𝐶of a singular line field𝐿is a pair of
hyperbolic basic sets𝐶` and𝐶´ whose stable and unstable sets satisfy
𝑊𝑢p𝐶´qX𝑊 𝑠p𝐶`q‰Hand𝑊 𝑢p𝐶`qX𝑊 𝑠p𝐶´q‰H
Theindexindp𝐶qisthepairofindicesofthehyperbolicinvariantsets𝐶 ` and𝐶´. Aheteroclinic
cycle issimpleif both basic sets are periodic orbits andheterodimensionalifindp𝐶`q‰indp𝐶 ´q.
Remark 5.We adopt the analogous terminology for heteroclinic cycles, indices and heterodi-
mensional cycles in the settings of diffeomorphisms, vector fields and flows.
Figure 1.A simple heterodimensional cycle consisting of two hyperbolic fixed
points of a 3-dimensional diffeomorphisms.
Given a hyperbolic invariant setΛof a singular line field𝐿onΣ, any other singular line field𝐾
sufficientlycloseto𝐿inthe𝐶 1-topologyhasahyperbolicinvariantsetΛ 𝐾 calledthecontinuation
ofΛ. The continuation is Hausdorff close toΛ, with the same index and conjugate dynamics.
Definition 6(Robustness).A heteroclinic cycle𝐶of a singular line field𝐿isrobustif it has a
𝐶1-open neighborhoodUin the space of singular line fields such that the continuations
𝐶`
𝐾 and𝐶 ´
𝐾
of the basic sets𝐶` and𝐶´ form a heteroclinic cycle for any singular line field𝐾inU.
Remark 7(Fragile And Robust Heteroclinics).Let𝐶 ` and𝐶 ´ be hyperbolic orbits such that
indp𝐶`qis less thanindp𝐶´q. If the stable and unstable manifolds intersect transversely, then
dimp𝑊𝑠p𝐶`qX𝑊 𝑢p𝐶´qqď0 dimp𝑊 𝑢p𝐶´qX𝑊 𝑠p𝐶`qqą0
Therefore, in the transverse case𝑊𝑠p𝐶`qX𝑊 𝑢p𝐶´qmust be empty while the intersections
𝑊𝑠p𝐶´qX𝑊 𝑢p𝐶`qpersist. Thus, theheteroclinicintersectionsinthesetwosetsarecalledfragile
androbustrespectively. Since a generic flow satisfies the Smale property, this analysis implies
that a robust heterodimensional cycle cannot be simple.

===== PAGE 3 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 3
Historically, robust heterodimensional dynamics originally appeared in the seminal work of
Abraham-Smale [1] who constructed the first examples of𝐶1-open sets of diffeomorphisms
that are not Axiom A. This disproved the conjecture that Axiom A diffeomorphisms and flows
are𝐶 1-generic, historically known asSmale’s dream[48]. Further examples were discovered in
[16,17,17,27,39,46,47]andageneralapproachttorobustheterodimensionalcycleswaseventually
developed by Bonatti-Diaz [8,10] using blenders. Robust heterodimensional dynamics, along
with the related phenomenon of robust homoclinic tangencies, subsequently developed into
central phenomena in differentiable dynamics (cf. [9,28,29] for related overviews).
The centrality of robust heterodimensional dynamics is exhibited by the following famous
conjecture of Palis, posed originally in [42,43], which can be viewed as a revision of Smale’s
dream that incorporates non-hyperbolic robust phenomena.
Conjecture8(Palis).A𝐶 1-genericdiffeomorphism (ornon-singularline field)either satisfiesAxiomA,
contains a robust heterodimensional cycle, or contains a robust homoclinic tangency.
In fact, there is a version of this question posed by Bonatti-Diaz [9, Question 1.2] that removes
the case of homoclinic tangencies, and thus conjectures a dichotomy between hyperbolicity and
robust heterodimensional cycles. This variant of the Palis Conjecture is closely related to the
results of this paper, and we will return to it shortly.
1.2.Characteristic Foliations And Basic Sets.We next revisit hypersurfaces in contact mani-
folds and formulate the key convexity obstruction. Consider a hypersurface
Σin a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉q
Any such hypersurface has a natural singular line field called thecharacteristic foliationthat is
induced by the contact structure. Examples of characteristic foliations include the suspension
flow of a contactomorphism, the Liouville flow on a Liouville manifold and Hamiltonian flows
with drag. We will review key facts about characteristic foliations in Section 2.
Remark 9(Contact Hamiltonian Manifolds).In the body of the paper, we will formulate most
of our results in terms ofcontact Hamiltonian manifoldswhich are the natural intrinsic models for
hypersurfaces in contact manifolds. This language is introduced in [15] and reviewed in Section
2. For simplicity, we will formulate our results in the introduction using hypersurfaces.
A subsetΛin the hypersurfaceΣis calledLiouvilleif there is a contact form for𝜉whose
restriction to a neighborhood ofΛis a Liouville form. IfΣis oriented, then a Liouville subset is
positiveif the Liouville form can be chosen to induce the given orientation, andnegativeif it can
be chosen to induce the opposite orientation. Liouville subsets plays a key role in the theory of
hypersurface in contact manifolds and has appeared, for example, in the work of Breen [11,12].
In general, a subset can be positive Liouville, negative Liouville, neither or even both. Our
first main result states that hyperbolic basic sets are automatically Liouville, and the sign of the
Liouville form is determined by the index of the basic set.
Theorem10(BasicSetsAreLiouville).LetΛĂΣbeahyperbolicbasicsetofthecharacteristicfoliation
of hypersurfaceΣin a contactp2𝑛`1q-manifold. ThenΛis Liouville with
Λpositive if and only ifindpΛqď𝑛
Our proof introduces a novel ergodic characterization of Liouville invariant subsets analogous
to the well-known McDuff-Sullivan criterion for Reeb flows [41,49]. An interesting result of this
analysisisthatanyLiouvilleinvariantsubsetcannotbebothpositiveandnegative(Lemma3.8).
Any convex hypersurface can be divided into a positive Liouville subset and a negative Liou-
villesubsetalongasub-manifoldΓĂΣcalledthedividingsetthatistransversetothecharacterstic
foliation. Using this splitting, one can deduce the following corollary of Theorem 10.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Figure 2.Examples of Liouville and non-Liouville subsets. The first subset, a
trivial arc in a topologically trivial characteristic foliation, is both positive and
negative Liouville. The second subset, a sink singularity, is a negative Liouville
set. The final subset is a more complicated invariant set that is not Liouville.
Corollary 11(Convexity Obstruction).Let𝐶 ` and𝐶 ´ be basic sets of the characteristic foliation of a
convex hypersurfaceΣin a contactp2𝑛`1q-manifoldp𝑌,𝜉q. Then
𝑊𝑠p𝐶`qX𝑊 𝑢p𝐶´q“Hif the indices satisfyindp𝐶 `qă𝑛ďindp𝐶 ´q
In particular, the pair𝐶“p𝐶`,𝐶´qdoes not form a heterodimensional cycle.
Remark12(SingleHeteroclinicVersusCycle).ThereaderwillnotethatCorollary11onlyrequires
one heteroclinic, instead of a full heterodimensional cycle, to obstruct convexity. However, for a
genericAxiomAflow,intersectionsin𝑊 𝑠p𝐶`qX𝑊𝑢p𝐶´qcanonlyexistwhenindp𝐶 `qąindp𝐶 ´q.
Therefore, the Palis Conjecture suggests that, for basic sets𝐶` and𝐶 ´ withindp𝐶 `q ă𝑛ď
indp𝐶´q, the intersection𝑊𝑠p𝐶`qX𝑊 𝑢p𝐶´qcan only be robustly non-empty when𝐶` and𝐶 ´
form a heterodimensional cycle. In other words, it seems likely that the robust version of the
obstruction in Corollary 11 does require a heterodimensional cycle.
Remark 13.Theorem 10 is a generalization of a theorem of Breen [11] stating that hyperbolic
orbits are Liouville. The obstruction in Corollary 11 is analogous to the obstruction to convexity
coming from retrograde flowlines between critical points (cf. [34]).
1.3.Creation Of Heterodimensional Dynamics.Next we discuss the problem of realizing ro-
bust heterodimensional cycles in a given characteristic foliation. First, we have the following
theorem that permits the creation of heterodimensional cycles by small perturbations.
Theorem 14(Cycle Creation).LetΣbe a hypersurface in a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qof dimension
2𝑛`1ě5and let𝑈Ă𝑌be an open set intersectingΣ. Then there is an isotopy
𝜄𝑠 :ΣÑ𝑌with𝜄 0pΣq“Σand𝜄 𝑠“𝜄 0 outside of𝑈
that is arbitrarily small in the𝐶0-topology and such that the characteristic foliation ofΣ1 contains a
heteroclinic cycle𝐶with index
indp𝐶`q“𝑛´1andindp𝐶 ´q“𝑛
Theorem14isprovenbyaexplicitconstructionofaheterodimensionalcycleinastandardregion
wherethehypersurfaceresemblesacertainstandardlocalmodel,specificallythesymplectization
of a small contact disk. Precisely, one first perturbs the characteristic foliation to create a small
closed orbit contained in a region modelled on the standard Liouville ball, then one modifies
the monodromy of a Poincare section along this orbit to introduce a heterodimensional cycle
between two closed hyperbolic orbits close to the original small orbit.

===== PAGE 5 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 5
Second,weshowthatanyheterodimensionalcycleofthecorrectindexcanbeusedtocreatea
robust heterodimensional cycle. This can be viewed as a stabilization theorem [38] for cycles in
the setting of characteristic foliations.
Theorem 15(Fragile To Robust).LetΣbe a closed hypersurface in a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qwhose
characteristic foliation contains a simple heteroclinic cycle𝐶of indexp𝑛´1,𝑛q. Then there is an isotopy
𝜄𝑠 :ΣÑ𝑌with𝜄 0pΣq“Σ
thatisarbitrarilysmallinthe𝐶 8-topologyandsuchthatthecharacteristicfoliationofΣ 1containsarobust
heterodimensional cycle of indexp𝑛´1,𝑛q.
Note that the combination of Corollary 11, Theorem 14 and Theorem 15 immediately imply the
main result (Theorem 3) stated at the beginning of the introduction.
This is an application of the deep and very recent work of Li-Turaev [38] on robust heterodi-
mensional dynamics. Precisely, we show (in Theorem 6.21) that, for any hypersurfaceΣwhose
characteristicfoliationcontainsaheterodimensionalcycleofindexp𝑛´1,𝑛q,wecanconstructa
family of embedded hypersurfaces
𝜄𝜖 :ΣÑ𝑌parametrized by𝜖PR 2 with𝜄 0pΣq“Σ
suchthatthecharacteristicfoliationsofthesurfaces𝜄 𝜖pΣqformaproperunfoldingofsingularline
fields onΣ, in the sense of [38]. Roughly speaking, a proper unfoldingΦ𝜖 in the sense of [38]
is a family of flows (in the continuous time case) or diffeomorphisms (in the discrete time case)
parametrized by𝜖PR 𝑘 for𝑘ě2. The systemsΦ 𝜖 must have a continuously varying pair of
hyperbolic orbits𝐶`
𝜖 and𝐶 ´
𝜖 that form a heterodimensional cycle𝐶when the parameters are
zero. Moreover,asoneoftheparameters𝜖 1varies,thefragileheteroclinicintersectiondisappears
inagenericmanner. Similarly,astheotherparameter𝜖 2varies,acertaindistinguishedmultiplier
of𝐶´
𝜖 calledthecenter-stablemultipliermustvarynon-trivially(seeFigure3). Wewillgiveavery
detailed review of the theory of unfoldings in Section 5.
Figure 3.A proper unfolding based at the heterodimensional cycle in Figure 1.
Varying one of the parameters in the family causes the fragile heteroclinic to
disappear transversely, and varying another parameter causes the center-stable
multiplier to vary, as depicted by the dashed arrows above.
A main result of Li-Turaev [38, Thm B] states that, for any proper unfolding such thatΦ0 has
a heterodimensional cycle𝐶, the systemΦ𝜖 exhibits a robust heterodimensional cycle𝐶1 of the
same index as𝐶for a generic small parameter𝜖. Thus, a generic hypersurfaces𝜄 𝜖pΣqin the
family constructed in Theorem 6.21 will contain a robust heterodimensional cycle of the desired
index for any small generic parameter𝜖.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Remark 16(Blenders).Blenders [7,8] are the key mechanism producing robust heterodimen-
sional cycles in the results of Li-Turaev (cf. [38, Thm D]). They are also the key ingredient in
theconstructionofrobustlynon-convexhypersurfacesin[14],wherethefirstauthorconstructed
the first examples of blenders in contact dynamics. In fact, the hypersurfaces constructed in [14]
do contain heterodimensional cycles induced by the presence of a blender. Thus, this paper
identifies more precisely the mechanism causing robust non-convexity in [14].
1.4.Generic Dynamics For Characteristic Foliations.We conclude this introduction with a
perspective on our results related to the program on𝐶1-generic dynamics outlined by Bonatti.
In[6],Bonattiarticulatesageneralphilosophyforunderstanding𝐶 1-genericdiffeomorphisms,
stating several conjectures similar to the Palis Conjecture. Roughly, each conjecture in [6] posits
that the space of diffeomorphisms divides into two𝐶1-open sets consisting of (a) a set of diffeo-
morphisms satisfying a global structural property and (b) a set of diffeomorphisms exhibiting a
robust local structure that obstructs the global one. The specific global structural property and
robust local structure vary from conjecture to conjecture.
The results of this paper fit neatly into this program as follows. We consider space of closed
orientedhypersurfacesincontactmanifoldsequippedwiththe𝐶 2-topology,whichcorresponds
to the𝐶 1-topology on the characteristic foliations. On one hand, convexity of the hypersurface
provides a global structural property of the characteristic dynamics. On the other hand, the
results of this paper suggest that the complementary robust local structure should be a certain
type of heterodimensional cycle. More precisely, we fix the following terminology.
Definition 17(Positive-Negative).A heterodimensional cycle𝐶in the characteristic foliation of
a hypersurfaceΣin a contact2𝑛`1-manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qispositive-negativeif the indices satisfy
indp𝐶`qď𝑛´1andindp𝐶 ´qě𝑛
We can divide the space of closed oriented hypersurfaces in a contact manifold into two
𝐶2-open sets: the set of convex hypersurfaces and the set of hypersurfaces containing a robust
positive-negative heterodimensional cycle. Corollary 11 states that these sets are disjoint; The-
orems 14 and 15 state that the latter set is non-empty and𝐶0-dense in higher dimensions; and
the result of Honda-Huang [34] states that the former set is non-empty and𝐶0-dense. We thus
arrive at the following Palis-type conjecture in the spirit of Bonatti’s program.
Conjecture 18.The space of closed oriented hypersurfaces in a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qdecomposes into
two open and𝐶 2-dense sets: the set of convex hypersurfaces and the set of hypersurfaces containing a
robust positive-negative heterodimensional cycle𝐶.
Phrased differently, Conjecture 18 states that positive-negative cycles are generically the only
obstruction to convexity.
Inthispaper,allofthepositive-negativeheterodimensionalcycles𝐶involvedintheconvexity
obstructionsarecoindexone. Whiletheyarenotverywellunderstood,robustheterodimensional
cyclesofhighercodimensionareknowntoexist[2–4]. Itisinterestingtoaskifthereareexamples
of robust positive-negative cycles of a different type.
Question 19.Are there examples of robust, positive-negative heterodimensional cycles of coin-
dex greater than one in the characteristic foliations of hypersurfaces in contact manifolds?
Outline.This concludes Section 1, the introduction. In Section 2, we provide background on
contactHamiltonianmanifolds(orequivalently,hypersurfacesincontactmanifolds). InSections
3 and 4, we prove Theorems 10 and 14 respectively. In Section 5, we provide key background on
non-degeneracy and unfoldings from [38]. Finally, in Section 6 we prove Theorem 15.
Acknowledgements.AI tools were used solely for proofreading this manuscript. JC and MH
were partially supported by NSF Award DMS-2446019 and US-Israel BSF Award 2024157.

===== PAGE 7 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 7
2.Contact Hamiltonian Manifolds And Convexity
Inthissection,wediscussthetheoryofcontactHamiltonianmanifoldsandtheircharacteristic
foliations. These spaces are the natural intrinsic models for hypersurfaces in contact manifolds.
This terminology is introduced at this level of generality in the survey [15].
2.1.Contact Hamiltonian Manifolds.We start by introducing contact Hamiltonian manifolds
and the basic structures associated to them.
Definition 2.1(Singular Hyperplane Field).Asingular hyperplane field𝜂on a manifoldΣis an
equivalence class of 1-forms up to multiplication by a nowhere zero smooth function. We let
kerp𝜆qdenote the equivalence class of a 1-form𝜆
Asingularityof a singular hyperplane field𝜂is a point where the defining 1-form𝜆vanishes.
Definition 2.2(Contact Hamiltonian Structure).Acontact Hamiltonian structure𝜂on a2𝑛-
manifoldΣis a singular hyperplane field𝜂defined by 1-form𝜆satisfying
(2.1)𝑑𝜆 𝑛‰0at any point where𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 vanishes.
A 1-form𝜆satisfying this formula is called acontact Hamiltonian form.
AnycontactHamiltonianmanifoldhasanaturallyassociateddynamicalsystem,well-defined
up to reparametrization. More precisely, we have the following definition.
Definition 2.3(Characteristic Flow).Thecharacteristic vector field𝑍determined by a contact
Hamiltonian form𝜆and a volume form𝜇is the unique vector field satisfying
(2.2)𝜄 𝑍𝜇“𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1
A flow acquired by integrating a characteristic vector field is called acharacteristic flow.
The characteristic vector field depends on the choice of contact Hamiltonian form and volume
form, but it determines a well-defined (singular) line field, in the following sense.
Definition2.4(SingularLineField).Asingularlinefield𝐿onamanifoldΣisanequivalenceclass
of vector fields up to multiplication by a nowhere zero smooth function. We let
spanp𝑉qdenote the equivalence class of a vector field𝑉
Asingularityof a singuar line field𝐿is a point where the defining vector field vanishes.
Definition 2.5(Characteristic Foliation).Thecharacteristic foliationΣ 𝜂 of a contact Hamiltonian
manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis the unique singular line field spanned by any characteristic vector field.
Remark 2.6.It is straightforward to check that the characteristic line field is well-defined (i.e.
independent of the volume form and contact Hamiltonian form) [15, Lem 2.17].
Remark 2.7.The characteristic vector field of𝜂can also be characterized as the unique vector
field tangent to𝜂and that preserves𝜂in the sense thatL𝑍𝜆“𝑓𝜆for any contact Hamiltonian
form𝜆and some smooth function𝑓that is non-zero along the singularities (cf. [15, Lem 2.20]).
There is an important class of subsets of contact Hamiltonian manifold, where the contact
Hamiltonian manifold structure is given by the kernel of a Liouville form.
Definition 2.8(Liouville Subsets).A subsetΛĂΣin a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis
calledLiouvilleif there is a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆such that
𝜆|𝑈 is a Liouville form on a neighborhood𝑈ofΛ
GivenanorientationonΣ,aLiouvillesubsetΛĂΣiscalledpositiveif𝜆| 𝑈 inducestheorientation
ofΣandnegativeif𝜆| 𝑈 induces the opposite orientation ofΣ.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
There are a handful of examples of contact Hamiltonian manifolds that we will consider:
hypersurfaces in contact manifolds, Liouville manifolds, symplectizations and suspensions.
Example2.9(Hypersurfaces).AnyhypersurfaceΣinacontactmanifoldp𝑌,𝜉qwithcontactform
𝛼is a contact Hamiltonian manifold with contact Hamiltonian structure
𝜂“𝜉X𝑇Σdefined by the contact Hamiltonian form𝜆“𝛼| Σ
ThecharacteristicfoliationΣ 𝜂 issimplythestandardcharacteristicfoliationΣ 𝜉 withrespectto𝜉.
Example 2.10(Exact Symplectic Manifolds).Any exact symplectic manifoldΣwith Liouville
form𝜆is a contact Hamiltonian manifold, with contact Hamiltonian structure
𝜂“kerp𝜆qwith contact Hamiltonian form𝜆
The characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 is simply the span of the Liouville vector field𝑍in this case.
Example 2.11(Symplectization).The symplectizationR 𝑡 ˆ𝑌of a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qis
naturally a contact Hamiltonian manifold with contact Hamiltonian structure
𝜂“spanpB 𝑡q‘𝜉
In this case, the characteristic foliation is simply the span of the vector fieldB𝑡.
2.2.Contactization.EverycontactHamiltonianmanifoldadmitsacontactstructureontheprod-
uctofthemanifoldwithaninterval, calledthecontactization. Thisrequiresachoiceofframing.
Definition 2.12(Framing).Aframingp𝑢,𝜃qfor a contact Hamiltonian form𝜆on a contact
Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qis apair ofa smoothfunction𝑢and asmooth 1-form𝜃onΣwhere
(2.3)𝑢¨𝑑𝜆 𝑛`𝑛𝜃^𝜆^𝑑𝜆 𝑛´1 is a volume form onΣ
Definition2.13(Contactization).Thecontactization𝐶ΣofacontactHamiltonianmanifoldpΣ,𝜂q
is the productr´𝜖,𝜖s𝑠ˆΣequipped with the contact structure𝜉with the contact form
𝛼“𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝑠p𝜃`𝑑𝑢q`𝜆for any contact Hamiltonian form𝜆and framingp𝑢,𝜃q
ThecontactizationisindeedacontactmanifoldcontainingΣ“0ˆΣasahypersurface[15,Lem
2.31]. Moreover, it is independent of the contact Hamiltonian form and framing as a germ of a
contact structure near0ˆΣdue to the following lemma.
Lemma 2.14.[24] Let𝜉and𝜉 1 be contact structures on𝑌and letΣĂ𝑌be a closed hypersurface with
𝜉X𝑇Σ“𝜉 1X𝑇Σ. ThenthereisanisotopyΦof𝑌suchthatΦ 0“Id,Φ ˚
1𝜉“𝜉 1 nearΣandΦ 𝑡pΣq“Σ.
Corollary 2.15(Contactization Neighborhood).LetΣĂ𝑌be a closed hypersurface in a contact
manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qwith contact Hamtiltonian structure𝜂“𝜉X𝑇Σ. Then there is a contact embedding
𝜄:𝐶ΣÑ𝑌with𝜄pΣq“Σ
The set of framings is convex and also non-empty in the following strong sense.
Lemma 2.16(Framing Extension).LetpΣ,𝜂qbe a contact Hamiltonian manifold. Fix an open subset
𝑈and a 1-form𝜙onΣsuch that
𝜙p𝑍qą0on𝑈for some characteristic vector field𝑍
Then there is a framingp𝑢,𝜃qwith𝑢|𝑈“0and𝜃| 𝑈“𝜙.
Proof.Chooseavolumeform𝜇andacontactHamiltonianform𝜆withcharacteristicvectorfield
𝑍. There is a 1-form𝜃such that𝜃p𝑍q ě0, such that𝜃| 𝑈 “𝜙and such that𝑑𝜆 𝑛 is a volume
form on the set𝑆where𝜃p𝑍q“0. Note that𝑆X𝑈“Hand𝑆“𝑆 `\𝑆´ where𝑆` is positive
Liouville and𝑆´ is negative Liouville. There is then a smooth function𝑢such that
𝑢|𝑈“0and𝑢𝑑𝜆 𝑛“𝑓𝜇for a non-negative smooth function𝑓with𝑓| 𝑆ą0
It is simple to check thatp𝑢,𝜃qis framing that satisfies the desired properties.□

===== PAGE 9 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 9
2.3.Convexity.A contact Hamiltonian manifold is convex if the contactization admits a trans-
lation invariant contact structure. More precisely, we adopt the following definition.
Definition 2.17(Convex Structure).A contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qisconvexif there is a
smooth function𝑢such thatp𝑢,´𝑑𝑢qis a framing, or equivalently
𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝜆is a contact form on𝐶Σ“r´𝜖,𝜖sˆΣ
We refer to the function𝑢as aframing functionfor the (convex) contact Hamiltonian manifold.
Note that Definition 2.17 is simply the intrinsic formulation of convexity for hypersurfaces in
contact manifolds, in the sense of Giroux [26].
Definition 2.18(Convex Hypersurface).A hypersurfaceΣin a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qisconvex
if there exists a contact vector field𝑉that is transverse toΣ.
The key property of convex hypersurfaces is the existence of a natural splitting into a positive
Liouville region and a negative Liouville regions along a contact sub-manifold.
Definition2.19(DividingSet).ThedividingsetΓofaconvexcontactHamiltonianmanifoldpΣ,𝜂q
with respect to a framing function𝑢is the hypersurface
Γ“t𝑢“0uĂΣ
The regionsΣ` andΣ ´ where𝑢is non-negative and non-positive are respectively called the
positiveandnegativeregions ofΣ. There is a natural splitting
Σ“Σ `YΣ´ withΣ `XΣ´“Γ
Lemma 2.20(Dividing Set Is Contact).The dividing setΓĂΣis a contact sub-manifold transverse to
the characteristic foliation that is independent of the framing function up to isotopy.
Lemma 2.21(Halves Are Liouville).The halvesΣ` andΣ´ of a convex contact Hamiltonian manifold
pΣ,𝜂qare positive and negative Liouville respectively, andΣ𝜂 points out fromΣ` alongΓ.
For proofs of the above facts, we refer the reader to [15, Lem 3.7 and 3.8] or [12].
2.4.Deformations.There is a natural type of deformation for contact Hamiltonian structures
given by embeddings into the contactization..
Definition2.22(AmbientDeformation).Anambientdeformation𝜄ofacontactHamiltonianstruc-
ture𝜂onΣis a 1-parameter family of embeddings into the contactization
𝜄:r0,1sˆΣÑ𝐶Σsuch that𝜄 0 is inclusion ofΣ“0ˆΣ
There is a naturally associated family of contact Hamiltonian structures given by𝜄˚
𝑡𝜉where𝜉is
the contact structure on the contactization. We denote the endpoing of this family by
𝜂𝜄“𝜄 ˚
1𝜉
Definition 2.23(Size).The𝐶 𝑘-sizeof an ambient deformation with respect to a Riemannian
metric𝑔is defined to be the𝐶𝑘-distance
}𝜄}𝐶𝑘 “dist 𝐶𝑘p𝜄,𝜄 trivq
where𝜄 triv is the trivial isotopy given by the inclusionΣÑ𝐶Σfor all parameters.
Remark 2.24(Concatenation).If𝜄is an ambient deformation ofpΣ,𝜂qand𝚥is an ambient
deformation of𝜂𝜄 that is sufficiently𝐶0-small, then we can form a concatenation
𝚥‹𝜄:r0,1sˆΣÑ𝐶Σ
Thisistheconcatenationoftheisotopy𝜄andtheisotopy𝜙˝𝚥,where𝜙:𝑈Ñ𝐶Σisanembedding
of the a neighborhood𝑈ofΣin the contactization ofΣwith respect to𝜂𝜄 into the contactization

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
𝐶Σwith respect to𝜂. Such an embedding exists by Corollary 2.15. Note that for any choice of
metric𝑔and any integer𝑘, there is a constant𝐴depending on𝑔,𝑘and𝜙such that
}𝚥‹𝜄} 𝐶𝑘 ď𝐴}𝚥} 𝐶𝑘`}𝜄} 𝐶𝑘
There are a few key examples of ambient deformations that will appear frequently. In partic-
ular, one can ambiently deform by taking the graph of a Hamiltonian within the contactization.
Example 2.25(Graphical Deformation).Fix a sufficiently small smooth function𝐻, a contact
Hamiltonian form𝜆and a framingp𝜃,𝑢qonΣ. There is an associatedgraphical deformation
(2.4)𝜄 𝐻 :r0,1s 𝑟ˆΣÑr´𝜖,𝜖s 𝑠ˆΣ“𝐶Σwhere𝜄 𝐻p𝑟,𝑥q“p´𝑟𝐻p𝑥q,𝑥q
Here we use the explicit form of the contactization𝐶Σgiven by
𝐶Σ“r´𝜖,𝜖sˆΣwith contact form𝑢𝑑𝑠`𝑠p𝑑𝑢`𝜃q`𝜆
The endpoing𝜂𝜃,𝐻 of the corresponding family of contact Hamiltonian structures is given by
(2.5)𝜂 𝜃,𝐻 “kerp𝜆 𝜃,𝐻qwhere𝜆 𝜃,𝐻 “𝜄 ˚
1𝛼“´𝑢¨𝑑𝐻´𝐻p𝜃`𝑑𝑢q`𝜆
Remark 2.26(Sympelectization Case).Given a contact manifold𝑈, the symplectizationR𝑡ˆ𝑈
has a natural framingp0,𝑑𝑡q. For this particular framing, we adopt the simplified notation
𝜆𝐻“´𝐻𝑑𝑡`𝜆and𝜂 𝐻“kerp𝜆 𝐻q
Remark 2.27(Size).For any contact Hamiltonian manifoldΣ, any choice of Riemannian metric
𝑔on the contactization and any integer𝑘, there is a constant𝐴depending on𝑔and𝑘with
}𝜄𝐻}𝐶𝑘 ď𝐴¨}𝐻} 𝐶𝑘
Lemma2.28(HamiltonianFlow).FixacontactHamiltonian𝐻:r0,1s 𝑡ˆ𝑈ÑRonacontactmanifold
𝑈with contact form𝛼. Then the deformed structure𝜂𝐻“´𝐻𝑑𝑡`𝛼has a characteristic vector field
𝑍𝐻“B 𝑡`𝑉𝐻 where𝑉𝐻 is the contact Hamiltonian vector field generated by𝐻
Proof.Recall that𝑉“𝑉 𝐻 is uniquely defined by the property that𝛼p𝑉q“𝐻andL𝑉𝛼“𝑓𝛼for
asmooth function𝑓onp0,1q 𝑡ˆ𝑈. Thus𝑍istangent tothecontact Hamiltonianstructure since
𝜆𝐻p𝑉q“´𝐻`𝛼p𝑉q“0. Moreover,wecancomputetheLiederivativeof𝜆 𝐻 along𝑍toseethat
L𝑍𝜆𝐻“´L 𝑉𝐻¨𝑑𝑡`L 𝑉𝛼“´𝜄 𝑉pL𝑉𝛼q¨𝑑𝑡`L 𝑉𝛼“𝑓p´𝐻𝑑𝑡`𝛼q“𝑓𝜆 𝐻
Thus the vector field𝑍is a characteristic vector field by Remark 2.7.□
2.5.Plugs.Wenextintroducethekeynotionofaplug. Let𝐷 stdbethecontactdiskofdimension
2𝑛´1with standard contact form𝛼 std. Consider the contact Hamiltonian manifold
𝑈std“r0,1s 𝑡ˆ𝐷 std with contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂 std“kerp𝛼 stdq
There is a standard characteristic vector field𝑍std“B 𝑡. We adopt the following notation for the
regions of the boundary where this vector field points inward and outward.
𝐷in“0ˆ𝐷 stdĂ𝑈 std and𝐷 out“0ˆ𝐷 stdĂ𝑈 std
The contactization of this contact Hamiltonian manifold can be written as
R𝑠ˆ𝑈 std“𝑇 ˚r0,1sˆ𝐷 std with contact structure𝜉 std“kerp𝑠𝑑𝑡`𝛼 stdq
A plug is essentially an ambient deformation of the contact Hamiltonian structure on𝑈std that
is supported away from the boundary. The precise definition is the following.
Definition 2.29(Plug).Acontact Hamiltonian plugis an isotopy of embeddings
𝜄:r0,1s 𝑟ˆ𝑈 stdÑ𝐶𝑈 std such that𝜄 0 is the inclusion𝑈stdĎ𝐶𝑈 std
with the property that𝜄𝑟 agrees with the inclusion𝑈stdĂ𝐶𝑈 std near the boundary of𝑈std.

===== PAGE 11 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 11
Example 2.30(Graphical Plug).Any contact Hamiltonian𝐻:r0,1sˆ𝐷 stdÑRon the standard
disk𝐷 std supported away from the boundary ofr0,1sˆ𝐷std determines agraphical plug𝜄𝐻 with
𝜄𝐻p𝑟,𝑡,𝑥q“p𝑟𝐻p𝑡,𝑥q,𝑡,𝑥q
Definition 2.31(Plug Insertion).Aplugging domain𝑈in a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂q
is a domain𝑈ĂΣequipped with an isomorphism of contact Hamiltonian manifolds
p𝑈std,𝜂 stdq»p𝑈,𝜂| 𝑈q
Theinsertion𝜄 𝑈 of a contact Hamiltonian plug𝜄along a plugging domain𝑈is the ambient
deformation ofΣthat agrees with𝜄on𝑈»𝑈 std and that is the inclusionΣÑΣoutside of𝑈.
Remark 2.32.Note that the insertion of a contact Hamiltonian plug is only defined for a plug𝜄
that is sufficiently small in the𝐶0-topology.
Remark2.33.Wedenotetheinsertionofagraphicalplug𝜄 𝐻 alongapluggingdomain𝑈inΣby
𝜄𝑈,𝐻 :r0,1sˆΣÑ𝐶Σ
We denote the corresponding deformed contact Hamitonian structure by
𝜂𝑈,𝐻
Note that for any choice of metric𝑔onΣand any integer𝑘, there is a constant𝐴depending on
the plugging domain𝑈,𝑔and𝑘such that
}𝜄𝑈,𝐻}𝐶𝑘 ď𝐴¨}𝐻} 𝐶𝑘
2.6.Transition And Return Maps.We next review the notion of transition maps between local
sections of a singular line field, and specifically the characteristic foliation.
Definition 2.34(Transition Map).Let𝐷and𝐷 1 be local sections of a singular line field𝐿on𝑀
and letΓbe a trajectory of𝐿connecting a point𝑃in𝐷to a point𝑃 1 in𝐷 1. Thetransition map
TrΓ:𝐷Ñ𝐷 1 along the trajectoryΓ
is the germ at𝑃defined as follows. Fix a flowΦgenerating𝐿and let𝑇be the time such that the
mapr0,𝑇sÑ𝑀givenby𝑡ÞÑΦ 𝑡p𝑃qparametrizesΓ. ThenTrΓ“Φ˝𝜎where𝜎isasmoothmap
𝜎:𝑈ÑRˆ𝑀where𝑈Ă𝐷is a neighborhood of𝑃,Φ˝𝜎p𝐷qĂ𝐷 1 and𝜎p𝑃q“p𝑇,𝑃q
The transition map iswell-definedon𝑈Ď𝐷if a smooth map𝜎satisfying these properties exists.
We remark on several standard composition and continuity properties of transition maps.
Remark 2.35(Definedness).The transition mapTrΓ:𝐷Ñ𝐷 1 alongΓis unique on any open
subset𝑈Ď𝑀whereitiswell-defined,andmaybeviewedasagermnearthestartpoint𝑃in𝐷.
Remark2.36(Composition).ThetransitionmapTrΓassociatedtotheconcatenationofasegment
Γ1 connecting𝐷 0 to𝐷 1 and a segmentΓ2 connecting𝐷 1 to𝐷 2 satisfies
TrΓ“TrΓ 2˝TrΓ 1
on any open set𝑈Ď𝐷where the transition map ofΓis well-defined.
Remark 2.37(Continuity).For any local sections𝐷,𝐷1 and segmentΓfrom𝑃in𝐷and𝑃 1 in𝐷 1,
andanysingularlinefield𝐾sufficiently𝐶 1-closeto𝐿,thereisanassociatedsegmentΓ 𝐾 starting
at𝑃in𝐷and ending at a point in𝐷1 and the transition map
TrΓ𝐾 :𝐷Ñ𝐷 1
iswell-definedonanopenset𝑈Ă𝐷independentof𝐾and continuousin𝐾inthe𝐶 1-topology.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Definition2.38(PoincareReturnMap).FixaclosedorbitΓof𝐿andalocalsection𝐷intersecting
Γat a point𝑃. ThePoincare return map
RetΓ:𝐷Ñ𝐷
is the transition map associated toΓas a flowline segment connecting𝑃to𝑃.
Next we turn to the transition maps and Poincare return maps associated to characteristic
foliations. Fix a contact Hamiltonian manifold
Σwith contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂
We note that the local sections and transition maps for characteristic foliations are naturally
contact manifolds and contact maps respectively [15, Lem 2.21 and Rmk 2.23].
Lemma2.39(ContactSection).Anylocalsection𝐷ofthecharacteristicfoliationΣ 𝜂isacontactmanifold
with contact structure𝜉“𝜂X𝑇𝐷.
Lemma 2.40(Contact Transition).The transition mapTrΓalong a segmentΓof the characteristic
foliationΣ 𝜂 connecting local sections𝐷and𝐷 1 is a contact map on any𝑈Ď𝐷where it is well-defined.
There is a key construction for modifying transition maps using plugs, which will be used
frequently. Fix a local sections𝐷and𝐷1 of the characteristic foliation and a segment of flowline
Γfrom a point𝑃in𝐷to a point𝑃 1 in𝐷 1
Definition2.41(Well-Positioned).Apluggingdomain𝑈iswell-positionedwiththetrajectoryΓif
𝑈XΓ“r0,1sˆ𝑂Ă𝑈 std where𝑂P𝐷 std is the origin
Remark 2.42.Note that, for any point𝑂alongΓand any neighborhood𝑊of𝑂intersecting𝑂
in an embedded arc, there is a plugging domain𝑈Ă𝑊well-positioned withΓsuch that𝑂is
identified with the origin in𝐷in“𝐷 std is the origin.
Given a plugging domain𝑈that is well-positioned withΓ, we can decomposeΓinto the
concatenation of the intersection𝑈XΓconnecting𝐷 in and𝐷 out with the two segments
Γin connecting𝐷to𝐷 inĂ𝑈andΓ out connecting𝐷 outĂ𝑈to𝐷 1
Note that the transition map along𝑈XΓis simply the identity map𝐷 in “𝐷 out “𝐷 std. By
Remark 2.36, we can therefore write the transition map alongΓas the composition
TrΓ“TrΓ out˝TrΓ in
Definition 2.43(Insertion Along Trajectory).Fix a plugging domain𝑈well-positioned withΓ
and a sufficiently𝐶0-small contact Hamiltonian
𝐻:𝑈 std“r0,1sˆ𝐷 stdÑR
such that𝐻vanishes near the boundary of𝑈std and such that the time 1 contactomorphismΦ𝐻
generated by𝐻preserves the origin. There is an associated insertion
𝜄𝑈,𝐻 :r0,1sˆΣÑ𝐶Σof the plug𝜄 𝐻 associated to𝐻
will be referred to in short as theinsertion of the plug associated to𝐻alongΓat𝑈.
By Lemma 2.28, the characteristic foliation of𝜂𝑈,𝐻 of the deformed contact Hamiltonian
structure associated to the insertion above is given, on the plugging domain𝑈, by
𝑍𝐻“B 𝑡`𝑉𝐻 under the identification𝑈»𝑈 std“r0,1sˆ𝐷 std
Inparticular,thereisatrajectoryofthedeformedcharacteristicfoliationconnecting0ˆ𝑂in𝐷 in
to1ˆ𝑂in𝐷 out and the transfer map along this trajectory is identified with
Φ𝐻 :𝐷 stdÑ𝐷 std

===== PAGE 13 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 13
By concatenating this trajectory with the trajectoriesΓin andΓ out, we acquire a continuation of
the original trajectoryΓthat we denote as follows.
Γ𝑈,𝐻 connecting𝐷to𝐷 1
The following lemma is immediatefrom this discussion and the composition property of transi-
tion maps (Remark 2.36).
Lemma2.44(TransitionMapDeformation).Let𝜄 𝑈,𝐻 betheinsertionofaplugassociatedtoacontact
Hamiltonian𝐻onr0,1sˆ𝐷 std along a trajectoryΓat a well-positioned plugging domain𝑈. Then
TrΓ𝑈,𝐻 :𝐷Ñ𝐷 1 is given byTrΓ 𝑈,𝐻 “TrΓ out˝Φ𝐻˝TrΓ in
3.Liouville And Hyperbolic Inv ariant Sets
In this section, we study hyperbolic invariant sets of characteristic foliations. In particular,
we prove that basic sets of characteristic foliations are automatically Liouville (Theorem 10) and
then deduce the key convexity obstruction in this paper (Corollary 11).
3.1.Invariant Measures And Cohomology.We start by reviewing the theory of invariant mea-
sures and cohomology for continuous flows and singular line fields. Fix a continuous flow
Φ:Rˆ𝑋Ñ𝑋on a compact metric space𝑋
Recall that the space ofcoboundariesand thecohomologyof the flow are given respectively by
𝐵p𝑋,Φq“close
`
𝐹˝Φ 𝑠´𝐹:𝑠PRand𝐹P𝐶 0p𝑋;Rq
˘
and𝐻p𝑋,Φq“𝐶 0p𝑋;Rq{𝐵p𝑋,Φq
where the closure is taken within the space of continuous functions𝐶0p𝑋;Rq. Similarly, the
space ofsigned invariant measuresis the dual space to the space of the cohomology.
𝐻p𝑋,Φq _
Finally, aninvariant measureis a signed invariant measure that integrate positively against every
positive continuous function. We denote this subset by
𝑀p𝑋,ΦqĂ𝐻p𝑋,Φq _
In the case of a differentiable flow on a smooth manifold, we have the following alternative
description of the space of coboundaries.
Lemma 3.1.Let𝑋be a compact manifold with a𝐶1 flowΦgenerated by a𝐶 1 vector field𝑉. Then
𝐵p𝑋,Φq“close
`
𝑉𝐹:𝐹P𝐶 1p𝑋;Rq
˘
Proof.Let𝐵“𝐵p𝑋,Φqdenote the space of coboundaries and𝐵 1 denote the closure of the space
of Lie derivatives𝑉𝐹. If𝐺“𝑉𝐹, then𝐺is given by the limit𝑠 ´1¨p𝐹˝Φ 𝑠´𝐹qas𝑠Ñ0and
therefore𝐺is𝐵. Since𝐵 1 is the closure of the space of all such𝐺and𝐵is closed, this shows that
𝐵1Ď𝐵. Conversely if𝐺“𝐹˝Φ 𝑠´𝐹then we can write
𝐺“
ż 𝑠
0
𝑉p𝐹˝Φ 𝑟q𝑑𝑟
This implies that𝐺is the limit of linear combinations of functions of the form𝑉𝐻, from which
it follows that𝐺is in𝐵1. Thus𝐵1Ď𝐵and the two spaces must coincide.□
We can associate cohomology space and a space of invariant measures to a singular line field
in a natural way. Fix a closed smooth manifold
𝑋with a singular line field𝐿

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Given a pair of spanning vector fields𝑈and𝑉of the singular line field𝐿, there is a positive
smooth function𝐹such that𝑉“𝐹𝑈. There are canonical isomorphisms of Banach spaces
𝐵p𝑋,𝑈qÑ𝐵p𝑋,𝑉qand𝐻p𝑋,𝑈qÑ𝐻p𝑋,𝑉qgiven by𝐺ÞÑ𝐹𝐺
This induces a dual identification of the invariant (signed) measures denoted by
𝐻p𝑋,𝑈q _Ñ𝐻p𝑋,𝑉q _ restricting to𝑀p𝑋,𝑈qÑ𝑀p𝑋,𝑉q
Definition 3.2(Cohomology/Measures For Line Fields).Thecohomologyof a singular line field
𝐿on a closed manifold𝑋are the Banach spaces
𝐻p𝑋,𝐿q“colim
𝑍
𝐻p𝑋,𝑉q
wherethecolimitistakenoverthespaceofspanningvectorfields𝑉. Weanalogouslydefinethe
spaces of signed invariant measures and invariant measures
𝐻p𝑋,𝐿q _ and𝑀p𝑋,𝐿q
3.2.Divergence Cohomology Class.Next we discuss the divergence of volume form along a
singular line field as a cohomology class. Recall that the divergence of a smooth vector field𝑉
with respect to a volume form𝜇is the function
(3.1)divp𝑉,𝜇qdefined implicitly by𝑑p𝜄 𝑉𝜇q“divp𝑉,𝜇q¨𝜇
Definition 3.3(Divergence).Thedivergence classof a singular line field𝐿on a smooth manifold
𝑋is the cohomology class
divp𝐿qP𝐻p𝑋,𝐿q
given bydivp𝑉,𝜇qin𝐻p𝑋,𝑉qfor any spanning vector field𝑉and any smooth volume form𝜇.
Lemma 3.4(Well-Defined).The divergence classdivp𝐿qis well-defined as a cohomology class.
Proof.Given a different spanning vector field𝑉and a smooth volume form𝜇. Given a positive
smooth function𝐹, we can compute that
divp𝐹𝑉,𝜇q“𝐹¨divp𝑉,𝜇q`𝑉𝐹“𝐹¨divp𝑉,𝜇q`𝐹𝑉plogp𝐹qq
This formula states that the divergencedivp𝐹𝑉,𝜇qis identified withdivp𝑉,𝜇qunder the identi-
fication of cohomology classes between𝑉and𝐹𝑉. Similarly, we can compute that
divp𝑉,𝐹𝜇q“divp𝑉,𝜇q`𝑉plogp𝐹qq
This shows that the cocycle is independent of the choice of𝜇.□
Example3.5(ClosedOrbit).SupposethatΓisaclosedorbitofasingularlinefield𝐿andconsider
the natural invariant Lebesgue probability measure
𝜇ΓP𝑀p𝑋,𝐿q
supported on the closed orbitΓ. The divergence evaluates against this measure as
(3.2)
ż
𝑋
divp𝐿q¨𝜇 Γ“log|detp𝑇 𝑂 RetΓq|
HereRet Γ :𝐷Ñ𝐷is the Poincare return map ofΓwith respect to any local section𝐷alongΓ
and𝑂P𝐷is the fixed point ofRet Γ corresponding to the orbitΓ.
The divergence cocycle can be used to detect the existence of a spanning vector field that
has positive (or negative) divergence along a given invariant set. More precisely, we have the
followingdivergencecroterionforconvexity,whichmaybeviewedasananalogueoftheMcDuff-
Sullivan criterion for Reeb vector fields [41].

===== PAGE 15 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 15
Proposition 3.6(Div Criterion).LetΛbe a compact invariant set of a singular line field𝐿on a closed
manifold𝑋and of𝐿. Then there is a spanning vector field𝑉withdivp𝑉,𝜇qą0alongΛif and only if
ż
𝑋
divp𝐿q¨𝜈ą0for every invariant measure𝜈P𝑀p𝑋,𝐿q
Similarly, there is a spanning vector field𝑉withdivp𝑉,𝜇qă0alongΛif and only if
ż
𝑋
divp𝐿q¨𝜈ă0for every invariant measure𝜈P𝑀p𝑋,𝐿q
Proof.Fix a spanning vector field𝑉generating a flowΦon𝑋. The set of invariant measures in
𝑀p𝑋,𝑉qwith support inΛis equivalent to the set of invariant measures𝑀pΛ,ΦqofΦ| Λ. The
existence of a spanning vector field𝑉withdivp𝑉,𝜇qą0alongΛevidently implies that
ż
𝑋
divp𝐿q¨𝜈“
ż
𝑋
divp𝑉,𝜇q¨𝜈ą0for every invariant measure𝜈P𝑀p𝑋,𝐿q“𝑀p𝑋,𝑉q
Conversely, suppose that the divergencedivp𝐿q“divp𝑉,𝜇qpairs positively with any invariant
measure𝜈in𝑀pΛ,Φq. Then we claim that there is a coboundary
𝐻:ΛÑRsuch thatdivp𝑉,𝜇q`𝐻ą0
Indeed, suppose otherwise. Then by the Hahn-Banach separation theorem, there is a signed
invariant measure𝜈P𝐻pΛ,Φq _ in the dual of𝐻pΛ,Φqsuch that
(3.3)
ż
Λ
divp𝑉,𝜇q¨𝜈ď0ă
´ż
Λ
𝐹𝜈:𝐹P𝐶 0pΛ,R`q
¯
This inequality implies that𝜈is a measure since it is posiitve on any positive function. Thus
(3.3) contradicts the hypothesis on the divergence. We can extend the coboundary𝐻onΛto a
coboundary on𝑋. Moreover, by the density of the functions𝑍𝐺in the space of boundaries, we
may assume that𝐻“´𝑈plogp𝐹qqwhere𝐹is a positive smooth function on𝑋. Then we have
𝐹¨divp𝑉,𝜇q“divp𝑈,𝜇q´𝑈plogp𝐹qqą0
where𝑉is a spanning vector field defined by𝐹𝑉“𝑈. An analogous proof applies for the
negative divergence case.□
3.3.Liouville Criterion Via Divergence.The following result (cf. [15, Lem 2.36]) characterizes
Liouville subsets using the divergence.
Lemma 3.7(Divergence Criterion).Fix a subsetΛĂΣof a contact Hamiltonian manifold and a
volume form𝜇. ThenΛis positive Liouville if and only if there is a characteristic vector field𝑍such that
divp𝑍,𝜇qą0alongΛ
Similarly,ΛisnegativeLiouvilleifandonlyifthereisacharacteristicvectorfieldwithnegativedivergence.
In general, it is possible for a subset of a contact Hamiltonian manifold can be both positive and
negative Liouville. In contrast, we have the following lemma.
Lemma 3.8(Sign Exclusivity).LetΛĂΣbe a compact invariant set the characteristic foliation of a
contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qthat is Liouville. ThenΛis not both positive and negative.
Proof.Suppose that this were the case. Choose a characteristic vector field𝑍, a volume form𝜇
and a positive smooth function𝐹such that
divp𝑍,𝜇qą0anddivp𝑍,𝐹𝜇q“𝐹¨divp𝑍,𝜇q`𝑍𝐹ă0
Take any invariant probability measure𝜈supported on the invariant setΛ. Then we have
ż
𝑌
p𝐹¨divp𝑍,𝜇q¨𝜈“
ż
𝑌
p𝐹¨divp𝑍,𝜇q`𝑍𝐹q¨𝜈“
ż
𝑌
divp𝑍,𝐹𝜇q¨𝜈
The left hand side is positive and the right hand side is negative. This is a contradiction.□

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
3.4.Hyperbolic Basic Sets Are Liouville.We now prove that hyperbolic basic sets are auto-
maticallyLiouville,generalizingtheresultofHonda-Huang[34]forhyperbolicfixedpointsand
Breen for hyperbolic periodic orbits [11]. We recall the basic definition of hyperbolicity.
Definition 3.9(Hyperbolic Set).A compact invariant setΛof a flowΦon a manifold𝑋is
hyperbolicif there areΦ-invariant, continuous sub-bundles of the tangent bundle𝑇𝑋called
thestable bundle𝐸 𝑠pΦ,Λqand theunstable bundle𝐸 𝑢pΦ,Λq
such that the tangent bundle of the manifold𝑋splits as
𝑇𝑋| Λ“spanp𝑍q‘𝐸 𝑠pΦ,Λq‘𝐸 𝑢pΦ,Λq
and such that there exist𝐴,𝐵ą1such that, for any𝑈P𝐸 𝑢pΦ,Λq,𝑉P𝐸 𝑠pΦ,Λqand𝑠PR
(3.4)|𝑇Φ 𝑠p𝑈q|ěexpp𝐴𝑠`𝐵q¨|𝑈|and|𝑇Φ 𝑠p𝑉q|ďexpp´𝐴𝑠`𝐵q¨|𝑉|
Definition 3.10(Index).TheindexindpΛqof a hyperbolic invariant setΛof a flowΦis the rank
of the stable bundle𝐸𝑠pΦ,Λq.
Definition3.11(Basic).AhyperbolicinvariantsetΛisbasicifitistransitiveandlocallymaximal.
We recall a few basic results about hyperbolic invariant sets that we will use later. First, we
have the following reparametrization property (cf. [23, Thm 5.1.11]).
Lemma3.12(Reparametrization).LetΛbeahyperbolicinvariantsetofaflowΦbeaflowonamanifold
𝑋. ThenΛis a hyperbolic invariant set of any smooth time reparametrizationΨofΦ.
In particular, Lemma 3.12 implies that hyperbolicity is a property of invariant sets of singular
line fields. Second, we have the following orbit density theorem.
Theorem 3.13(Orbit Density).LetΛbe a hyperbolic basic set of a flowΦ. Then the orbit measures
𝜇𝛾 where𝛾is a periodic orbit inΛ
are dense in the set of all probability measures supported on𝜇.
We also require the following lemma for hyperbolic fixed points of contactomorphisms. Our
proof uses Lemma 6.4 from Section 6.1 below, where many related results will also be proven.
Lemma 3.14(Determinant Bound For Flows).LetΓbe a hyperbolic closed orbit of index𝑛´1or less
of the characteristic foliation of a contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. Then
detp𝑇𝑂 RetΓqě𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂 RetΓq𝑛
where𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂 RetΓqis the smallest absolute value of an eigenvalue of the differential ofRetΓ at𝑂that is
greater than one.
Proof.Let𝑂be the hyperbolic fixed point of the contact embeddingΦ“RetΓas a partially
defined contactomorphism of a local section𝐷. Note thatindp𝑂q“indpΓqď𝑛´1. Lemma 6.4
in Section 6.1 then states that the differential𝑇𝑂Φsatisfies
detp𝑇𝑂Φqě𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂Φq𝑛 □
We are now ready to prove the main result of this section. This is precisely a restatement of
Theorem 10 in intrinsic terms via contact Hamiltonian manifolds.
Theorem 3.15(Theorem 10).LetΛĂΣbe a hyperbolic basic set of the characteristic foliation of a
contact Hamiltonian2𝑛-manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. ThenΛis Liouville with
Λpositive if and only ifindpΛqď𝑛´1

===== PAGE 17 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 17
Proof.Fix a hyperbolic basic setΛof the characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 with
indpΛqď𝑛´1
Fixacharacteristicvectorfield𝑍generatingacharacteristicflowΦ. Byscaling𝑍,wemayassume
that every closed orbit ofΦin a small neighborhood ofΛhas period1or greater. Fix constants
𝐴,𝐵satisfying (3.4). We claim that
(3.5)
ż
Σ
divpΣ𝜂q¨𝜈ě𝑛𝐴¨
ż
Σ
𝜈ą0for allΣ 𝜂-invariant measures𝜈supported onΛ
By Proposition 3.6 and Lemma 3.7, this will prove thatΣ𝜂 is positive Liouville. Moreover,
reversing the orientation ofΣ, and thus of the characteristic foliation, swaps the stable and
unstable bundles ofΛ. Thus, the case whereindpΛqě𝑛follows by switching orientations. To
demonstrate (3.5), we consider two cases.
Case 1: Orbit Measures.We first consider the case where𝜈“𝜇 Γ is the invariant probability
measure supported on a closed hyperbolic orbitΓĂΛ. Fix a local section𝐷ofΣ𝜂 centered at a
point𝑂PΓand let𝑇be the period ofΓ. By Example 3.5 and Lemma 3.14, we see that
(3.6)
ż
Σ
divpΣ𝜂q¨𝜇 Γělog|detp𝑇 𝑂 RetΓq|ě𝑛¨log
`
𝜎𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂 RetΓq
˘
where𝑇𝑂 RetΓ is the linearized return map ofΓand𝜎𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂 RetΓqis the smallest absolute value
of an eigenvalue with norm greater than one. On the other hand, we can write
𝑇𝑂 RetΓ“𝑇Φ 𝑇|𝐸 where𝐸“𝐸 𝑠
𝑂pΦ,Λq‘𝐸 𝑢pΦ,Λq𝑂Ă𝑇𝑂Σ
Moreover,𝐸𝑠
𝑂pΦ,Λqand𝐸 𝑢
𝑂pΦ,Λqare precisely the direct sum of the real invariant subspaces of
𝑇𝑂 RetΓ corresponding to eigenvalues of modulus less than1and greater than1, respectively. In
particular, there is a non-zero vector𝑉P𝐸𝑢
𝑂pΦ,ΛqĂ𝑇 𝑂Σsuch that
𝜎𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂 RetΓq𝑘¨|𝑉|“|𝑇Φ 𝑇p𝑉q|ěexpp𝑘𝐴𝑇`𝐵q¨|𝑉|for any𝑘PN
By dividing by|𝑉|, taking a logarithm and passing to the limit as𝑘Ñ8, we find that
(3.7)logp𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂 RetΓqqě𝐴𝑇ě𝐴
Combining (3.6) and (3.7) yields the desired inequality in this case.
Case2: GeneralMeasures.Nowconsideranyinvariantmeasure𝜈supportedonΛ. ByTheorem
3.13, there is a sequence of invariant measures𝜇𝑖 supported on closed orbits𝛾𝑖 ĂΛsuch that
𝜇𝑖Ñ𝜈weakly in the space of invariant measures. It follows that
ż
Σ
divpΣ𝜂q¨𝜈“lim
𝑖Ñ8
ż
Σ
divpΣ𝜂q¨𝜇 𝑖ě𝑛𝐴¨lim
𝑖Ñ8
ż
Σ
𝜈𝑖“𝑛𝐴¨
ż
Σ
𝜈□
We are now prepared to prove Corollary 11, following the proof that was sketched in the
introduction. We also state this result in the language of contact Hamiltonian manifolds.
Corollary 3.16(Corollary 11).Let𝐶 ` and𝐶 ´ be basic sets of the characteristic foliation of a contact
Hamiltonian2𝑛-manifoldpΣ,𝜂q. Then
𝑊𝑠p𝐶`qX𝑊 𝑢p𝐶´q“Hif the indices satisfyindp𝐶 `qă𝑛ďindp𝐶 ´q
In particular, the pair𝐶“p𝐶`,𝐶´qdoes not form a heterodimensional cycle.
Proof.Any convex contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qcan be split along a dividing setΓĂΣ
into a positive Liouville domainΣ` and a negative Liouville domainΣ´.
Σ“Σ `YΣ´ withΓ“Σ `XΣ´

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
HereΓis transverse toΣ𝜂. Moreover, the characteristic foliationΣ𝜂 points outward fromΣ` and
inward toΣ´ alongΓ. It follows from Theorem 3.15 and Lemma 3.8 that the hyperbolic basic
sets𝐶´ and𝐶` must satisfy
𝐶`ĂΣ` and𝐶 ´ĂΣ´
from which it follows that there cannot be a heteroclinic from𝐶´ to𝐶`.□
4.Creation Of Simple Heteroclinic Cycles
We next show that any contact Hamiltonian manifold can be deformed to contain a simple
heteroclinic cycle. We formulate our result via contact Hamiltonian plugs (Definition 2.29).
Theorem4.1(LocalCycleCreation).Forany𝜖andany𝑛ě2,thereisacontactHamiltonian2𝑛-plug
𝜄:r0,1sˆ𝑈 stdÑ𝐶𝑈 std
with𝐶 0-sizelessthan𝜖whosecharacteristicfoliationcontainsasimpleheterocliniccycleofindexp𝑛´1,𝑛q.
Proof Sketch.First, we construct small plug containing a periodic orbit (Lemma 4.3). We then
show that any contact embedding with a fixed point can be modified by a small Hamiltonian
perturbation so that it is the identity near the fixed point (Corollary 4.10) and that the identity
map can be further perturbed to contain a heteroclinic cycle of the desired index (Corollary
4.13). Wecanthusinsertaplugassociatedtoawell-chosen,smallcontactHamiltonianalongthe
periodic orbit from the first step, in order to modify the transition map to possess a heteroclinic
cycle. □
Figure 4.A cartoon of the steps in the proof of Theorem 4.1 depicting: (a) a
local model of the unperturbed characteristic foliation; (b) the introduction of a
periodic orbit; and (c) the introduction of a heteroclinic cycle along the orbit.
Remark 4.2(Theorem 14).Given an arbitrary hypersurfaceΣin a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qand
an open set𝑈Ă𝑌intersectingΣ, we can insert the plug in Theorem 4.1 in a plugging domain
contained in𝑈to produce an𝐶 0-small isotopy supported in𝑈connectingΣto a hypersurface
Σcontaining a heterodimensional cycle𝐶with indexp𝑛´1,𝑛q. Thus Theorem 4.1 immediately
implies Theorem 14 from the introduction.
In the rest of this section, we develop the necessary lemmas used in the proof sketch above
(Sections 4.1-4.4). We provide a full version of the proof at the end of the section (Section 4.5).

===== PAGE 19 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 19
4.1.Closed Orbit Creation.We start by showing that we can find a plug whose characteristic
foliation contains a periodic orbit.
Lemma 4.3(Orbit Creation).For any𝜖and any𝑛ě2, there is a contact Hamiltonian2𝑛-plug
𝜄:r0,1sˆ𝑈 stdÑ𝐶𝑈 std with size less than𝜖
suchthatthecharacteristicfoliationofthedeformedcontactHamiltonianstructure𝜂 𝜄 hasaclosedorbitΓ.
Proof.We consider the standard Liouville form𝜆on𝑈std“r0,1s 𝑡ˆ𝐷 std given by𝑒𝑡𝛼std where
𝛼std is the standard contact form. The contactization𝐶𝑈std with respect to this Liouville form is
𝐶𝑈std“R 𝑠ˆ𝑈 std with contact form𝑑𝑠`𝜆
Given any smooth function𝐻:𝑈stdÑR, we can form the graphical deformation𝜆𝐻“𝑑𝐻`𝜆.
TheLiouvillevectorfield𝑍 𝐻 of𝜆𝐻 isacharacteristicvectorfieldfor𝜂 𝐻“kerp𝜆 𝐻qwhichsatisfies
𝑍𝐻“𝑍´𝑋 𝐻 for the Hamiltonian vector field𝑋𝐻 of𝐻
We must show that for each𝜖, there is a smooth function𝐻:𝑈stdÑr´𝜖,𝜖sthat is the identity
nearB𝑈 std such that𝑍𝐻 has a closed orbit. We construct this in steps.
Step1.Takeasymplecticembedding𝑊Ñ𝑈 std where𝑊Ă𝑇 ˚𝐵𝑛 isasmallballinthecotangent
bundle of the𝑛-ball intersecting the zero section. LetΛĂ𝑈std be a disk in this chart contained
in the image of the zero section𝑇˚𝐵𝑛 and let𝜆1 be the pushforward of the standard Liouville
form on𝑇˚𝐵𝑛 to𝑈. Note that this Liouville form satisfies
𝜆1“0along the diskΛ
Moreover, since𝜆1´𝜆is closed and𝑈is a ball, there is a smooth function𝐹on𝑈such that
𝑑𝐹“𝜆 1´𝜆. By adding a constant, we may assume that𝐹p𝑥q“0at a point𝑥PΛ. We then let
𝐺“𝜒𝐹for a smooth bump function𝜒:𝑈Ñr0,1swith𝜑“1near𝑥
By choosing the support of𝜒sufficiently small around𝑥, and by shrinking the diskΛand the
Darboux chart𝑈, we can assume that
|𝐺|ď𝜖{2and𝜆 𝐺“𝑑𝐺`𝜆“𝜆 1 in a Darboux chart𝑈containingΛand𝑝
Step 2.Next, we may choose coordinatesp𝑟,𝜃,𝑞1...𝑞 𝑛´2qon𝐵 𝑛 wherep𝑟,𝜃qare radial coordi-
nates on𝐵2“𝐵 2ˆ0Ă𝐵 𝑛 and such thatΛis the 2-disk of radiusď𝛿contained in𝐵2ˆ0. Let𝜙
denote the momentum coordinate corresponding to𝜃and consider a smooth Hamiltonian
𝐹:𝑇 ˚𝐵𝑛ÑRwith𝐹“𝜙nearBΛ“tp𝛿,𝜃qP𝐵 2 :𝜃P𝑆 1u
It is simple to compute that the Hamiltonian vector field of𝐹is given by
𝑋𝐹“B 𝜃 alongBΛ
In particular,𝑋𝐹 hasBΛas a closed loop. Moreover, since𝜙vanishes near the zero section of
𝑇˚𝐵𝑛 and in particular alongBΛ, we can cutoff𝐹so that it satisfies
|𝐹|ď𝜖{2and𝐹compactly supported in the chart𝑈
We now pullback𝐹through the chart map to a function on𝑈, which we will also denote as𝐹.
Step3.Finally,welet𝐻“𝐹`𝐺andlet𝜆 𝐻“𝑑𝐹`𝜆 𝐺“𝑑𝐻`𝜆. ThentheLiouvillevectorfield
is given by𝑍𝐻 “𝑍 𝐺´𝑋 𝐹“´𝑋 𝐹 alongBΛand thus hasBΛas a periodic orbit. The size of the
deformation is given by|𝐹`𝐻|ď|𝐹|`|𝐻|ď𝜖.□

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
4.2.Conformally Symplectic Linear Maps.Next, we briefly review conformally symplectic
linear maps and their contact lifts. Recall that the conformal symplectic group
CSpp2𝑛qĂGLp2𝑛;Rq
is the group of orientation preserving invertible linear maps that preserve the standard linear
symplectic form up to a positive conformal factor
CFp𝐴qdefined by𝐴 ˚Ωstd“CFp𝐴q¨Ω std
Thereisanimportantnon-degeneracypropertyforconformallysymplecticmapsthatwewill
need to use later in this section.
Definition4.4(ConformallyNon-Singular).Alinearconformalsymplectomorphism𝐴inCSpp2𝑛q
isconformally non-singularif the conformal factor is not an eigenvalue of𝐴.
Lemma 4.5.The conformally non-singular elements are open and dense inCSpp2𝑛q.
Proof.Openess is clear since the spectrum and conformal factor vary continuously. To prove
density, fix𝐴PCSpp2𝑛q. For any constant𝐶PR `, we haveCFp𝐶𝐴q “𝐶 2¨CFp𝐴qand the
eigenvalues of𝐶𝐴aregiven by𝐶𝜆foreigenvalues𝜆of𝐴. Thus𝐶𝐴isconformally non-singular
if𝐶¨CFp𝐴qis not an eigenvalue of𝐴. This holds for a generic constant inR`.□
Alinearconformalsympectomorphismnaturallyliftstoacontactomorphismasfollows. Con-
sider the standard contact Euclidean space
R2𝑛`1“Rˆ𝑇 ˚R𝑛 with contact form𝛼 std“𝑑𝑧`𝜆 std
Definition 4.6(Lifted Contactomorphism).Thelifted contactomorphism r𝐴corresponding to a
linear conformal symplectomorphism𝐴PCSpp2𝑛qis the contactomorphism
r𝐴:R 2𝑛`1ÑR 2𝑛`1 given by r𝐴p𝑧,𝑥,𝑦q“
`
CFp𝐴q¨𝑧`𝑓 𝐴p𝑥,𝑦q,𝐴p𝑥,𝑦q
˘
Here𝑓 𝐴 is the unique function onR2𝑛“𝑇 ˚R𝑛 that vanishes at the origin and that satisfies
𝑑𝑓𝐴“𝐴 ˚𝜆std´CFp𝐴q¨𝜆 std
We will require a few elementary properties of lifted contactomorphisms. First, we have the
following computation of the differential.
Lemma 4.7(Differential).The lifted contactomorphism r𝐴of a linear conformal symplectomorphism𝐴
fixes the origin and has differential at the origin given by
𝑇 r𝐴“CFp𝐴q‘𝐴PEndpR‘R 2𝑛q
Proof.Simply note that𝑓 𝐴p0q“0and that𝜆 std vanishes at0, so that𝑑𝑓𝐴“0at0.□
Second, we have the following useful linearization theorem near fixed points of contact embed-
dings. Fix an open subset𝑈Ă𝑌of a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qand a contact embedding
Φ:𝑈Ñ𝑌with a fixed point𝑥P𝑈
The differential of the contact embedding restricts to a conformally symplectic bundle map
𝑇Φ|𝜉 :𝜉Ñ𝜉defined over𝑈
Proposition 4.8(Linearization).LetΦ:𝑈Ñ𝑌be a contact embedding with a fixed point𝑥such that
𝑇Φ|𝜉 is conformally non-singular at𝑥
Then there are Darboux coordinates on a neighborhood𝑊centered at𝑥and a conformally symplectic
linear map𝐴such that
𝑇Φ“𝑇 r𝐴at the point𝑥“0in Darboux coordinates on𝑊

===== PAGE 21 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 21
Proof.In any Darboux chart sending𝑥to0PR 2𝑛`1, the contact structure at𝑥is given by
R2𝑛 ĂR 2𝑛`1 and the restriction𝑇Φ|𝜉 is identified with a conformally symplectic linear map𝐴.
The full differential𝑇Φat𝑥in this chart can be computed as the block matrix
𝑇Φ“
„ CFp𝐴q0
˚𝐴
ȷ
inEndpR‘R 2𝑛q
Thus by Lemma 4.7, it suffices to show that we can choose the chart so that𝑇Φis diagonal at0.
To prove this, note thatCFp𝐴qis an eigenvalue of𝑇Φ. If𝐴is conformally non-singular, then the
eigenvalueCFp𝐴qissimpleandhasaneigenvector𝑅thatispositivelytransverseto𝜉“R 2𝑛 at𝑥.
Choose any contact form𝛼and let𝛽“𝑓𝛼where𝑓is a positive function such that at𝑥we have
1“𝛽p𝑅q“𝑓¨𝛼p𝑅qand0“𝜄 𝑅𝑑𝛽|𝜉“𝛼p𝑅q¨𝑑𝑓`𝑓¨𝜄 𝑅𝑑𝛽
Then𝑅is the Reeb vector field of𝛽at𝑥. We can take a strict contact Darboux chart (cf. [25, Thm
2.5.1]) to get a chart where𝑅“B𝑧. This concludes the proof.□
4.3.Isotopy To Identity.We next discuss a procedure for performing an isotopy of a contacto-
morphism with a fixed point to a contactomorphism that is the identity near that point.
Proposition 4.9(Isotopy To Identity).LetΦ:𝑈Ñ𝑌be a contact embedding with a fixed point𝑥.
Then there is an open set𝑊Ă𝑈containing𝑥and an isotopy of contact embeddings
Ψ:r0,1sˆ𝑊Ñ𝑌withΨ 0“IdΨ 1“Φ| 𝑊 andΨ 𝑡p𝑥q“𝑥for𝑡Pr0,1s
Corollary 4.10(Local Small Hamiltonian).LetΦ:𝑈Ñ𝑌be a contact embedding of an open set
𝑈Ă𝑌with a fixed point𝑥. Then for any𝜖and any contact form𝛼on𝑌, there is a contact Hamiltonian
𝐻:r0,1sˆ𝑈Ñr´𝜖,𝜖s
that is compactly supported inp0,1qˆ𝑈and with time 1 contact Hamiltonian flowΦ𝐻“Φnear𝑥.
Proof.(Corollary 4.10) Let𝑊Ă𝑈andΨbe the open set and isotopy in Proposition 4.9. After
reparametrizing in time, we may assume thatΨ𝑡 is constant for𝑡near0or1. Then the contact
vectorfield𝑉generatingΨvanishesidenticallyat𝑥sinceΨ 𝑡p𝑥q“𝑥forall𝑡,andfor𝑡near0and
1. We may then choose𝐻to agree with𝛼p𝑉qin a neighborood of𝑥and to vanish outside of𝑊.
The contact Hamiltonian flow of𝐻must then agree withΨ𝑡 in a small neighborhood of𝑥.□
The strategy for Proposition 4.9 can be summarized as follows. First, we prove the result in
the case where the contact embedding is small in the𝐶1-topology using a standard Legendrian
graph trick (Lemma 4.11). We then use composition with a certain standard family of lifted
conformally linear contactomorphisms to reduce to the𝐶1-small case.
Lemma 4.11(𝐶 1-Small Case).Fix a closed contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qwith a Riemannian metric. Then
there is a constant𝜖such that, for any domain𝑈Ă𝑌and any contact embeddingΦ:𝑈Ñ𝑌with
}Φ´Id} 𝐶1ď𝜖
there is an isotopy of contact embeddingsΦ𝑡 fromIdtoΦwith the property that any fixed point𝑥ofΦis
a fixed point ofΦ𝑡 for all𝑡.
Proof.ThisisastandardargumentusingtheLegendriangraph(cf.[40]fortheanalogousargment
in the symplectic setting). We consider two cases.
Case 1: Contactomorphisms.First assume that𝑈“𝑌so thatΦis a contactomorphism. Fix a
contact form𝛼on𝑌and consider the contact manifold
𝑌ˆR 𝑠ˆ𝑌with contact form𝜋 ˚
1𝛼´𝑒 𝑠𝜋˚
2𝛼

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Here𝜋𝑖 denotestheprojectionmapfrom𝑌ˆR 𝑠ˆ𝑌tothe𝑖thfactorof𝑌. Anycontactomorphism
Φ:𝑌Ñ𝑌determines a Legendrian graphΓ ΦĂ𝑌ˆR 𝑠ˆ𝑌given by
ΓΦ“tp𝑥,𝐹p𝑥q,Φp𝑥q:𝑥P𝑌uwhere𝐹:𝑌ÑR ` is defined byΦ˚𝛼“𝐹𝛼
LetΓ IdĂ𝑌ˆR 𝑠ˆ𝑌denote the Legendrian diagonal given by the graph ofId. We can take a
Legendrian Weinstein neighborhood aroundΓId identified with an open neighborhood
𝑊ĂRˆ𝑇 ˚𝑌of the diagonalΓ Id“𝑌
Let𝜋:Rˆ𝑇 ˚𝑌Ñ𝑌denote the projection to the base in the jet bundleRˆ𝑇˚𝑌. There is an𝜖
such that if}Φ´Id} 𝐶1ď𝜖thenΓ Φ is identified with the 1-jet of a smooth function
𝐺Φ :𝑌ÑR
Conversely, any sufficiently𝐶2-small function𝐺determines a LegendrianΓ 𝐺 contained in𝑊
that is𝐶 1-close to the zero section via the 1-jet, and thus a contactomorphismΨ𝐺 defined by
Ψ𝐺p𝑥q“𝜋 2p𝜋´1
1 p𝑥qXΓ 𝐺q
Inparticular,wecanwriteacontactisotopyΦ:r0,1sˆ𝑌Ñ𝑌withΦ 0“IdandΦ 1“Φbytaking
Φ𝑡 “Ψ 𝑡𝐺 where𝐺is the function corresponding toΦ. The fixed points ofΨ𝐺 are precisely the
zeros of𝐺, and so it is simple to see thatΦ𝑡“Ψ 𝑡𝐺 has the same fixed points for all𝑡.
Case2: Embeddings.Nowassumemoregenerallythat𝑈isanydomainin𝑌. Chooseaconstant
𝜖as in Case 1. We can apply the construction of Case 1 to acquire a Legendrian with boundary
ΓΦĂ𝑊ĂRˆ𝑇 ˚𝑌that is𝐶 1-close to𝑈Ă𝑌
This LegendrianΓ Φ is the 1-jet of a smooth function𝐺defined over the domain𝑈1 “𝜋pΓ Φq
where𝜋is projection fromRˆ𝑇 ˚𝑌to𝑌. We can extend𝐺to a smooth function over all of𝑌
and this defines a contactomorphism
Ψ𝐺 :𝑌Ñ𝑌such thatΨ 𝐺|𝑈“Φ
Then we take our isotopy of embeddingsΦ𝑡 to be the restriction of the contact isotopyΨ𝑡𝐺 for
𝑡Pr0,1sto the domain𝑈.□
We can now prove the full version of Proposition 4.9 by using lifted conformally symplectic
linear maps to reduce to the case of𝐶1-small contact embeddings.
Proof.(Proposition4.9)Bypossiblyshrinking𝑈andpassingtoaDarbouxchart,wemayassume
that𝑌“𝐷isthestandardcontactdiskinR 2𝑛`1 andthat𝑥“0istheorigin. Let𝐴PCSpp2𝑛qbe
the conformally symplectic linear map given by𝑇Φ|𝜉 at0. We consider two cases.
Case 1: Non-Singular Differential.First suppose that𝐴is conformally non-singular. Then by
Proposition4.8,wecanpasstoaDarbouxchart𝑊where𝑇Φ“ r𝐴at𝑥“0. Sincetheconformally
symplectic groupCSpp2𝑛qis connected, we can choose a path
𝐵:r0,1sÑCSpp2𝑛qwith𝐵 0“Idand𝐵 1“𝐴 ´1
We can then lift𝐵to a path of lifted contactomorphismsr𝐵𝑡. Note that r𝐵𝑡 fixes the origin for
all𝑡by Lemma 4.7. Thus the path of contact embeddingsΦ˝ r𝐵𝑡 is then an isotopy of contact
embeddings from a small neighborhood𝑊of0to𝐷such that
𝑇Φ1“Idat the origin𝑥“0andΦ 𝑡p0q“0for all𝑥
By further shrinking the chart𝑊, we may assume that}Φ1´Id}is arbitrarily small on𝑊.
We may also assume that𝑊is a domain (i.e. a compact codimension zero sub-manifold with
boundary). Now Lemma 4.11 provides an isotopyΨ𝑡 fromΦ 1 toIdsuch thatΨ 𝑡p0q“0for all𝑡.
The concatenation ofΦ𝑡 andΨ 𝑡 therefore gives the desired isotopy fromIdtoΦon𝑊Ă𝑈.

===== PAGE 23 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 23
Case2: GeneralDifferential.Inthegeneralcase,chooseapath𝐵 𝑡 inCSpp2𝑛qsothat𝐵 0“Idand
𝐴𝐵1 is conformally non-singular. This path exists by Lemma 4.5. Then the isotopyΨ𝑡 “Φ˝ r𝐵𝑡
restricted to a small open𝑊Ă𝑈is an isotopy fromΦto a map satisfying the assumptions of
Case 1. This reduces to that case.□
4.4.CycleCreationForMaps.Hereweconstructcontactvectorfields(andthusarbitrarilysmall
contactomorphisms) that contain heteroclinic cycles between two hyperbolic fixed points.
Proposition 4.12(Contact Vector Field With Cycle).For any𝑛ě2, there is a contact vector field
𝑉on the standard contact disk𝐷 std of dimension2𝑛´1
that has hyperbolic critical points𝑂of index𝑛´1and𝑃of index𝑛such that
𝑊𝑠p𝑉,𝑂qX𝑊 𝑢p𝑉,𝑃q‰Hand𝑊 𝑢p𝑉,𝑂qX𝑊 𝑠p𝑉,𝑃q‰H
Corollary4.13(CycleCreationForIdentity).Forany𝜖andany𝑛ě2,thereisacontactHamiltonian
𝐻:r0,1sˆ𝐷 stdÑr´𝜖,𝜖son the standard disk𝐷 std of dimension2𝑛´1
that is compactly supported inp0,1qˆintp𝐷 stdqand such thatΦ𝐻 contains a simple heteroclinic cycle
consisting of two hyperbolic fixed points𝑂and𝑃, where𝑂is the origin.
Proof.Let𝑉be the vector field in Proposition 4.12 with critical points𝑂and𝑃. We may assume
after applying a contactomorphism that𝑂is the origin. LetΦ:r0,1sˆ𝐷Ñ𝐷be the flow of
𝛿𝑉for small𝛿. EvidentlyΦis identity nearB𝐷. Moreover, we can reparametrize in time to a
contact isotopyΦ1 generated by a vector field𝑉1 with𝑉 1
𝑡 “0for𝑡near0and1, and such that
|𝑉1
𝑡|ď2𝛿|𝑉|. If𝛿is chosen small, the Hamiltonian𝐻for𝑉 1 will satisfy|𝐻|ď𝜖andΦ 1
1 will be
the time𝛿flow of𝑉, which will have a heteroclinic cycle consisting of the origin𝑂and𝑃.□
For the proof of Proposition 4.12 , we first construct a certain standard local model for one of
the heteroclinics. Denote the standard contact Euclidean space by
R2𝑛´1“Rˆ𝑇 ˚R𝑛´1 with the standard contact form𝑑𝑧`𝜆 std
Let𝑂 std denote the origin ofR2𝑛´1 and let𝑃std denote the point in the zero section defined by
𝑃std“p1,0...0qPR 𝑛´1ĂRˆ𝑇 ˚R𝑛´1
LetΞ std denote open line segment inR𝑛´1 connecting𝑂 std and𝑃 std given by
Ξstd“tp𝑥 1,0...0q: 0ă𝑥 1ă1uĂR 𝑛´1
Finally, letΓ𝑢
std andΓ 𝑠
std denote the positive half of the Reeb trajectory starting at𝑂std and the
negative half of the Reeb trajectory ending on𝑃std respectively.
Γ𝑢
std“r0,8q 𝑧ˆ𝑂 stdĂR 2𝑛´1 andΓ 𝑠
std“p´8,0s 𝑧ˆ𝑃 stdĂR 2𝑛´1
Lemma 4.14(Single Heteroclinic).For any𝜖and any𝑛ě2, there is a contact vector field𝑉on the
standard contact manifoldR2𝑛´1 with the following properties.
(a) There are hyperbolic critical points of𝑉at𝑂std of index𝑛´1and𝑃 std of index𝑛.
(b) The segmentΞstd from𝑃 std to𝑂 std is a heteroclinic, or equivalently
ΞstdĂ𝑊 𝑠p𝑉,𝑂 stdqX𝑊 𝑢p𝑉,𝑃 stdq
(c) The positive Reeb trajectoryΓ𝑢
std starting at𝑂 std is contained in𝑊𝑢p𝑉,𝑂 stdqand the negative
Reeb trajectoryΓ𝑠
std ending on𝑃std is contained in𝑊𝑠p𝑉,𝑃 stdq.
(d) The vector field𝑉satisfies𝑉“B 𝑧 outside of the set
𝑈𝜖“Nbhd 𝜖pR𝑛´1qXNbhd 𝜖pΓ𝑢
stdYΞ stdYΓ 𝑠
stdq

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Proof.We start by fixing some choices and notation. First, let𝑉` denote the contact vector field
𝑉`“2𝑧B 𝑧`3
ÿ
𝑖
𝑦𝑖B𝑦𝑖´𝑥 𝑖B𝑥𝑖 with Hamiltonian𝐻 `“2𝑧´
ÿ
𝑖
𝑥𝑖𝑦𝑖
Note that this vector field has a single hyperbolic critical point of index𝑛´1at𝑂std. Second,
let𝑉´ be the translation of´𝑉std so that the single critical point lies on𝑃std and let𝐻´ be the
correspondingHamiltonian. Thiscriticalpointof𝑉 ´ hasindex𝑛. Finally,picksmoothfunctions
𝜙:R 2𝑛´1Ñr0,1sand𝜓:R 2𝑛´1Ñr0,1s
satisfying the following properties:𝜙depends only on the𝑥-variables,𝜙“1near𝑂 std and
𝜙“0near𝑃 std; and𝜓depends only on the𝑧-variable in a neighborhood ofΓ𝑢
std andΓ 𝑠
std,𝜓“1
nearΞ std and𝜓“0outside of the set𝑈 𝜖. Define𝑉“𝑉 𝐻 to be the contact Hamiltonian vector
field of
𝐻“p1´𝜓q`𝜓p𝜙𝐻 ``p1´𝜙q𝐻 ´q
Note that properties (a) and (d) are immediate since𝐻“𝐻` near𝑃 std,𝐻“𝐻 ´ near𝑞 std and
𝐻“1outside of𝑈 𝜖 by construction. Let us now verify (b) and (c).
First, we verify property (b). Note that𝐻` and𝐻 ´ vanish along the zero sectionR𝑛´1. The
contact Hamiltonian equations then imply that𝑉is given by the combination
𝑉“𝜙𝑉 ``p1´𝜙q𝑉 ´ in a neighborhood of the segmentΞstd
Directly along the line segmentΞstd connecting𝑂 std to𝑃 std inR 𝑛, this further simplifies to
𝑉“´𝜙𝑥 1B𝑥1`p1´𝜙qp𝑥 1´1qB 𝑥1 on the line segmentΞstd
It follows from this expression that the segmentΞstd is a heteroclinic from𝑦std to𝑥 std. Second
we verify property (c). It follows from the choices of𝐻˘ and𝜓that
(4.1)𝑑𝐻 `“2𝑑𝑧alongΓ 𝑢
std 𝐻´“´2𝑑𝑧alongΓ 𝑠
std 𝑑𝜓“B 𝑧𝜓¨𝑑𝑧alongΓ 𝑢
std andΓ 𝑠
std
Note that the contact Hamiltonian𝐻has contact Hamiltonian vector field𝑉parallel to the Reeb
vector field𝑅at a point𝑥if and only if𝑑𝐻“𝑑𝐻p𝑅q¨𝛼at𝑥. From (4.1), we compute that
(4.2)𝐻“p1´𝜓q`𝜓𝐻 ` and thus𝑑𝐻“p𝐻 `´1q¨𝑑𝜓`𝜓¨𝑑𝐻 ` nearΓ 𝑢
std
An analogous formula holds with𝐻´ nearΓ 𝑠
std. It follows that𝑉is proportional to𝑅and of the
form𝑉“𝐻¨𝑅alongΓ 𝑢
std andΓ 𝑠
std. From (4.2), we can compute that
(4.3)𝑉“pp1´𝜓q`2𝑧𝜓qB 𝑧 alongΓ 𝑢
std and𝑉“pp1´𝜓q´2𝑧𝜓qB 𝑧 alongΓ 𝑠
std
Itisimmediatefrom(4.3)andtheconstructionof𝜓thatthisisapositivemultipleofB 𝑧 alongΓ𝑢
std
andΓ𝑠
std. ItfollowsthatΓ 𝑢
stdisatrajectorylimitingto𝑂 stdbackwardintimeandΓ 𝑠
stdisatrajectory
limiting to𝑃std forward in time. In other words,Γ𝑢
stdĂ𝑊 𝑢p𝑉,𝑂 stdqandΓ 𝑠
stdĂ𝑊 𝑠p𝑉,𝑃 stdq.□
Proof.(Proposition 4.12) Consider the standard contact disk𝐷ĂRˆ𝑇˚R𝑛´1 with the standard
contact form𝑑𝑧`𝜆 std and Reeb vector field𝑅“ B𝑧. LetΛĂ𝐷be the standard Legendrian
unknot, which must necessarily have a Reeb chordΓfrom𝑃to𝑂. By the (strict) Legendrian
Weinstein neighborhood theorem, there is a strict contact embedding
𝑈1Ñ𝐷from a neighborhood𝑈 1ĂRˆ𝑇 ˚Λof the zero sectionΛ
that sends the zero section toΛ. Take an chart𝑊ĂΛalong with a diffeomorphismR𝑛´1Ñ𝑊
sending𝑂 std to𝑂and𝑃 std to𝑃. This induces an embedding of jet spacesR2𝑛´1ÑRˆ𝑇 ˚Λand
thus a strict contact embedding
𝑈Ñ𝐷from a neighborhood𝑈ĂR 2𝑛´1 ofR 𝑛´1

===== PAGE 25 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 25
This neighborhood must contain the region𝑈𝜖 in Lemma 4.14(d) for sufficiently small𝜖. Let𝑉𝜖
be the corresponding vector field in Lemma 4.14 for this choice of𝜖and define a contact vector
field𝑉on𝐷by
𝑉“𝑉 𝜖 in𝑈 𝜖 and𝑉“𝑅outside of𝑈 𝜖
Lemma 4.14(d) implies that𝑉is smooth. Lemma 4.14(a-b) implies that𝑂and𝑃are hyperbolic
critical points of𝑉of index𝑛´1and𝑛respectively, with a connecting heteroclinic𝑃to𝑂
containedin𝑈 𝜖. Finally,Lemma4.14(c-d)impliestheReebchordΓistangentto𝑉andintersects
the stable manifold of𝑃and the unstable manifold of𝑂. It follows that there is a heteroclinic
from𝑂to𝑃. □
4.5.Proof Of Theorem 4.1.We now assemble the results of this section to prove Theorem 4.1.
Proof.(Theorem 14) Fix a constant𝛿ą0. Lemma 4.3 states that there is a plug𝚥of size𝛿such
that the deformed characteristic foliation of𝜂𝚥 has a closed orbitΓ. Consider the return map
Φ“RetΓ:𝐷Ñ𝐷for some local section𝐷intersectingΓat𝑂P𝐷
Fix a neighborhood𝑊Ă𝐷of𝑂such that the inverse ofRetΓis well-defined on𝑊. We can
assume that𝑊is contactomorphic to𝐷 std and that𝑂is identified with the origin. Then the
inverseΦ´1 :𝑊Ñ𝐷is a contact embedding fixing the origin, and we can apply Corollary 4.10
to get a contact Hamiltonian
𝐹:r0,1sˆ𝐷Ñr´𝛿,𝛿s
compactly supported inr0,1sˆ𝑊such thatΦ 𝐹 “Φ ´1 in a neighborhood𝑈of𝑂. Similarly,
Corollary 4.13 implies that there is a contact Hamiltonian
𝐺:r0,1sˆ𝐷Ñr´𝛿,𝛿s
supported onp0,1qˆ𝑊such thatΦ 𝐺 has a heterodimensional cycle of the desired index in
an arbitrarily small neighborhood of𝑂consisting of hyperbolic fixed points𝑂and𝑃. By
concatenating the Hamiltonians𝐹and𝐺, we get a contact Hamiltonian
𝐻:r0,1sˆ𝐷Ñr´𝛿,𝛿ssuch thatΦ˝Φ 𝐻“Φ˝Φ ´1˝Φ𝐺“Φ 𝐺
We can next choose a small plugging domain𝑈»𝑈std that is well-positioned alongΓ(Defi-
nition 2.41) such that𝐷“𝐷 in. By inserting the plug associated to𝐻alongΓalong this domain
(Definition 2.43), we acquire an ambient deformation
𝜄𝑈,𝐻 of the contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂𝜄q
By Lemma 2.44, after inserting this plug, the continuationΓ𝑈,𝐻 ofΓhas return map
RetΓ𝑈,𝐻 :𝐷Ñ𝐷given byΦ˝Φ 𝐻“Φ 𝐺 on𝑊
In particular, the deformed contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂𝑈,𝐻 has a heteroclinic cycle𝐶of the
desired index, given by the suspension of the corresponding cycle𝐶ofΦ˝Φ𝐻. We now let
𝜄:r0,1sˆ𝑈 stdÑ𝐶𝑈 std
betheconcatenationof𝚥and𝜄 𝑈,𝐻 asinRemark2.24. Thenthecharacteristicfoliationof𝜂 𝜄“𝜂 𝑈,𝐻
hasaheterocliniccycle𝐶ofthedesiredindex. Moreover,byRemark2.24andRemark2.33,there
is a constant𝐴independent of𝑈and𝐻such that
}𝜄}𝐶0ď}𝜄 𝑈,𝐻 ‹𝚥} 𝐶0ď𝐴}𝜄 𝑈,𝐻}𝐶0`}𝚥} 𝐶0ďp𝐴`1q𝛿
By choosing𝛿sufficiently small, we assure that the size of our deformation is less than𝜖.□

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
5.Non-Degenerate Heterodimensional Cycles And Proper Unfoldings
Inthissection,wereviewthenotionsofnon-degenerateheterodimensionalcyclesandproper
unfoldings as formulated by Li-Turaev [38]. In the process, we introduce key tools that will be
used in the construction of unfoldings in the setting of characteristic foliations.
5.1.Multipliers And Invariant Manifolds.We begin by reviewing key terminology and struc-
tures associated to hyperbolic fixed points of diffeomorphisms. Fix a smooth embedding
Φ:𝑈Ñ𝑀to a manifold𝑀from an open set𝑈Ă𝑀
Remark5.1.Inlatersections,thismapwillbethePoincarereturnmapofaperiodicorbitofaflow.
Inparticular,itwillonlybewell-defineduptosmoothconjugacyasagermofadiffeomorphism.
Definition 5.2(Multipliers).Amultiplierof a fixed point𝑂of the embeddingΦis an eigenvalue
of the differential ofΦat𝑂. Given a fixed point𝑂, we use the notation
𝜆1p𝑂q...𝜆 𝑛p𝑂qand𝑆p𝑂q
for the sequence of multipliers (with repetition, in order of increasing absolute value) and the
set of absolute values of the multipliers, respectively. Theinvariant subspace
𝐸𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qĂ𝑇 𝑂𝑀and𝐸 𝑢p𝑂,𝜎qĂ𝑇 𝑂𝑀associated to a real number𝜎PR `
is the direct sum of the real invariant subspaces of the differential ofΦat𝑂corresponding to
multipliers of absolute value less than or equal to𝜎and greater than or equal to𝜎, respectively.
We next recall the notion of local invariant manifolds and foliations for a fixed point of a local
diffeomorphism or embedding.
Construction 5.3(Local Invariant Manifolds).Let𝑂be a fixed point ofΦand let𝑃be a point in
a sufficiently small neighborhood ofΦ. Thelocal invariant manifolds
𝑊𝑠p𝑃,𝜎qĂ𝑈and𝑊 𝑢p𝑃,𝜎qĂ𝑈for any real number𝜎PR
are constructed as follows. Take an open chart𝑉Ă𝑈containing𝑃and𝑂with an chart map
𝑉ÑR 𝑛 identifying𝑂with the origin. ExtendΦ|𝑉 to a smooth map¯Φ:R 𝑛ÑR 𝑛 of the form
¯Φp𝑥q“𝐴p𝑥q`𝐹p𝑥q
where𝐴is a linear isomorphism and𝐹is a smooth function that vanishes at the origin with
small𝐶 1-norm. Then𝑊𝑠p𝑃,𝜎qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑃,𝜎qare respectively the components of the subsets
¯𝑊𝑠p𝑃,𝜎q“
␣
𝑄P𝑉: distp ¯Φ𝑖p𝑄q, ¯Φ𝑖p𝑃qqď𝐶𝑒 𝜎𝑖 for some𝐶ą0and all𝑖ě0
(
¯𝑊𝑢p𝑃,𝜎q“
␣
𝑄P𝑉: distp ¯Φ𝑖p𝑄q, ¯Φ𝑖p𝑃qqď𝐶𝑒 𝜎𝑖 for some𝐶ą0and all𝑖ď0
(
that contain the point𝑃. Note that these sets depend on the chart𝑉and extension¯Φ.
Definition5.4(UnstableAndStableManifolds).Thelocalstablemanifoldandlocalunstablemanifold
of a hyperbolic fixed point𝑂of the embeddingΦare the local invariant manifolds
𝑊𝑠p𝑂q“𝑊 𝑠p𝑂,1qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑂q“𝑊 𝑢p𝑂,1q
Note that since𝑂is hyperbolic, we have𝑊 𝑠p𝑂q “𝑊𝑠p𝑂,´𝜖qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑂q “𝑊𝑢p𝑂,𝜖qfor𝜖
positive and sufficiently close to zero. We denote the corresponding tangent spaces at𝑂by
𝐸𝑠p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑢p𝑂q
The following result summarizes the key properties of local invariant manifolds. See Hirsch-
Pugh-Shub [30, Thm 5.5, p. 61] or alternatively Shilnikov-Shilnikov-Turaev-Chua [45, §5.2].

===== PAGE 27 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 27
Theorem 5.5(Local Invariant Manifolds).Let𝑂be a fixed point of the smooth embeddingΦand fix
real numbers𝜎and𝜏that are not in𝑆p𝑂q. Then the local invariant manifolds
𝑊𝑠p𝑃,𝜎qĂ𝑈and𝑊 𝑢p𝑃,𝜏qĂ𝑈for𝑃near the fixed point𝑂
are locallyΦ-invariant and𝐶1-embedded sub-manifolds that form the leaves of continuous foliations
F𝑠p𝜎qandF 𝑢p𝜏qof a small neighborhood of𝑂in𝑈
These manifolds and foliations have the following properties.
(a) (Tangent Space) The tangent spaces of the local invariant manifolds at𝑂are given by
𝑇𝑊𝑠p𝑂,𝜎q| 𝑂“𝐸 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qand𝑇𝑊 𝑢p𝑂,𝜏q| 𝑂“𝐸 𝑢p𝑂,𝜏q
(b) (Inclusions) Given real numbers𝜎ă𝜎 1 and𝜏 1 ă𝜏, there are the following inclusions with
equality if and only if the intervalsr𝜎,𝜎1sandr𝜏 1,𝜏sare disjoint from𝑆p𝑂q.
𝑊𝑠p𝑃,𝜎qĎ𝑊 𝑠p𝑃,𝜎 1qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑃,𝜏qĎ𝑊 𝑢p𝑃,𝜏1q
(c) (Strong Foliations) The invariant manifolds𝑊𝑠p𝑃,𝜎qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑃,𝜏qand the corresponding fo-
liationsF 𝑠p𝜎qare smooth and independent of the choices in Construction 5.3, for𝜎ă1ă𝜏.
(d) (ExtendedManifolds)Thelocalinvariantmanifolds𝑊 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑂,𝜏qmaydependonthe
choices in Construction 5.3 for𝜎ą1ą𝜏but the restricted tangent bundles
𝑇𝑊𝑠p𝑂,𝜎q| 𝑊𝑠p𝑂q and𝑇𝑊 𝑠p𝑂,𝜏q| 𝑊𝑢p𝑂q
are independent of the choices in Construction 5.3 for any hyperbolic fixed point𝑂.
Remark 5.6(Alternate Notation).In settings where we must consider the local invariant mani-
folds of multiple embeddings, we will use the notation
𝑊𝑠pΦ;𝑂,𝜎qand𝑊 𝑢pΦ;𝑂,𝜏q
for the stable and unstable invariant manifolds of the embeddingΦ.
Remark5.7(Continuity).Thelocalinvariantsub-manifolds𝑊 𝑠pΦ;𝑂,𝜎qand𝑊 𝑢pΦ;𝑂,𝜏qdepend
continuously in the𝐶1-topology among the embeddingsΦsuch that𝜎and𝜏are not in𝑆p𝑂q.
Moreover, if𝜎ă0ă𝜏andΦ 𝜖 is afamily ofembeddings depending smoothlyon aparameter𝜖,
then𝑊 𝑠pΦ𝜖;𝑂,𝜎qand𝑊 𝑢pΦ𝜖;𝑂,𝜏qdepend smoothly on𝜖. See [30] and [45] for details.
Wewillrequirethefollowinglemmathatdictatesthebehavioroftheinvariantmanifoldswith
respect to invariant distributions.
Lemma 5.8(Invariant Distributions).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point ofΦand fix a real number𝜎
not in𝑆p𝑂q. Then for anyΦ-invariant distribution𝐷, we have
𝐸𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qĂ𝐷at𝑂if and only if𝑇𝑊 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qĂ𝐷along the stable manifold𝑊 𝑠p𝑂q
𝐸𝑢p𝑂,𝜎qĂ𝐷at𝑂if and only if𝑇𝑊 𝑢p𝑂,𝜎qĂ𝐷along the unstable manifold𝑊 𝑢p𝑂q
Proof.We prove the result for the stable manifolds, since the other case follows by considering
the local inverse. Moreover, note that𝑇𝑊𝑠p𝑂,𝜎q “𝐸 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qat the fixed point𝑂, and so one
direction of the result is obvious.
Intheotherdirection,supposethat𝐸 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qĂ𝐷at𝑂. Considerthecontinuousdistributions
tangent to the invariant foliations in Theorem 5.5.
𝐹𝑠“𝑇F 𝑠p𝜎qand𝐹 𝑢“𝑇F 𝑢p𝜎q
These distributions are locally invariant and coincide with𝐸𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qand𝐸 𝑢p𝑂,𝜎qat𝑂, respec-
tively. Since𝑇𝑂𝑀“𝐸 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎q‘𝐸 𝑢p𝑂,𝜎qif𝜎is not in𝑆p𝑂q, it follows that
𝑇𝑀“𝐹 𝑠‘𝐹 𝑢 in a sufficiently small neighborhood𝑈1 of𝑂

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Given a vector𝑣in𝑇𝑀in𝑈 1, we write𝑣𝑠 and𝑣 𝑢 for its components in𝐹𝑠 and𝐹 𝑢. Finally, fix a
metric on𝑇𝑀. By construction of𝐸 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qand𝐸 𝑢p𝑂,𝜎qthere are constants𝜎 𝑐𝑠 ă𝜎ă𝜎 𝑐𝑢 so
that
(5.1)|𝑇Φp𝑢q|ă𝜎 𝑐𝑠|𝑢|for any𝑢P𝐸 𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qand𝜎 𝑐𝑢|𝑣|ă|𝑇Φp𝑣q|for any𝑣P𝐸 𝑢p𝑂,𝜎q
Since𝐹 𝑠 and𝐹 𝑢 are continuous distributions with fibers𝐸𝑠p𝑂,𝜎qand𝐸 𝑢p𝑂,𝜎qat𝑂, it follows
that the same inequalities hold for𝑢P𝐹𝑠 and𝑣P𝐹 𝑢 in a small neighborhood𝑈1 of𝑈.
Next, fixaparameter𝜖ą0andconsidertheconefield𝐶 𝑠
𝜖 inthetangentbundleto𝑈 1 defined
by the following inequalities.
𝐶𝑠
𝜖“t𝑣P𝑇𝑈 1 :|𝑣 𝑢|ď𝜖|𝑣 𝑠|u
It follows from (5.1) thatΦ˚p𝐶𝑠
𝜖qĂ𝐶 𝑠
𝑐𝜖 where𝑐“𝜎 𝑐𝑠{𝜎𝑐𝑢. To prove the desired result, it suffices
toshowthatforevery𝜖,𝑥in𝑊 𝑠p𝑂qX𝑈 1 and𝑢in𝐹 𝑠
𝑥“𝑇𝑥𝑊𝑠p𝑂,𝜎q,thereisa𝑣in𝑇 𝑥𝑈1 suchthat
𝑣𝑠“𝑢and𝑣P𝐷X𝐶 𝑠
𝜖
To prove this claim, note that since𝐹𝑠 Ă𝐷at𝑂, there is a neighborhood𝑁of𝑂such that for
every𝑢P𝐹 𝑠|𝑁, there is a𝑣P𝐷X𝐶 𝑠
1 with𝑣 𝑠 “𝑢. On the other hand, for any𝑥P𝑊 𝑠p𝑂qwe
know thatΦ𝑘p𝑥qÑ𝑂and thusΦ 𝑘p𝑥qP𝑁for large𝑘. Thus
Φ𝑘
˚p𝑢qP𝐶 𝑠
1 for any𝑥P𝑊 𝑠p𝑂qX𝑈 1,𝑢P𝐹 𝑠
𝑥 and𝑘large.
This implies that𝑢is in𝐶 𝑠
𝜖 where𝜖“𝑐 𝑘. Since𝑐ă1and𝑘can be arbitrarily large, this proves
the desired claim.□
5.2.Center Multipliers.We will be primarily interested in the local invariant manifolds associ-
ated to the central multipliers of hyperbolic fixed points.
Definition 5.9(Center Multipliers).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point of the embeddingΦ. The
center-stable normandcenter-unstable normare the elements of𝑆p𝑂qgiven by
𝜎𝑐𝑠p𝑂q“max t𝜎P𝑆p𝑂q:𝜎ă1 u and𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑂q“min t𝜎P𝑆p𝑂q:𝜎ą1 u
Thecenter-stableandcenter-unstablemultipliersarethosewithrespectivenorm𝜎 𝑐𝑠p𝑂qand𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑂q.
Definition5.10(CenterSubspaces).Thecenter-stableandcenter-unstablesubspacesarethesumsof
the real invariant subspaces corresponding to the center-stable and center-unstable eigenvalues.
𝐸𝑐𝑠p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑐𝑢p𝑂q
Thestrong stableandstrong unstablespaces are the real invariant subspaces corresponding to the
eigenvalues of norm less than𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂qand greater than𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂qrespectively, and are denoted by
𝐸𝑠𝑠p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑢𝑢p𝑂q
Note that the stable and unstable eigenspaces decompose as direct sums
𝐸𝑠p𝑂q“𝐸 𝑐𝑠p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑠𝑠p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑢p𝑂q“𝐸 𝑐𝑢p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑢𝑢p𝑂q
Definition 5.11(Extended (Un)stable Manifolds).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point with simple
multipliers. Thelocal extended stableandlocal extended unstablemanifolds
𝑊𝑠𝑒p𝑂qĂ𝑈and𝑊 𝑢𝑒p𝑂qĂ𝑈
are the unique local invariant manifolds with tangent spaces at𝑂given by the subspaces
𝐸𝑠𝑒p𝑂q“𝐸 𝑠p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑐𝑠p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑢𝑒p𝑂q“𝐸 𝑢p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑐𝑢p𝑂q

===== PAGE 29 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 29
Definition 5.12(Strong Foliations).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic orbit with simple multipliers. The
strong stableandstrong unstablefoliations
F𝑠𝑠 on𝑊 𝑠p𝑂qandF 𝑢𝑢 on𝑊 𝑢p𝑂q
that are the local invariant foliations tangent at𝑂to the subspaces
𝐸𝑠𝑠p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑢𝑢p𝑂q
Each of the stable and unstable manifolds are equipped with strong stable and strong unstable
foliations, tangent to the corresponding subspaces of the tangent space at the fixed point.
Remark 5.13(Strong Stable/Unstable Manifolds).The leaves of the strong-stable foliation and
the strong-unstable foliation that pass through𝑂are denoted by𝑊𝑠𝑠p𝑂qand𝑊 𝑢𝑢p𝑂q.
There is a useful choice of coordinates that straightens out the stable and unstable manifolds
nearafixedpoint. Theexistenceofthesecoordinatesisestablishedin[45]anddiscussedin[38].
Theorem 5.14((Un)stable Linear Coordinates).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic orbit. Then there exist two sets
of coordinates in a neighborhood of𝑂of the form
p𝑥𝑠,𝑥 𝑐𝑢,𝑥 𝑢𝑢qPR 𝑎
𝑠ˆR 𝑏
𝑐𝑢ˆR 𝑐
𝑢𝑢 andp𝑦 𝑠𝑠,𝑦 𝑐𝑠,𝑦 𝑢qPR 𝑑
𝑠𝑠ˆR 𝑒
𝑐𝑠ˆR 𝑓
𝑢
called stable linear coordinates𝑥and unstable linear coordinates𝑦with the following properties.
‚The stable and unstable manifolds𝑊𝑠p𝑂qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑂qare given in the coordinates by
𝑊𝑠p𝑂q“t𝑥 𝑐𝑢 “𝑥 𝑢𝑢 “0u“t𝑦 𝑢“0uand𝑊 𝑢p𝑂q“t𝑥 𝑠“0u“t𝑦 𝑐𝑠 “𝑦 𝑠𝑠 “0u
‚The strong stable and strong unstable foliations are given by
F𝑠𝑠 “t𝑥 𝑠“𝑥 𝑐𝑢 “0uandF 𝑢𝑢 “t𝑦 𝑢“𝑦 𝑐𝑠 “0u
‚The mapΦacts linearly on the center-unstable and center-stable components in the𝑥-coordinates
and𝑦-coordinates respectively. That is, there are linear maps
𝐴𝑐𝑢 :R 𝑏
𝑐𝑢 ÑR 𝑏
𝑐𝑢 and𝐴 𝑐𝑠 :R 𝑒
𝑐𝑠 ÑR 𝑒
𝑐𝑠
such thatΦrestricts to𝐴𝑐𝑢 ont𝑥 𝑠“𝑥 𝑢𝑢 “0uand to𝐴 𝑐𝑠 ont𝑦 𝑠𝑠 “𝑦 𝑢“0u.
Finally, there is an important simplicity condition on the central multipliers that will be needed
below. We will say that a multiplier norm𝜎in𝑆p𝑂qissimpleif
the set of multipliers𝜆with|𝜆|“𝜎is a singleton or a conjugate pair
Definition 5.15(Simple Center Multipliers).A hyperbolic fixed point𝑂of an embeddingΦis
simple center-stable multipliersif𝜎𝑐𝑠p𝑂qis simple andsimple center-unstable multipliersif𝜎𝑐𝑢p𝑂qis
simple. In these respective settings, we let
𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂qand𝜆 𝑐𝑢p𝑂q
be the unique center-stable and center-unstable multipliers with non-negative imaginary part.
5.3.Non-Degeneracy Of Heteroclinic Cycles.We next introduce non-degeneracy for hetero-
clinic cycles of coindex one following Li-Turaev [38]. We require the following definitions.
Definition 5.16(Coindex).Thecoindexof a heteroclinic cycle𝐶is the difference of the indices of
the constituent hyperbolic orbits𝐶` and𝐶´.
coindp𝐶q“indp𝐶 ´q´indp𝐶 `q
Definition 5.17(Simple Center Multipliers).A heterodimensional cycle𝐶hassimple center mul-
tipliersif𝐶 ´ has simple center-stable multipliers and𝐶` has simple center-unstable multipliers.

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Figure 5.The various invariant manifolds associated to a hyperbolic fixed point
𝑂with real and simple center-unstable multipliers.
We also require the following preliminary setup and notation in order to formuate non-
degeneracy. Here we will use the notation for transition and return maps from Section 2.6.
Setup5.18(Non-Degeneracy).Fixasingularlinefield𝐿containingaheterodimensionalcycle𝐶
with coindex one and simple center multipliers. Fix a local sections of𝐿intersecting𝐶` and𝐶´
at single points denoted as follows.
(5.2)𝐷 ` and𝐷´ with𝑂 `“𝐷`X𝐶` and𝑂´“𝐷´X𝐶´
This determines a pair of Poincare return maps associated to𝐶` and𝐶´.
Ret𝐶` :𝐷`Ñ𝐷` andRet𝐶 ´ :𝐷´Ñ𝐷´
These return maps have hyperbolic a fixed point with simple center-unstable multipliers at𝑂`
andafixedpointwithsimplecenter-stablemultipliersat𝑂 ´. Since𝐶formsaheterocliniccycle,
we may fix points along such heteroclinics of the form
(5.3)𝑃 𝑢
˘P𝑊 𝑢p𝑂˘qĂ𝐷 ˘ and𝑃 𝑠
˘P𝑊 𝑠p𝑂˘qĂ𝐷 ˘
suchthat𝑃 𝑢
`isconnectedto𝑃 𝑠
´byasegmentofaheteroclinicfrom𝐶 `to𝐶´and𝑃 𝑠
`isconnected
to𝑃 𝑢
´ by a segment of a heteroclinic from𝐶´ to𝐶`. We denote these heteroclinic segments by
(5.4)Γ ` andΓ ´
Weassumethatthesetwosegmentsaredisjointfromthesections𝐷 ` and𝐷´ otherthanattheir
endpoints. In other words, we assume that
(5.5)Γ `X𝐷`“𝑃 𝑢
` Γ`X𝐷´“𝑃 𝑠
` Γ´X𝐷`“𝑃 𝑠
` Γ´X𝐷´“𝑃 𝑢
´
We will refer to the two heteroclinics as therobust heteroclinicΓ` and thefragile heteroclinicΓ´,
respectively. We denote the transition maps along the segments between𝑃𝑢
˘ and𝑃 𝑠
˘ by
TrΓ` :𝐷`Ñ𝐷´ andTrΓ ´ :𝐷´Ñ𝐷`
Note that the points𝑃𝑢
˘ and𝑃 𝑠
˘ are mapped to each other by these transition maps.
TrΓ`p𝑃𝑢
`q“𝑃 𝑠
´ andTrΓ ´p𝑃𝑢
´q“𝑃 𝑠
`
We now formulate the non-degeneracy conditions assuming Setup 5.18 as follows. The first
three may be viewed as basic transversality and genericity assumptions for the transition maps.

===== PAGE 31 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 31
Figure 6.AdepictionofthevariousdatafixedinSetup5.18. Hereweonlydepict
the data on the local sections𝐷` and𝐷´, and we do not depict the flow itself.
.
Condition 5.19(Simple Fragile Heteroclinic).The transition map of the fragile heteroclinicΓ´
satisfies the following transversality properties at the point𝑃𝑠
`.
TrΓ´
`
𝑊𝑢p𝑂´q
˘
is tranverse to𝑊𝑠𝑒p𝑂`qandTrΓ ´
`
𝑊𝑢𝑒p𝑂´q
˘
is tranverse to𝑊𝑠p𝑂`q
Condition 5.20(Simple Robust Heteroclinic).The transition map of the robust heteroclinicΓ`
satisfies the following transversality property at the point𝑃𝑠
´.
TrΓ`
`
𝑊𝑢p𝑂`qqis transverse to𝑊𝑠p𝑂´q
Moreover, the strong unstable foliationF𝑢𝑢 of the return mapRet𝐶 ` and the strong stable
foliationF 𝑠𝑠 ofthereturnmapRet𝐶 ´ mustsatisfythefollowingtransversalityconditionsat𝑃 𝑠
´.
TrΓ`
`
F𝑢𝑢˘
is not tangent to𝑊𝑠p𝑂´qandF 𝑠𝑠 is not tangent toTrΓ`
`
𝑊𝑢p𝑂`q
˘
Condition 5.21.The points𝑃 𝑢
` and𝑃 𝑠
´ must satisfy𝑃𝑢
`R𝑊 𝑢𝑢p𝑂`qand𝑃 𝑠
´R𝑊 𝑠𝑠p𝑂´q.
Remark 5.22(Intersection Curves).Condition 5.20 implies that the unstable manifold𝑊𝑢p𝐶`q
and the stable manifold𝑊𝑠p𝐶´qintersect transversely along the heteroclinicΓ`. Therefore
𝐼´“TrΓ `
`
𝑊𝑢p𝑂`qqX𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´qĂ𝐷 ´ and𝐼 `“𝑊 𝑢p𝑂`qXTrΓ ´1
`
`
𝑊𝑠p𝑂´q
˘
Ă𝐷`
areembedded1-manifoldsinasufficientlysmallneighborhoodof𝑃 𝑠
´ and𝑃 𝑢
`,respectively. Note
that, by construction, the transition map induced byΓ` restricts to a diffeomorphism
(5.6)TrΓ ` :𝐼 `Ñ𝐼 ´ such thatTrΓ `p𝑃𝑢
`q“𝑃 𝑠
´
Moreover, the two intersection curves satisfy the following trsansversality properties.
(5.7)𝐼 ´ is transverse toF𝑠𝑠 in𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´qand𝐼 ` is transverse toF𝑢𝑢 in𝑊 𝑢p𝑂`q
Remark5.23(ThirdCondition).Notethat,whenConditions5.19and5.20aresatisfied,thenthe
intersections𝑊 𝑠𝑠p𝑂´qX𝐼 ´ and𝑊 𝑢𝑢p𝑂`qX𝐼 ` areisolated. ItfollowsthatCondition5.21canbe
achieved without perturbation of the line field by simply changing the choice of𝑃𝑢
` and𝑃 𝑠
´ to a
different pair of points in𝐼` and𝐼´.
The fourth and final condition depends on the central multipliers of the hyperbolic orbits.
Assume Conditions 5.19-5.21 and choose linear coordinates as in Theorem 5.14.
(5.8)p𝑥 𝑠,𝑥 𝑐𝑢,𝑥 𝑢𝑢qforRet𝐶 ` near𝑂` andp𝑦 𝑠𝑠,𝑦 𝑐𝑠,𝑦 𝑢qforRet𝐶 ´ near𝑂´
Also fix an arbitrary parametrization of the intersection curve𝐼´ that maps the origin to𝑃𝑢
`.
(5.9)𝜓:r´1,1s 𝑟Ñ𝐼 ´Ă𝐷´ such that𝜓p0q“𝑃 𝑢
`

===== PAGE 32 =====
32 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Figure 7.A depiction of data in Setup 5.18 that satisfies the first three non-
degeneracy conditions, Conditions 5.19, 5.20 and 5.21.
Thecenter-unstablecoordinates𝑥 𝑐𝑢 andthecenter-stablecoordinates𝑦 𝑐𝑠 respectivelydetermine
two smooth maps𝑢𝑐𝑢 and𝑣 𝑐𝑠 on the intervalr´1,1s𝑟 defined by
(5.10)𝑢 𝑐𝑢 :r´1,1s 𝑟ÑR 𝑏
𝑐𝑢 given by𝑢 𝑐𝑢 “𝑥 𝑐𝑢˝𝜓
(5.11)𝑣 𝑐𝑠 :r´1,1s 𝑟ÑR 𝑒
𝑐𝑠 given by𝑣 𝑐𝑠 “𝑦 𝑐𝑠˝TrΓ `˝𝜓
HereR 𝑏
𝑐𝑢 »𝐸 𝑐𝑢p𝑂`qandR 𝑒
𝑐𝑠 »𝐸 𝑐𝑠p𝑂´qare linearly identified with the center-unstable and
center-unstable invariant subspaces of𝑂` and𝑂 ´, respectively. Moreover, the properties (5.6)
and (5.7) and Condition 5.21 imply that the following quantities are non-zero.
𝑢𝑐𝑢p0q‰0𝑣 𝑐𝑠p0q‰0B 𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑢p0q‰0B 𝑟𝑣𝑐𝑠p0q‰0
Wecannowformulatethefinalnon-degeneracyconditions,whichisbrokenintocasesdepending
on the center-stable and center-unstable multipliers.
Condition 5.24(Saddle).If the stable multiplier𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂´qand the unstable multiplier𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂`q
are real, then the center-unstable and center-stable coordinates satisfy
(5.12)
ˇˇˇB𝑟 log|𝑣𝑐𝑠|
B𝑟 log|𝑢𝑐𝑢|
ˇˇˇ‰1at𝑟“0
Condition 5.25(Focus).If the center-stable multiplier𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂´qis complex, then the vectors
𝑣𝑐𝑠p0qandB 𝑟𝑣𝑐𝑠p0qare not proportional as vectors inR2
𝑐𝑠
Similarly, if the center-unstable multiplier𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂`qis complex, then the vectors
𝑢𝑐𝑢p0qandB 𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑢p0qare not proportional as vectors inR2
𝑐𝑢
Definition5.26(Non-Degeneracy).Acoindexoneheterodimensionalcycle𝐶withsimplecenter
multipliers isnon-degenerateif there exist local sections and heteroclinic points as in Setup 5.18
𝐷˘ as in (5.2) and𝑃 𝑢
˘ and𝑃 𝑠
˘ as in (5.3)
such that the non-degeneracy Conditions 5.19, 5.19, 5.21, and either 5.24 or 5.25 are satisfied.

===== PAGE 33 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 33
5.4.Proper Unfoldings.We next introduce proper unfoldings for heteroclinic cycles following
Li-Turaev [38, §2.4]. We continue to assume Setup 5.18 so that we have a heteroclinic cycle
𝐶“p𝐶 `,𝐶´qof coindex one for a singular line field𝐿
We must introduce some continuous parameters associated to line fields that are close to𝐿.
Given a line field𝐾contained in the neighborhood in the𝐶1-topology, there are continuations
𝐶˘
𝐾 of the hyperbolic orbits𝐶˘
The chosen local sections𝐷˘ remain local sections of𝐶˘
𝐾 and thus there are continuations
𝑂˘
𝐾 that are fixed points of the return mapsRetΓ˘
𝐾 :𝐷˘Ñ𝐷˘
Note that the orbits, return maps and fixed points all vary continuously in𝐾. The first set of
parameters that we will need are associated to the multipliers of these fixed points.
Definition 5.27(Ratio/Arguments).Let𝐾be a singular line field that is sufficiently𝐶1-close to
𝐿. Themultiplier ratiois the quantity
𝜃p𝐾q“´
log|𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂´
𝐾q|
log|𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂`
𝐾q|
Similarly, themultiplier arguments𝜔𝑠p𝐾qand𝜔 𝑢p𝐾qare given by
𝜔𝑠p𝐾q“argp𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂´
𝐾qqand𝜔 𝑢p𝐾q“argp𝜆 𝑐𝑢p𝑂`
𝐾qq
whereargp𝑧q“𝑏foracomplexnumber𝑧“𝑎𝑒 2𝜋𝑖𝑏 where𝑎isrealandpositive,and0ď𝑏ď1{2.
The additional parameter that we need is more complicated and requires the notion of a
splitting function for embeddings of disks discussed in the following remark.
Remark 5.28(Splitting For Disks).Let𝐷denote a disk equipped with a Riemannian metric𝑔
and a pair of properly embedded disks𝐴Ă𝐷and𝐵Ă𝐷with
dimp𝐴q`dimp𝐵q“dimp𝐷q´1and𝐴intersects𝐵cleanly at one point𝑂P𝐷
Fixsmall𝐶 1-neighborhoodsUandVof𝐴and𝐵respectivelyinthespacesofembeddeddisksin
𝐷. For sufficiently small choices of neighborhoods, the setUˆVsplits as a disjoint union
UˆV“W `\Y\W ´
whereYconsistsofpairsofembeddedhypersurfacesthatintersectandW ˘arethetwoconnected
components ofpUˆVqzY. Moreover, there is a signed refinement of the distance function
sdist :UˆVÑR
that is negative onW´, positive onW`, and whose absolute value coincides with the distance.
|sdistp𝐴1,𝐵1q|“dist 𝑔p𝐴1,𝐵1qfor any𝐴 1PUand𝐵 1PV
Note that this is unique up to an overall choice of sign, corresponding to the choice of signs on
the componentsW˘.
There is a corresponding function on singular line fields𝐾near𝐿that measures the failure of
the line field to possess a fragile heteroclinic. Precisely, the (un)stable manifolds
𝑊𝑠p𝑂`
𝐾qand𝑊 𝑢p𝑂´
𝐾q
vary continuously with𝐾in the𝐶 1-topology. Moreover, the segmentsΓ˘ connecting𝐷 ` and
𝐷´ have continuations
Γ˘
𝐾 with transition mapsTrΓ˘
𝐾
By choosing the disks𝐷` and𝐷´ sufficiently small in Setup 5.18, we may assume that
𝐴𝐾“𝑊 𝑢p𝑂`
𝐾qand𝐵 𝐾“TrΓ ´
𝐾p𝑊𝑠p𝑂´
𝐾qq

===== PAGE 34 =====
34 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
areproperlyembeddeddisksin𝐷 `ofdimensionindp𝐶 `qandcodimensionindp𝐶 ´qrespectively.
Since the heteroclinic cycle𝐶is codimension one, we therefore have
dimp𝐴𝐾q`dimp𝐵 𝐾q“dimp𝐷 `q´1
Definition 5.29(Splitting Function).Let𝐶be a heteroclinic cycle equipped with choices of local
sections𝐷˘ and heteroclinic points𝑃𝑢
˘ and𝑃 𝑠
˘ as in Setup 5.18. Thesplitting function
𝜎𝑔 :UÑRfor a choice of Riemannian metric𝑔
is the continuous function on an open neighborhoodUof𝐿in the space of singular line fields
with the𝐶 1-topology, defined by
𝜎𝑔p𝐾q“sdist 𝑔p𝐴𝐾,𝐵𝐾q
wheresdist 𝑔 is the signed refinement of the distance function for𝑔described in Remark 5.28.
We are now ready to precisely define the notion of a proper unfolding and state the main
theorem relating unfoldings to robust heteroclinic cycles [38, Theorem B].
Definition 5.30(Proper Unfolding).Let𝐿be a singular line field with a non-degenerate hetero-
clinic cycle𝐶and let𝑈be an open set ofR𝑚 containing0. A𝐶 𝑘 proper unfolding
𝐿𝜖 parametrized by𝜖P𝑈and based at𝐿“𝐿 0
is a𝐶𝑘-continuous family of singular line fields such that there is a choice of Riemannian metric
𝑔such that
𝜎𝑔˝𝐿:𝑈ÑRis differentiable with0as a regular value
Moreover, letΣĂ𝑈be the sub-manifold of parameters given byΣ“ p𝜎˝𝐿q ´1p0q. Then the
family𝐿 𝜖 must satisfy the following properties depending on the multipliers.
(SS) If𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂´qand𝜆 𝑐𝑢p𝑂`qare both real, then𝜃˝𝐿 𝜖 is differentiable and has nowhere zero
derivative as a function of𝜖PΣ.
(FS) If𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂´qis not real and𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂`qis real, then the continuous functions𝜃˝𝐿 𝜖,𝜔 𝑠˝𝐿 𝜖
and1are linearly independent as functions of𝜖PΣ.
(SF) If𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂´qis real and𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂`qis not real, then the continuous functions𝜃˝𝐿𝜖,𝜔 𝑢˝𝐿 𝜖
and 1 are linearly independent as functions of𝜖PΣ.
(FF) If𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂´qand𝜆 𝑐𝑢p𝑂`qare both not real, the the continuous functions𝜃˝𝐿𝜖,𝜔 𝑠˝𝐿 𝜖,
𝜃𝜔𝑢˝𝐿 𝜖 and1are linearly independent as functions of𝜖PΣ.
Theorem 5.31(Unfoldings To Robust Cycles).[38] Let𝐿𝜖 be a proper unfolding parametrized by𝑈
based at a non-degenerate singular line field𝐿with a heteroclinic cycle𝐶of coindex one. Then arbitrarily
close to0P𝑈, there exist parameters𝜖P𝑈such that𝐿 𝜖 has a robust heteroclinic cycle of indexindp𝐶q.
6.Contact Unfoldings And Robustification
In this section, we show that any contact Hamiltonian manifold whose characteristic foliation
contains a simple heteroclinic cycle can be ambiently perturbed to contain a robust heteroclinic
cycle(Theorem15). Moreprecisely,weprovethatanysimpleheterocliniccycleofindexp𝑛´1,𝑛q
can be perturbed to be non-degenerate (Theorem 6.16) and that any non-degenerate simple
heteroclinic cycle can be extended to a proper unfolding (Theorem 6.21). These two results,
combined with Theorem 5.31 will immediately imply Theorem 15.

===== PAGE 35 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 35
6.1.Invariant Manifolds Of Contactomorphisms.We start by showing that the local invariant
manifolds of middle-index hyperbolic fixed points of contactomorphisms are variously Legen-
drianandpre-Lagrangian. Fixacontactmanifold𝑌ofdimension2𝑛´1andacontactembedding
Φ:𝑈Ñ𝑌from an open set𝑈Ă𝑌
We will require the following normal form for the differential of a contactomorphism will be
repeatedly used below. The proof is an elementary computation and left as an exercise.
Lemma6.1(NormalForm).Let𝑂beafixedpointofacontactembeddingΦ. Theninastandardcontact
Darboux chart centered at𝑂, we have
(6.1)𝑇 𝑂Φ“
„ 𝐶0
˚
?
𝐶¨𝐵
ȷ
where𝐶ą0is a constant and𝐵is a symplectic matrix acting onR2𝑛´2 at𝑂.
We now prove the various properties of the invariant manifolds that we will need. First, the
stable and unstable manifolds are isotropic under natural index assumptions.
Lemma 6.2(Isotropic Stables).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point of a contact embeddingΦ. Then
𝑊𝑠p𝑂qis isotropic ifindp𝑂qď𝑛´1and𝑊 𝑢p𝑂qis isotropic ifindp𝑂qě𝑛
Proof.The unstable case follows from the stable case by considering the local inverse. Therefore
assume that𝑂has index𝑛´1or less. By Lemma 5.8, it suffices to show that
𝐸𝑠p𝑂qĂ𝜉at the fixed point𝑂
where𝐸 𝑠p𝑂qis the stable eigenspaces of𝑇𝑂Φconsisting of the sum of real invariant subspaces
corresponding to eigenvalues of norm less than one. We may pass to a standard Darboux chart
so that the differential𝑇𝑂Φthe normal form in Lemma 6.1. Then the eigenvalues of𝑇𝑂Φare𝐶
and
?
𝐶¨𝜆where𝜆isaneigenvalueof𝐵. Everyeigenvalueof𝐵comesinapairwithitsinverse.
Thus if𝐶ă1, then
?
𝐶𝐵has at least𝑛´1eigenvalues of norm less than1and thus𝑇 𝑂Φis
index at least𝑛. If𝐶ą1, then the stable eigenspace is contained in the subspace𝜉“R2𝑛´2 of
𝑇𝑂𝑌“R 2𝑛´1 at𝑂. This proves the desired result.□
Remark6.3.Lemma6.2isalsoprovenbyBreen[11]withaproofthatisseeminglyverydifferent.
A similar argument can be used to prove a lower bound on determinant, which was invoked in
the proof of Lemma 3.14 in Section 3.
Lemma 6.4(Determinant Bound).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point of a contact embeddingΦwith
indp𝑂qď𝑛´1. Then
detp𝑇𝑂Φqě𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂Φq𝑛
where𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂Φqis the center-unstable norm, or equivalently smallest absolute value of an eigenvalue of
the differential ofΦat𝑂that is greater than one.
Proof.We pass to a Darboux chart so that the differential𝑇𝑂Φtakes the normal form in Lemma
6.1. In the normal form we can compute the determinant as
detp𝑇𝑂Φq“𝐶¨detp𝐶Φq“𝐶 𝑛
Moreover, note that𝐶must be an eigenvalue which satisfies𝐶‰1since𝑇𝑂Φis hyperbolic. As
in the proof of Lemma 6.2, we have
𝐶ą1if the index satisfiesindp𝑂qď𝑛´1
Therefore we may compute that
detp𝑇𝑂Φq“𝐶 𝑛ě𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑀q𝑛“𝜎 𝑐𝑢p𝑇𝑂Φq𝑛 □

===== PAGE 36 =====
36 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
A similar result holds for the complementary stable and unstable manifolds under a more
restrictive index assumption. We fix the following terminology.
Definition 6.5(Pre-Lagrangian).A sub-manifold𝑊Ă𝑌in a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qispre-
Lagrangian along a subset𝑆Ă𝑊if it satisfies
𝑇𝑊is transverse to𝜉and𝑇𝑊X𝜉is a Legendrian sub-bundle of𝜉| 𝑆
A sub-manifold𝑊that is pre-Lagrangian along𝑊Ă𝑊will simply be calledpre-Lagrangian.
Remark 6.6.It is a simple exercise to show that if a compact sub-manifold𝑊with boundary is
pre-Lagrangian, then there exists a contact form whose Reeb vector field is tangent to𝑊.
Lemma 6.7(Pre-Lagrangian Unstables).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point of a contact embeddingΦ
with index𝑛´1. Then𝑂has simple center-unstable multipliers and
𝑊𝑢p𝑂qis pre-Lagrangian with Legendrian foliationF𝑢𝑢 ifindp𝑂q“𝑛´1
Similarly, if𝑂is a hyperbolic fixed point with index𝑛, then𝑂has simple center-stable multipliers and
𝑊𝑠p𝑂qis pre-Lagrangian with Legendrian foliationF𝑠𝑠 ifindp𝑂q“𝑛
Proof.The stable case follows from the unstable case by considering the local inverse. Therefore
assumethat𝑂hasindex𝑛´1. ByLemma5.8,itsufficestoshowthat𝑂hassimplecenter-unstable
multipliers and that at the fixed point𝑂, we have
𝐸𝑢𝑢p𝑂qis a subspace of𝜉of dimension𝑛´1and𝐸 𝑢p𝑂qtransverse to𝜉
Notethat𝐸 𝑢p𝑂qistransverseto𝜉at𝑂since𝐸 𝑠p𝑂qĂ𝜉byLemma6.2and𝑇 𝑂𝑌isadirectsumof
𝐸𝑠p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑢p𝑂q. Thuswecheckthat𝑂hassimplecenter-unstablemultipliersand𝐸 𝑢𝑢p𝑂qĂ𝜉.
For these claims, we pass to a contact Darboux chart to adopt the normal form in Lemma 6.1
for𝑇𝑂Φwithconstant𝐶ą0andsymplecticmatrix𝐵. ByLemma6.2,𝐸 𝑠p𝑂qĂ𝜉isaLagrangian
subspace and the constant𝐶in Lemma 6.1 satisfies𝐶ą1. Moreover,𝐸 𝑠p𝑂qmust consist of
generalized eigenvectors of
?
𝐶𝐵with eigenvalue
?
𝐶𝜆for an eigenvalue𝜆of𝐵. In order for
dimp𝐸𝑠p𝑂qq“𝑛´1, it must be the case that𝐵has𝑛´1eigenvalues𝜆such that
?
𝐶𝜆ă1and
thus𝜆ă1. Since the inverse eigenvalues will have𝜆´1 ą1, we conclude that𝐵is hyperbolic
and that𝐸𝑠p𝑂qĂ𝜉 𝑂“R 2𝑛´2 is the stable invariant subspace𝑉𝑠 of𝐵.
Next,notethattheunstableinvariantsubspace𝑉 𝑢 for𝐵isspannedbygeneralizedeigenvectors
of𝐵of eigenvalue𝜆with
?
𝐶𝜆´1ă1. It follows that, as eigenvalues of𝑇𝑂Φ, these eigenvectors
have eigenvalue
?
𝐶𝜆ą𝐶. Thus the strong stable subspace𝐸 𝑢𝑢p𝑂qis precisely𝑉 𝑢, which is a
subspace of𝜉“R 2𝑛´2 at𝑂. The dimension is the codimension of𝑉𝑠 inR 2𝑛´2, which is𝑛´1.
This concludes the proof.□
Corollary 6.8(Center Multipliers).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point of a contact embeddingΦ. Then
𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂qis real and𝐸𝑐𝑢p𝑂qis transverse to𝜉at𝑂ifindp𝑂q“𝑛´1
𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂qis real and𝐸𝑐𝑠p𝑂qis transverse to𝜉at𝑂ifindp𝑂q“𝑛
Proof.It suffices to prove the first case by passing to the inverse. Ifindp𝑂q “𝑛´1, then the
center-unstable bundle𝐸𝑐𝑢p𝑂qis 1-dimensional by Lemma 6.7. It follows that𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂qmust be
real since otherwise𝐸𝑐𝑢p𝑂qmust be 2-dimensional.□
Next, the extended invariant manifolds of a hyperbolic fixed point with simple multipliers are
also pre-Lagrangian in the appropriate sense.

===== PAGE 37 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 37
Lemma 6.9(Pre-Lagrangian Extended Manifolds).Let𝑂be a hyperbolic fixed point of a contact
embeddingΦ. Then
𝑊𝑠𝑒p𝑂qis pre-Lagrangian along𝑊𝑠p𝑂qifindp𝑂q“𝑛´1
𝑊𝑢𝑒p𝑂qis pre-Lagrangian along𝑊𝑢p𝑂qifindp𝑂q“𝑛
Proof.The stable case follows from the unstable case by considering the local inverse. Therefore
assume that𝑂has index𝑛´1. It follows from Lemma 6.7 that
𝐸𝑠𝑒p𝑂q“𝐸 𝑐𝑢p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑠p𝑂qĆ𝜉
Therefore by Lemma 5.8, the tangent space𝑇𝑊𝑠𝑒p𝑂qis transverse to𝜉along all of𝑊 𝑠p𝑂q. On
the otherhand,𝑇𝑊𝑠p𝑂qĂ𝑇𝑊 𝑠𝑒p𝑂qis a Lagrangian subspace of𝜉along𝑊 𝑠p𝑂qby Lemma 6.2.
It follows from dimension considerations that
𝑇𝑊𝑠𝑒p𝑂qX𝜉“𝑇𝑊 𝑠p𝑂qalong𝑊 𝑠p𝑂q
Thus𝑊 𝑠𝑒p𝑂qis pre-Lagrangian along𝑊𝑠p𝑂q.□
6.2.Contact Preliminaries.Here we record several results in contact geometry that will be
useful in the constructions of unfoldings in the following sections.
We first need the following result, stating that intersections between Legendrians and pre-
Lagrangians can be made transverse by an arbitrarily small perturbation.
Lemma 6.10(Transversality Contactomorphism).Let𝐿and𝑀be sub-manifolds of the contact
manifold𝑌intersecting at a point𝑃and let𝑈be a neighborhood of𝑃. Suppose that
𝑇𝑃𝐿is transverse to𝜉at𝑃and𝑇 𝑃𝐿X𝜉and𝑇 𝑃𝑀X𝜉are Lagrangian subspaces of𝜉at𝑃
Thenthereisanarbitrarily𝐶 8-smallHamiltonian𝐻:r0,1sˆ𝑈ÑRsupportedinp0,1qˆ𝑈suchthat
Φ𝐻p𝐿qintersects𝑀transversely at𝑃.
Proof.BypassingtoaDarbouxchartcenteredat𝑃andshrinking𝑈,wecanassumethat𝑈“𝐷 std
is the standard contact disk and𝑃is the origin in𝐷stdĂR 2𝑛´1. We consider the subspaces
𝑉“𝑇 𝑃𝐿XR 2𝑛´2 and𝑊“𝑇 𝑃𝑀XR 2𝑛´2 in the contact structure𝜉𝑃“R 2𝑛´2 at𝑃
These are Lagrangian subspaces ofR2𝑛´2 and thus we can find a path 1-parameter subgroup of
linearsymplectomorphisms𝐴:RÑSpp2𝑛qsuchthat𝐴 𝑠p𝑉qistransverseto𝑊forallsufficiently
small𝑠ą0. We can then take the family of lifted contactomorphisms
Φ𝑠“ r𝐴𝑠 :R 2𝑛´1ÑR 2𝑛´1 as in Definition 4.6
By Lemma 4.7, we know thatΦ𝑠 fixes𝑃and the differential𝑇Φ 𝑠 ofΦ 𝑠 at𝑃is given by1‘𝐴 𝑠 for
all𝑠. It follows that𝑇Φ𝑠p𝑉qis transverse to𝑊as subspaces ofR 2𝑛´2“𝜉 𝑃. Since𝐿is transverse
to𝜉at𝑃, this furthermore implies that𝑇Φ𝑠p𝑇𝑃𝐿qis transverse to𝑇𝑃𝑀for all𝑠.
NowwesimplynotethatΦ 𝑠 isa1-parametersubgroupofcontactomorphismsandistherefore
generated by an autonomous contact Hamiltonian𝐺. We define𝐻to be the cutoff of𝑠𝐺by a
bump function supported in𝑈that is1near𝑃. ThenΦ 𝐻 “Φ 𝑠 near𝑃, so thatΦ𝐻p𝐿qintersects
𝑀at𝑃transversely. By taking𝑠close to0, we can ensure that𝐻is arbitrarily𝐶 8-small. By
reparametrizing time, we can assume that𝐻is supported in the intervalp0,1qin time.□
Remark 6.11.By taking the inverse contactomorphism, we can also find an arbitrarily𝐶8-small
contactomorphism𝐻satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 6.10 so thatΦ𝐻p𝑀qis transverse to𝐿.
Next, we require the following lemma stating that transverse curves can be stretched near a
given point using contactomorphisms.

===== PAGE 38 =====
38 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Lemma 6.12(Stretching Contactomorphism).Let𝐼be an embedded 1-manifold in a contact manifold
p𝑌,𝜉qthat is transverse to𝜉at a point𝑃in𝐼and let𝑈be a neighborhood of𝑃. Then there is an
arbitrarily𝐶8-small Hamiltonian𝐻:r0,1sˆ𝑈ÑRsupported inp0,1qˆ𝑈such thatΦ 𝐻 restricts to
a diffeomorphism𝜓:𝐼Ñ𝐼supported in𝑈X𝐼such that
𝜓p𝑃q“𝑃and𝑇 𝑃𝜓‰˘Id
Proof.By the standard neighborhood theorem for transverse sub-manifolds, we can pass to a
Darboux chart to assume that
𝑌“R 2𝑛´1“R 𝑧ˆ𝑇˚R𝑛´1 𝐼“r´1,1s 𝑧ˆ0ĂR 2𝑛´1 𝑃“0Pr´1,1s
HereR 2𝑛´1 isequippedwiththestandardcontactform𝛼 std“𝑑𝑧`𝜆 std. Let𝐺betheautonomous
contact Hamiltonian𝐺“𝑓p𝑧qwhere𝑓vanishes outside of𝑈X𝐼and𝑓p𝑧q“𝑧near0. Then the
contact Hamiltonian vector field alongR𝑧ˆ0is precisely𝑓p𝑧qB 𝑧 and the flowΦ𝐺
𝑡 of𝐺restricts
to a flow𝜙𝑡 on𝐼such that
𝜙𝑡p0q“0and𝑇 0𝜙𝑡“𝑒 𝑡 Idfor all𝑡
We can now take𝐻to be the cutoff of𝑠𝐺by a cutoff function that is1near𝐼and that vanishes
outside of𝑈. Then𝐻can be made arbitrarily𝐶 8-small by taking𝑠small enough, and the
restriction𝜓ofΦ 𝐻 to𝐼will have the desired properties.□
Finally,wewillrequirearesultfrommetriccontactgeometry. Weformulatethisresultviathe
following definition.
Definition 6.13(WeaklyCompatible).A Riemannian metric𝑔on a contact manifoldp𝑌,𝜉qwith
contact form𝛼isweakly compatibleif the Reeb vector field𝑅satisfies
𝑔p𝑅,𝑅q“1and𝜉is orthogonal to𝑅
ItisastandardfactthattheflowlinesoftheReebvectorfield𝑅aregeodesicswithrespecttoany
weakly compatible metric (cf. [5]). We will need the following result.
Proposition 6.14(Legendrian Distance).Let𝑔be a weakly Riemannian metric on a compact contact
manifold with boundaryp𝑌,𝜉qwith contact form𝛼. Fix compact Legendrian sub-manifoldsΛand𝐾
intersecting at a single point
(6.2)𝑃“ΛX𝐾satisfying𝜉 𝑃“𝑇𝑃Λ‘𝑇 𝑃𝐾
Then there is a constant𝜖ą0, a neighborhood𝐵of𝑃, and𝐶 8-neighborhoodsUofΛandVof𝐾in the
space of Legendrian embeddings such that
(a) Any pair of LegendrianΛ1 inUand𝐾 1 inVare connected by a unique Reeb chord
ΓpΛ1,𝐾1qĂ𝐵of length𝑇pΛ 1,𝐾1qă𝜖
(b) The distancedist𝑔pΛ1,𝐾1qbetween any pair of LegendriansΛ1 inUand𝐾 1 inVis given by
dist𝑔pΛ1,𝐾1q“𝑇pΛ 1,𝐾1q
Moreover, the Reeb chordΓpΛ1,𝐾1qand its length𝑇pΛ1,𝐾1qdepend smoothly onΛ1 and𝐾 1.
Remark6.15.Notethat,foraweaklycompatiblemetric,thelengthofaReebchordwithrespect
to the parametrization induced by the Reeb vector field is equivalent to the metric length.
Proof.Let𝑅denote the Reeb vector field of the contact form𝛼and letΨ:Rˆ𝑌Ñ𝑌denote the
Reeb flow. Also let𝜄:ΛÑ𝑌and𝚥:ΛÑ𝐾denote the inclusions ofΛand𝐾. Recall that Reeb
chords are in bĳection with points
p𝑇,𝑄qPpΨ˝𝜄q ´1p𝚥p𝐾qq

===== PAGE 39 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 39
The hypothesis (6.2) implies thatΓpΛ,𝐾q“p0,𝑃qis a transverse intersection point. This implies
thatthereare𝐶 8-neighborhoodsUofΛ,Vof𝐾,andr´𝜖,𝜖sˆ𝐵ofp0,𝑃qsuchthateveryinclusion
𝜄1PUand𝚥 1PVhas a unique transverse chord
ΓpΛ1,𝐾1q“p𝑇pΛ 1,𝐾1q,𝑃pΛ1,𝐾1qqPr´𝜖,𝜖sˆ𝑈
that depends smoothly on the sub-manifoldsΛand𝐾. This is simply a rephrasing of (a).
Next, let𝜎:𝑌ˆ𝑌ÑR ` denote the square distance function𝜎p𝑥,𝑦q“dist 𝑔p𝑥,𝑦q 2. Recall
that the square distance function is smooth on a neighborhood of the diagonalΔĂ𝑌ˆ𝑌and
the Hessian along the diagonal is given by
(6.3)∇ 2𝜎p𝑥,𝑥qp𝑢‘𝑣,𝑢‘𝑣q“2𝑔 𝑥p𝑢´𝑣,𝑢´𝑣q
Bychoosing𝐵tobegeodesicallyconvexwithdiamatersmallerthantheinjectivityradiusof𝑔,we
canguaranteethat𝜎| 𝐵ˆ𝐵 isdifferentiableandthatanytwopointsin𝐵areconnectedbyaunique
(and length minimizing) geodesic contained in𝐵. Note that (6.3) implies that the restriction
𝜎|Λˆ𝐾 has a non-degenerate minimum atp𝑃,𝑃qsince
𝑇𝑃ΛX𝑇 𝑃𝐾“0
Moreover, the restriction𝜎|Λˆ𝐾 varies smoothly withΛand𝐾since𝜎is smooth. It follows that,
bychoosingtheneighborhoods𝐵,UandVsufficientlysmall,wecanguaranteethatthefunction
𝜎|Λ1ˆ𝐾1 for anyΛ1PUand𝐾 1PV1
has a unique critical pointp𝑃1,𝑄1qcontained in the neighborhoodp𝐵XΛ1qˆp𝐵X𝐾 1qsuch that
𝑃1 and𝑄 1 are connected by a unique geodesic in𝐵(which is length minimizing) and such that
𝜎p𝑃1,𝑄1q“dist 𝑔pΛ1,𝐾1q2
On the other hand, sinceΓpΛ1,𝐾1q Ă𝐵is contained in𝐵, it is the unique length minimizing
geodesic connecting the endpoints ofΓpΛ1,𝐾1q. Moreover, since the endpoints ofΓpΛ1𝐾1qare
orthogonaltoΛ 1and𝐾1attheendpoints,theendpointsarecriticalpointsof𝜎| Λ1ˆ𝐾1 andtherefore
must bep𝑃1,𝑄1q. It follows that the distance between the endpoints isdist𝑔pΛ1,𝐾1qand that
dist𝑔pΛ1,𝐾1q“𝑇pΛ 1,𝐾1q. This proves (b).□
6.3.Non-DegenerateApproximation.Inthispart,weprovethatanycontactHamiltonianman-
ifoldwithaheterodimensionalcycleoftheappropriateindexcanbeambientlyperturbedsothat
the heterodimensional cycle is non-degenerate in the sense of Definition 5.26.
Theorem6.16(Non-DegenerateApproximation).LetpΣ,𝜂qbeacontactHamiltonianmanifoldwhose
characteristic foliation contains a heterodimensional cycle
𝐶“p𝐶 `,𝐶´qwith indexp𝑛´1,𝑛q
Then there is an ambient deformation𝜄ofpΣ,𝜂q, arbitrarily small in the𝐶 8-topology, such that the
continuations𝐶 1
˘ of𝐶˘ in the characteristic foliation of𝜂𝜄 form a non-degenerate heteroclinic cycle𝐶1.
Proof.The heterodimensional cycle𝐶in Theorem 6.16 is coindex one by hypothesis and𝐶auto-
maticallyhassimplecentermultipliersinthesenseofDefinition5.17byLemma6.7. Therefore,it
is only necessary show that we can perform a𝐶8-small isotopy to achieve Conditions 5.19-5.25.
Each non-degeneracy condition is open in the𝐶1-topology (cf. the discussion in [38, §2.2]) and
thus we may show that a perturbation exists that achieves each condition separately.
Lemmas6.18and6.19belowestablishthisforConditions5.19and5.20respectively. Condition
5.21 can be achieved without perturbation by changing the heteroclinic segments as in Remark
5.23. Finally, Corollary 6.8 implies that the center-stable and center-unstable multipliers𝜆𝑠 and
𝜆𝑢 are both real under our index assumptions on𝐶. Thus the final condition that must be
achieved is Condition 5.24, and this is addressed in Lemma 6.20 below.□

===== PAGE 40 =====
40 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Intheremainderofthispart,weworktowardstheproofsofLemmas6.18,6.19and6.20. Fixa
contact Hamiltonian manifoldpΣ,𝜂qand a heterodimensional cycle𝐶as in Theorem 6.16. Also
fix local sections and heteroclinic points as in Setup 5.18.
𝐷˘ as in (5.2) and𝑃 𝑢
˘ and𝑃 𝑠
˘ as in (5.3)
LetΓ` andΓ´ be the heteroclinic segments connecting𝑃𝑢
` to𝑃 𝑠
´ and𝑃 𝑢
´ to𝑃 𝑠
`, respectively. As
in Setup 5.18 and specifically (5.5), we will assume that these heteroclinic segments are disjoint
fromthepartialsections𝐷 ` and𝐷´ awayfromtheirendpoints. Weconsiderthecorresponding
transition maps
TrΓ` :𝐷`Ñ𝐷´ andTrΓ ´ :𝐷´Ñ𝐷`
Given an sufficiently𝐶8-small ambient deformation𝜄of𝜂, the characteristic foliation of the
deformed contact Hamiltonian structure𝜂𝜄 is𝐶 8-close to the characteristic foliation of𝜂. In
particular, it inherits continuations
𝐶𝜄
˘ of the hyperbolic orbits𝐶˘ andΓ 𝜄
˘ of the heteroclinic segmentsΓ˘
Inordertoachievethedesirednon-degeneracyconditions,wewillplugthecharacteristicfoliation
along the heteroclinic segmentsΓ` andΓ´. In particular, we will repeatedly use the following
variant of Lemma 2.44 from Section 2.6.
Lemma 6.17(Transition Deformation For Heteroclinics).There is an𝜖and a neighborhood𝑊of𝑃𝑠
´
in𝐷´ such that, for any contact Hamiltonian
𝐻:r0,1sˆ𝐷 ´ÑRwith|𝐻|ď𝜖andsuppp𝐻qĂp0,1qˆ𝑊
there is an ambient deformation𝜄“𝜄 𝐻 of𝜂such that the return maps of the continuations𝐶𝜄
˘ and the
transition maps of the continuationsΓ𝜄
˘ satisfy
TrΓ𝜄
`“Φ 𝐻˝TrΓ ` TrΓ𝜄
´“TrΓ ´ Ret𝐶 𝜄
˘“Ret𝐶 ˘
Moreover,themapsending𝐻totheambientdeformation𝜄 𝐻 is𝐶 8-continuous. Theanalogousresultsfor
Hamiltonians on𝐷` and the transition map ofΓ´ also holds.
Proof.Chooseapluggingdomain𝑈“r0,1sˆ𝐷 std embeddedinΣthatiswell-positioned along
Γ` (see Definition 2.41). Then we can factor the transition map ofΓas a composition
TrΓ“TrΓ out˝TrΓ in
of the segmentΓin ofΓ` from𝐷` to the inward boundary𝐷in“0ˆ𝐷 std of𝑈and the segment
Γout ofΓ` from the outward boundary𝐷out“1ˆ𝐷 std of𝑈to𝐷 ´. Let𝑄be the pointTrΓ inp𝑃𝑢
`q
so thatTrΓ outp𝑄q “𝑃 𝑠
´. Note that the transition mapTrΓ out is a contactomorphism from a
small neighborhood of𝑄in𝐷 std to a small neighborhood of𝑃𝑠
´ in𝐷 ´. Therefore, there is a
neighborhood𝑈of𝑃 𝑠
´ in𝐷´ so that, for any contact Hamiltonian𝐻supported inr0,1sˆ𝑈, we
can write
Φ𝐻˝TrΓ out“TrΓ in˝Φ𝐻1 for a contact Hamiltonian𝐻1 :r0,1sˆ𝐷 stdÑR
Note that the map𝐻ÞÑ𝐻 1 is𝐶 𝑘-continuous for every𝑘and𝐻 1 is supported in the open set
𝑈1“TrΓ ´1
outp𝑈q. Lettheambientisotopy𝜄betheplugging𝜄 𝑈,𝐻 1 of𝜂alongthepluggingdomain
𝑈bythecontactHamiltonian𝐻 1 (Definition2.31andRemark2.33). ThenLemma2.44statesthat
TrΓ𝜄
`“TrΓ out˝Φ𝐻1˝TrΓ in“Φ 𝐻˝TrΓ out˝TrΓ in“Φ 𝐻˝TrΓ `
Sincethemapsending𝐻 1 totheambientdeformation𝜄 𝑈,𝐻 1 is𝐶 𝑘-continuousforeach𝑘,themap
𝐻ÞÑ𝜄 𝑈,𝐻 1 is also𝐶𝑘-continuous for all𝑘.
Finally, the deformation𝜄“𝜄 𝑈,𝐻 1 is supported in the plugging domain𝑈, which can be
chosentoliewithinanarbitrarilysmallneighborhoodofthepoint𝑄PΓ `. Thus, bychoosing𝑈
sufficiently small, we can guarantee that the characteristic foliation is unchanged along the flow

===== PAGE 41 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 41
segmentΞconnecting a point𝑃P𝐷 ´ in the domain ofTrΓ´ to its imageTrΓ´p𝑃qin𝐷 `, since
the union of such segments is disjoint fromΓ`. This implies thatΓ𝜄
´“Γ´ andTrΓ 𝜄
´“TrΓ ´. A
similar argument applies the return maps of𝐶` and𝐶´.□
We can now present the proofs of Lemmas 6.18 and 6.19 using Lemma 6.10 and Lemma 6.17.
Lemma 6.18(Fragile Heteroclinic).There is an arbitrarily𝐶8-small ambient deformation𝜄of𝜂such
that𝐶has a continuation𝐶 𝜄 in the characteristic foliation of𝜂𝜄 satisfying Condition 5.19.
Proof.Weadoptthefollowingsimplifiednotationforthesub-manifoldsof𝐷 ` inCondition5.19.
𝐿´“TrΓ ´p𝑊𝑢p𝑂´qq𝑀 `“𝑊 𝑠𝑒p𝑂`q𝑀 ´“TrΓ ´p𝑊𝑢𝑒p𝑂´qq𝐿 `“𝑊 𝑠p𝑂`q
Wealsodenotethepoint𝑃 𝑠
` in𝐷` by𝑃. Notethat𝑃iscontainedin𝐿 `X𝑀` and𝐿´X𝑀´. Note
that𝐿`isthestablemanifoldoftheindex𝑛´1hyperbolicfixedpoint𝑂 `ofthecontactomorphism
Ret𝐶`, and𝐿´ is the image under a contactomorphismTrΓ´ of the unstable manifold of the
index𝑛hyperbolic fixed point𝑂 ´ ofRet𝐶 ´. It follows from Lemma 6.2 that𝐿` and𝐿 ´ are
Legendriansin𝐷 `. Similarly,Lemma6.9impliesthat𝑀 ` and𝑀´ arepre-Lagrangianalongthe
intersections
𝑀`X𝑊 𝑠p𝑂`qand𝑀 ´XTrΓ ´p𝑊𝑢p𝑂´qq
Moreover,𝑃“𝑃 𝑠
` iscontainedintheintersectionof𝑊 𝑠p𝑂`qandTrΓ ´p𝑊𝑢p𝑂´qq. Itfollowsthat
𝑀` and𝑀´ are pre-Lagrangian at𝑃in the sense of Definition 6.5.
Lemma 6.10 and Remark 6.11 now imply that there is an arbitrarily𝐶8-small contact Hamil-
tonian𝐻supported in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of𝑃such that
Φ𝐻p𝐿`qis transverse to𝑀` at𝑃andΦ 𝐻p𝑀´qis transverse to𝐿´ at𝑃
By Lemma 6.17, there is a corresponding𝐶8-small ambient deformation𝜄ofΣsuch that the
continuationΓ 𝜄
` ofΓ ` has transition mapTrΓ𝜄
´ “Φ 𝐻˝TrΓ ´, and such that the return maps
of𝐶 ˘ and the transition map ofΓ` are unchanged. In particular, the (un)stable and extended
(un)stable invariant manifolds are the same and
TrΓ𝜄
`p𝑊𝑢p𝑂´qq“Φ 𝐻p𝐿`qis transverse to𝑊𝑠𝑒p𝑂`q“𝑀 ` at𝑃 𝑠
`“𝑃
TrΓ1
`p𝑊𝑢𝑒p𝑂´qq“Φ 𝐻p𝑀´qis transverse to𝑊𝑠𝑒p𝑂`q“𝐿 ´ at𝑃 𝑠
`“𝑃
This is precisely Condition 5.19 for the deformed structure𝜂𝜄 and this proves the lemma.□
Lemma 6.19(Robust Heteroclinic).There is an arbitrarily𝐶8-small ambient deformation𝜄of𝜂such
that𝐶has a continuation𝐶 𝜄 in the characteristic foliation of𝜂𝜄 satisfying Condition 5.20.
Proof.We again adopt simplified notation. Consider the strong-stable foliationF𝑠𝑠 on𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´q
andthestrong-unstablefoliationF 𝑢𝑢 on𝑊 𝑢p𝑂`q. LetΛbetheleafofTrΓ `pF𝑢𝑢qpassingthrough
𝑃𝑠
´ andΞbe the leaf ofF𝑠𝑠 passing through𝑃𝑠
´. Finally, let
𝐿“TrΓ `p𝑊𝑢p𝑂`qq𝑀“𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´q𝑄“𝑃 𝑠
´
Notethat𝑀isthestablemanifoldofanindex𝑛hyperbolicfixedpointand𝐿istheimageunder
a contactomorphism of the unstable manifold of an index𝑛´1hyperbolic fixed point. Thus𝐿
and𝑀are pre-Lagrangian by Lemma 6.7. Moreover,ΛandΞare Legendrian by Lemma 6.7,
since they are (images of) leaves of the strong stable and unstable foliations on𝑀and𝐿.
Lemma 6.10 and Remark 6.11 now imply that there is an arbitrarily𝐶8-small contact Hamil-
tonian𝐻supported in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of𝑃such that
(6.4)Φ 𝐻p𝐿qandΦ 𝐻pΛqare transverse to𝑀at𝑃Φ 𝐻p𝐿qis transverse toΞat𝑃
AsinLemma6.18,wecannowinvokeLemma6.17toacquireacorresponding𝐶 8-smallambient
isotopy𝜄ofΣsuchthatthecontinuationΓ 𝜄
`hastransitionmapΦ 𝐻˝TrΓ`. Ananalogousargument

===== PAGE 42 =====
42 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
to Lemma 6.18 then shows that the transversality properties in (6.4) are equivalent to Condition
5.20 for the deformed characteristic foliation.□
Lemma 6.20(Saddle-Saddle).There is an arbitrarily𝐶8-small ambient deformation𝜄of𝜂such that𝐶
has a continuation𝐶𝜄 in the characteristic foliation of𝜂𝜄 satisfying Condition 5.24.
Proof.By Lemma 6.18 and 6.19, we may assume that Condition 5.19 and 5.20. As in the formu-
lation of Condition 5.24, we consider the curves of intersection between the stable and unstable
manifolds defined as follows.
𝐼´“TrΓ `
`
𝑊𝑢p𝑂`qqX𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´qĂ𝐷 ´ and𝐼 `“𝑊 𝑢p𝑂`qXTrΓ ´1
`
`
𝑊𝑠p𝑂´q
˘
Ă𝐷`
Fix linear coordinatesp𝑥𝑠,𝑥 𝑐𝑢,𝑥 𝑢𝑢qandp𝑦 𝑠𝑠,𝑦 𝑐𝑠,𝑦 𝑢qas in Theorem 5.14 and (5.8). Also fix a
parametrization𝜓of𝐼 ´ byr´1,1s 𝑟 as in (5.9). We consider the functions onr´1,1s𝑟 given by
𝑢𝑐𝑢 “𝑥 𝑐𝑢˝𝜓and𝑣 𝑐𝑠 “𝑦 𝑐𝑠˝TrΓ `˝𝜓
Note that by construction,𝜓p0q “𝑃 𝑢
` andTrΓ `p𝑃𝑢
`q “𝑃 𝑠
´. Suppose Condition 5.24 is not
satisified, since we are finished otherwise. Then
ˇˇB𝑟𝑣𝑐𝑠p0q¨𝑢 𝑐𝑢p0q
B𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑢p0q¨𝑣 𝑐𝑠p0q
ˇˇ“
ˇˇB𝑟 log|𝑣𝑐𝑠|
B𝑟 log|𝑢𝑐𝑢|
ˇˇ“1
Note that the interval𝐼´ is transverse to the foliationF𝑠𝑠 in𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´q. Since𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´qis pre-
LagrangianbyLemma6.7,thisimpliesthat𝐼 ´ istransversetothecontactstructureof𝐷 ´. Thus,
by Lemma 6.12, we can construct an arbitrarily𝐶8-small contact Hamiltonian𝐻supported in
an arbitrarily small neighborhood of𝑃𝑠
´ such thatΦ𝐻 restricts to a diffeomorphsm
𝜙:𝐼 ´Ñ𝐼 ´ such thatΦ 𝐻p𝑃𝑠
´q“𝑃 𝑠
´ and𝑇𝜙‰˘Idat𝑃 𝑠
´
AsinLemmas6.18and6.19,wecanapplyLemma6.17tofindacorresponding𝐶 8-smallambient
isotopy𝜄ofΣso that the transition map of the continuationΓ𝜄
` satisfies
TrΓ𝜄
`“Φ 𝐻˝TrΓ ` TrΓ𝜄
´“TrΓ ´ RetΓ𝜄
˘“RetΓ ˘
Let𝐼 𝜄
´ and𝐼 𝜄
` denote the intervals of intersection corresponding to this characteristic foliation
of𝜂 𝜄 and let𝑢𝜄
𝑐𝑢 and𝑣 𝜄
𝑐𝑠 denote the corresponding functions onr´1,1s𝑟. SinceΦ𝐻 fixes𝐼´, it is
simple to decud
𝐼´“TrΓ `p𝑊𝑢p𝑂`qqX𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´qĎΦ 𝐻˝TrΓ `p𝑊𝑢p𝑂`qqX𝑊 𝑠p𝑂´q“𝐼 𝜄
´
On the other hand, the intersections above are transverse andΦ𝐻 is𝐶 8-small, it follows that we
musthave𝐼 𝜄
´“𝐼 ´. Asimilarargumentshowsthat𝐼 𝜄
`“𝐼 `. Ifweadopt𝜓astheparametrization
of both𝐼´ and𝐼 𝜄
´, then
𝑢𝜄
𝑐𝑢 “𝑢 𝑐𝑢 and𝑣 𝜄
𝑐𝑠 “𝑦 𝑐𝑠˝Φ𝐻˝TrΓ `˝𝜓“𝑦 𝑐𝑠˝𝜙˝TrΓ `˝𝜓
Note that𝑣𝜄
𝑐𝑠p0q“𝑣 𝑐𝑠p0qsinceΦ 𝐻˝TrΓ `˝𝜓p0q“𝜙p𝑃 𝑠
`q“𝑃 𝑠
`. However,B𝑟𝑣𝜄
𝑐𝑠p0q‰˘B 𝑟𝑣𝑐𝑠p0q
since𝑇𝜙‰˘Idat𝑃 𝑠
`. It follows that
ˇˇB𝑟𝑣𝜄
𝑐𝑠p0q¨𝑢 𝜄
𝑐𝑢p0q
B𝑟𝑢𝜄
𝑐𝑢p0q¨𝑣 𝜄
𝑐𝑠p0q
ˇˇ“
ˇˇB𝑟𝑣𝜄
𝑐𝑠p0q
B𝑟𝑣𝑐𝑠p0q
ˇˇ¨
ˇˇB𝑟𝑣𝑐𝑠p0q¨𝑢 𝑐𝑢p0q
B𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑢p0q¨𝑣 𝑐𝑠p0q
ˇˇ‰1
ThisispreciselyCondition5.24forthecharacteristicfoliationof𝜂 𝜄. Thisconcludesthelemma.□

===== PAGE 43 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 43
6.4.Characteristic Unfoldings.We conclude this section by proving the following existence
theorem for unfoldings of characteristic foliations. This will finish the proof of Theorem 15.
Theorem 6.21(Characterestic Unfoldings).LetpΣ,𝜂qbe a contact Hamiltonian manifold whose
characteristic foliation contains a non-degenerate heterodimensional cycle𝐶with indexp𝑛´1,𝑛q. Then
there is a 2-parameter family of embeddings fromΣinto the contactization
𝜄𝜖 :ΣÑ𝐶Σparametrized by an open set𝑈ĂR 2 containing0
such that𝜄 0 is the inclusionΣ“0ˆΣÑΣand such that the characteristic foliations of the contact
Hamiltonian structures𝜂𝜖“𝜄 ˚
𝜖𝜉for𝜖P𝑈form a proper unfolding in the sense of Definition 5.30.
WewilldeduceTheorem6.21,viaapluggingconstruction,fromthefollowingpropositionon
the existence of certain contact isotopies of contactomorphisms and Legendrians.
Proposition 6.22.LetΦ:𝑈Ñ𝐷be a contact embedding to a contact disk𝐷from an open set𝑈Ă𝐷
with a hyperbolic fixed point𝑂of index𝑛. LetΛĂ𝑈be a Legendrian with an intesection point
𝑃PΛX𝑊 𝑢p𝑂qsuch that𝜉 𝑃“𝑇𝑃Λ‘𝑇 𝑃𝑊𝑢p𝑂q
Thenforanyneighborhoods𝑉of𝑂and𝑊of𝑃,thereisan𝜖ą0andtwofamiliesofcontactHamiltonians
𝐺𝑟 :r0,1sˆ𝐷ÑRand𝐻 𝑟,𝑠 :r0,1sˆ𝐷ÑR
parametrized by𝑟Pr´𝜖,𝜖sandp𝑟,𝑠qPr´𝜖,𝜖s 2 respectively, that satisfy the following properties.
(a) (Support)𝐺 𝑟 and𝐻 𝑟,𝑠 are supported onp0,1qˆ𝑉andp0,1qˆ𝑊, respectively, and
𝐺0“𝐻 0“0
(b) (Hyperbolicity) For each𝑟Pr´1,1s, the point𝑂is a hyperbolic fixed point of the embedding
Φ𝑟 :𝑈Ñ𝐷given byΦ 𝐺𝑟˝Φ
(c) (Multiplier) Let𝜆𝑐𝑠pΦ𝑟,𝑂qdenote the center-stable multiplier of𝑂as a fixed point ofΦ𝑟. Then
𝜆𝑐𝑠pΦ𝑟,𝑂q“𝑒 𝑟¨𝜆 𝑐𝑠pΦ0,𝑂q
(d) (Signed Distance) LetΛ𝑟,𝑠 “Φ 𝐻𝑟,𝑠pΛq. Then there is a closed ball𝐵Ă𝐷centered at𝑃and a
Riemannian metric𝑔on𝐷 1 such that
sdist𝑔pΛ𝑟,𝑠 X𝐵,𝑊 𝑢pΦ𝑟,𝑂qX𝐵q“𝑠
Proof.We break the proof into two steps, namely the construction of𝐺and the construction of
𝐻. We verify the desired properties (a-d) as we go.
Step1: ConstructionOf𝐺.Westartbyconstructing𝐺. Considerthesplittingof𝑇 𝑂𝐷intostrong
stable, center stable and unstable spaces
𝑇𝑂𝐷“𝐸 𝑠p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑢p𝑂q“𝐸 𝑠𝑠p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑐𝑠p𝑂q‘𝐸 𝑢p𝑂q
By Lemma 6.2 and Lemma 6.7, the spaces𝐸𝑢p𝑂qand𝐸 𝑠𝑠p𝑂qare Lagrangian subspaces of the
contact structure𝜉of𝐷at𝑂, and𝐸 𝑐𝑠p𝑂qis transverse to𝜉at𝑂. Therefore, by passing to a
Darbouxchartwemayassumethat𝐷“𝐷 stdisthestandardcontactdiskinR 2𝑛´1“R 𝑧ˆ𝑇˚R𝑛´1,
𝑂is the origin and
𝐸𝑐𝑠p𝑂q“spanpB 𝑧qat the point𝑂
We construct𝐺 𝑟 as follows. Let𝐺 1 :R 2𝑛´1 ÑRbe the autonomous contact Hamiltonian
generating the contact flowΨ𝑡 given by
Ψ𝑡p𝑧,𝑥,𝑦q“p𝑒 𝑡𝑧,𝑒 𝑡{2𝑥,𝑒 𝑡{2𝑦q
We can construct𝐺𝑟 by taking𝑟𝐺, multiplying by a function that is1near𝑂and0outside of
a neighborhood of𝑂, and then reparametrizing time so that the resulting contact Hamiltonian

===== PAGE 44 =====
44 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
is compactly supported in the time parameterp0,1q. We thus acquire a 1-parameter family of
contact Hamiltonians
𝐺𝑟 :r0,1sˆ𝐷ÑRwith𝐺 0“0andΦ 𝐺𝑟 “Ψnear𝑂
suchthat𝐺 𝑟 issupportedonp0,1qˆ𝐷andΦ 𝐺𝑟 “Ψ 𝑟 inaneighborhoodof𝑂. Notethatproperty
(a) is immediate from the construction. Property (b) holds for𝑟Pr´𝜖,𝜖sfor some small𝜖, since
the origin𝑂is fixed byΨ 𝑟 and hyperbolicity of a fixed point is an open condition. Finally, we
argue that property (c) holds. To see this, note that for any vector𝑣P𝐸𝑐𝑠p𝑂q, we have
𝑇𝑂Φ𝑟p𝑣q“𝑇 𝑂Φ𝐺𝑟˝𝑇𝑂Φp𝑣q“𝑒 𝑟¨𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂q¨𝑣
In particular,𝑒 𝑟 ¨𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂qis a multiplier of𝑂as a fixed point ofΦ 𝑟. Since the center-stable
multiplier varies continuously and the spectrum is finite, it follows that𝜆𝑐𝑠pΦ𝑟,𝑂q“𝑒 𝑟¨𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂q
for𝑟Pr´𝜖,𝜖sand sufficiently small𝜖.
Step2: ConstructionOf𝐻.Next,weconstructthefamily𝐻. Fixasmall,closedcontactDarboux
ball𝐵centered at𝑃and contained in the neighborhood𝑊of𝑃. Let𝛼be a contact form that
is standard in this ball and letΨdenote the (partially defined) Reeb flow of this contact form.
Finally, for convenience, let
𝐾𝑟“𝑊 𝑢pΦ𝑟,𝑂qand𝐾“𝑊 𝑢p𝑂q“𝐾 0
Note that the family𝐾𝑟 is family of Legendrian sub-manifolds of𝐷by Lemma 6.2 that depends
smoothly on𝑟(see Remark 5.7). Moreover, by the hypotheses of the proposition
𝜉𝑃“𝑇𝑃Λ‘𝑇 𝑃𝐾
This implies that for small𝜖, the map
𝐹:r´𝜖,𝜖s 𝜏ˆ𝐾Ñ𝑌given by the Reeb flow𝐹p𝑡,𝑥q“Ψ 𝑡p𝑥q
is an embedding transverse toΛat𝑃. In particular, there is a smooth function𝜏:r´𝜖,𝜖s𝑟 ÑR
such thatΛ𝑟“Ψ 𝜏p𝑟qpΛqintersects𝐾 𝑟 at𝑃and𝜉 𝑃“𝑇𝑃Λ𝑟‘𝑇𝑃𝐾𝑟.
Next, choose a weakly compatible metric𝑔onR 2𝑛´1. We apply Proposition 6.14 to find a
smooth function𝜖qp𝑟qą0such that, for any𝑟and any𝑠with|𝑠|ă𝜖p𝑟q, we have
distpΨ𝜏p𝑟q`𝑠pΛqX𝐵,𝐾X𝐵q“dist 𝑔pΨ𝑠pΛ𝑟qX𝐵,𝐾 𝑟X𝐵q“dist 𝑔pΨ𝑠pΛ𝑟X𝐵q,𝐾 𝑟X𝐵q“|𝑠|
By choosing𝜖small enough, we may assume that𝜖p𝑟qą𝜖and thus that the above inequality
holds for allp𝑟,𝑠qPr´𝜖,𝜖s 2. We now define
𝐻𝑟,𝑠 :r0,1sˆ𝐷Ñ𝐷
to be a smooth family of Hamiltonians supported inp0,1qˆ𝑉such that the family of contacto-
morphisms generated by𝐻𝑟,𝑠 satisfies
Φ𝐻𝑟,𝑠 “Ψ 𝜏p𝑟q`𝑠 in a neighborhood of𝐵
Then for sufficiently small𝜖, the family of LegendriansΛ𝑟,𝑠 “Φ 𝐻𝑟,𝑠pΛqwill satisfydistpΛ 𝑟,𝑠 X
𝐵,𝑊 𝑢pΦ𝑟,𝑂qX𝐵q “ |𝑠|. Moreover, since the isotopy of Legendrians𝑠ÞÑΛ 𝑟,𝑠 intersects𝐾 𝑟
tranversely at one point at𝑠“0, the signed distance changes sign as𝑠changes sign. Therefore
property (d) follows and this concludes the proof.□
Construction 6.23(Unfolding).Let𝐶be a non-degenerate heterodimensional cycle in the char-
acteristic foliation ofpΣ,𝜂q, as in Theorem 6.21. We now construct a family of embeddings
(6.5)𝜄 𝑟,𝑠 :ΣÑ𝐶Σparamfetrized byp𝑟,𝑠qPR 2 sufficiently small
By Definition 5.26 for non-degeneracy, there exists a choice of local sections, heteroclinic points
and heteroclinic segments
𝐷˘ as in (5.2)𝑃 𝑢
˘ and𝑃 𝑠
˘ as in (5.3) andΓ ˘ as in (5.4)

===== PAGE 45 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 45
suchthatConditions5.19,5.20,5.21and5.24allhold. Weconsiderthecontactembeddinggiven
by the Poincare return map of𝐶´
Φ“Ret𝐶 ´ :𝑈Ñ𝐷 ´ with hyperbolic fixed point𝑂“𝑂 ´“Γ´X𝐷´
and Legendrian given by the image of the stable manifold of𝑂` under the transfer map ofΓ´.
Λ“TrΓ ´p𝑊𝑠p𝑂`qqwith intersection point𝑃“𝑃 𝑠
´
NotethatCondition5.19impliesthat𝜉 𝑃“𝑇𝑃Λ‘𝑇𝑃𝑊𝑢p𝑂q. WecanthusapplyProposition6.22
to the embeddingΦand LegendrianΛto acquire families of contact Hamiltonians
𝐺𝑟 :r0,1sˆ𝐷 ´ÑRand𝐻 𝑟,𝑠 :r0,1sˆ𝐷 ´ÑR
satisfyingProposition6.22(a-d)supportedinarbitraryneighborhoods𝑉of𝑂and𝑊of𝑃. Next,
choose a plugging domain𝑈𝐺 that is well-positioned along the orbit𝐶´ and such that the
outward boundary is𝐷´. Also choose a plugging domain𝑈𝐻 that is well-positioned along
Γ´ and that is disjoint from𝑈𝐺. By Lemma 2.44 and Lemma 6.17, we can insert the plug
corresponding to𝐺𝑟 along𝑈 𝐺 and a plug corresponding to𝐻𝑟,𝑠 along𝑈 𝐻 to get an family of
embeddings
(6.6)𝜄 𝑟,𝑠 :ΣÑ𝐶Σforp𝑟,𝑠qsufficiently close top0,0q
such that the continuation𝐶𝑟,𝑠
´ of𝐶 ´ and the continuationΓ𝑟,𝑠
´ ofΓ´ have the following return
map and transition map, respectively.
(6.7)Ret𝐶 𝑟,𝑠
´ “Φ 𝐺𝑟˝Ret𝐶 ´ andTrΓ 𝑟,𝑠
´ “Φ 𝐻𝑟,𝑠 ˝TrΓ ´
Note that for (6.7) to hold, we must choose the open sets𝑈and𝑉to be sufficiently small
neighborhoods of𝑂“𝑂 ´ and𝑃“𝑃 𝑠
´. This guarantees that the trajectory from any point𝑄in
𝐷` to its imageTrΓ´ in𝐷´ cannot pass through the support of the plug by𝐺𝑟. Also note that
the return maps of𝐶` andΓ` are unchanged as long as𝑈and𝑉are small.
(6.8)Ret𝐶 𝑟,𝑠
` “Ret𝐶 ` andTrΓ 𝑟,𝑠
` “TrΓ `
Lemma 6.24.Let𝜄 𝑟,𝑠 be the embeddings in Construction 6.23. Then the characteristic foliations𝐿𝑟,𝑠 of
the contact Hamiltonian structures𝜂𝑟,𝑠 “𝜄 ˚
𝑟,𝑠𝜉form a proper unfolding in the sense of Definition 5.30.
Proof.As in Proposition 6.22, we adopt the following notation.
Φ𝑟“Φ 𝐺𝑟˝Φ“Ret𝐶 𝑟,𝑠
´ andΛ 𝑟,𝑠 “Φ 𝐻𝑟,𝑠pΛq“TrΓ 𝑟,𝑠
´p𝑊𝑠p𝑂`qq
First, we check that the function𝜎p𝐿𝑟,𝑠qis smooth in𝑟and𝑠, with a regular value at0, where𝜎
is the splitting function in Definition 5.29. Let𝐵be the ball in Proposition 6.22(d). Then
𝜎𝑔p𝐿𝑟,𝑠q“sdist
`
𝑊𝑢p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
´qX𝐵,TrΓ 𝑟,𝑠
´p𝑊𝑠p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
`qqX𝐵
˘
Here𝑂 𝑟,𝑠
˘ is the continuation fixed point of𝑂˘ for the line field𝐿𝑟,𝑠. Note that𝑊 𝑢p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
´qis
precisely the unstable manifold𝑊𝑢pΦ𝑟,𝑂´qof𝑂 ´ as a fixed point ofΦ𝑟, while𝑊 𝑠p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
`q “
𝑊𝑠p𝑂`qsince the return map of𝐶𝑟,𝑠
` is simplyRet𝐶`. Therefore
𝜎𝑔p𝐿𝑟,𝑠q“sdist
`
𝑊𝑢pΦ𝑟,𝑂´qX𝐵,Λ 𝑟,𝑠 X𝐵q“𝑠
Thisshowsthat𝜎 𝑔p𝐿𝑟,𝑠qisasmoothfunctionintheparameters𝑟and𝑠witharegularvalueat0.
Moreover, the sub-manifold𝑆of parameters with𝜎𝑔p𝐿𝑟,𝑠q“0is precisely the set where𝑠“0.
Second, we compute the derivative of the multiplier ratio along𝑆. We are interested in the
function on𝑆“t𝑠“0ugiven by
𝜃p𝑟q“´
log|𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
´q|
log|𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
`q||𝑠“0

===== PAGE 46 =====
46 JULIAN CHAIDEZ AND MICHAEL HUANG
Again, sinceRet𝐶 𝑟,𝑠
` “Ret𝐶 ` for all𝑟and𝑠, we know that𝜆 𝑐𝑢p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
`q“𝜆 𝑐𝑠p𝑂`qis independnt
of𝑟. On the other hand,𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂𝑟,𝑠
´qis simply the center-stable multipler𝜆𝑐𝑠pΦ𝑟,𝑂´qof𝑂 ´ with
respect to the return mapΦ𝑟“Ret𝐶 𝑟,𝑠
´ . Therefore, Proposition 6.22(c) implies that
𝜃p𝑟q“´ log|𝜆𝑐𝑠pΦ𝑟,𝑂´q|
log|𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂`q| “´𝑟¨ log|𝜆𝑐𝑠p𝑂´q|
log|𝜆𝑐𝑢p𝑂`q|
In particular,𝜃p𝑟qis differentiable with a nowhere zero derivative. This verifies the second
property of a proper unfolding and finishes the proof.□
References
[1] RalphAbrahamandStephenSmale.Nongenericityof𝜔-stability.InTheCollectedPapersofStephenSmale: Volume
2, pages 735–738. World Scientific, 2000.
[2] Masayuki Asaoka. Stable intersection of cantor sets in higher dimension and robust homoclinic tangency of the
largest codimension.Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 375(2):873–908, 2022.
[3] Pablo G Barrientos, Lorenzo J Díaz, Yuri Ki, Cristina Lizana, and Sebastián A Pérez. Robust heterodimensional
cycles of co-index two via split blending machines.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.12412, 2025.
[4] Pablo G Barrientos, Yuri Ki, and Artem Raibekas. Symbolic blender-horseshoes and applications.Nonlinearity,
27(12):2805–2839, 2014.
[5] Tilman Becker.On geodesible vector fields and related geometric structures. PhD thesis, Universitäts-und Stadtbiblio-
thek Köln, 2023.
[6] C Bonatti. Towards a global view of dynamical systems, for thec1-topology.Ergodic Theory, pages 959–993, 2010.
[7] Christian Bonatti, Sylvain Crovisier, Lorenzo Diaz, and Amie Wilkinson. What is... a blender?arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.02848, 2016.
[8] ChristianBonattiandLorenzoJ.Diaz.Persistentnonhyperbolictransitivediffeomorphisms.AnnalsofMathemat-
ics, 143(2):357–396, 1996.
[9] Christian Bonatti and Lorenzo J Díaz. Robust heterodimensional cycles and-generic dynamics.Journal of the
Institute of Mathematics of Jussieu, 7(3):469–525, 2008.
[10] Christian Bonatti, Lorenzo J Díaz, and Marcelo Viana.Dynamics beyond uniform hyperbolicity: A global geometric
and probabilistic perspective, volume 3. Springer Science & Business Media, 2004.
[11] JosephBreen.Morse-smalecharacteristicfoliationsandconvexityincontactmanifolds.ProceedingsoftheAmerican
Mathematical Society, 149(9):3977–3989, 2021.
[12] Joseph Breen. Folded symplectic forms in contact topology.Journal of Geometry and Physics, 201:105213, 2024.
[13] Joseph Breen, Ko Honda, and Yang Huang. The giroux correspondence in arbitrary dimensions.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.02317, 2023.
[14] Julian Chaidez. Robustly non-convex hypersurfaces in contact manifolds.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05979, 2024.
[15] Julian Chaidez. Conformally symplectic topology from a dynamical viewpoint.Proceedings of the 2026 Georgia
International Topology Conference, 2026.
[16] LJDíaz.Persistenceofcyclesandnonhyperbolicdynamicsatheteroclinicbifurcations.Nonlinearity,8(5):693–713,
1995.
[17] LorenzoJDíazandJorgeRocha.Nonconnectedheterodimensionalcycles: bifurcationandstability.Nonlinearity,
5(6):1315–1341, 1992.
[18] Yakov Eliashberg and Mikhael Gromov. Convex symplectic manifolds.Several complex variables and complex
geometry, pages 135–162, 1991.
[19] John Etnyre. Convex surfaces in contact geometry: Class notes.
[20] John B Etnyre and Ko Honda. On the nonexistence of tight contact structures.Annals of Mathematics, pages
749–766, 2001.
[21] John B Etnyre and Ko Honda. Tight contact structures with no symplectic fillings.Inventiones Mathematicae,
148(3):609, 2002.
[22] John B Etnyre and Ko Honda. Cabling and transverse simplicity.Annals of mathematics, pages 1305–1333, 2005.
[23] Todd Fisher and Boris Hasselblatt.Hyperbolic flows. Zurich Lectures in Advanced Mathematics. EMS Publishing
House, Berlin, [2019]©2019.
[24] Hansjörg Geiges.An introduction to contact topology, volume 109. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[25] Hansjörg Geiges.An introduction to contact topology, volume 109 ofCambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008.
[26] Emmanuel Giroux. Convexity in contact topology.Comment. Math. Helv, 66(4):637–677, 1991.
[27] AS Gorodetski and Yulĳ Sergeevich Ilyashenko. Certain properties of skew products over a horseshoe and a
solenoid. InProc. Steklov Inst. Math, volume 231, pages 90–112, 2000.

===== PAGE 47 =====
CONVEX HYPERSURFACES AND ROBUST HETERODIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS 47
[28] Andy Hammerlindl and Rafael Potrie. Partial hyperbolicity and classification: a survey.Ergodic Theory and
Dynamical Systems, 38(2):401–443, 2018.
[29] F Rodriguez Hertz, J Rodriguez Hertz, and Raúl Ures. Partially hyperbolic dynamics.Publicaçoes Matemáticas do
IMPA, 2011.
[30] M.W. Hirsch, C.C. Pugh, and M. Shub.Invariant Manifolds. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2006.
[31] Ko Honda. On the classification of tight contact structures i.arXiv preprint math/9910127, 1999.
[32] Ko Honda. On the classification of tight contact structures ii.Journal of Differential Geometry, 55(1):83–143, 2000.
[33] Ko Honda and Yang Huang. Bypass attachments in higher-dimensional contact topology.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.09142, 2018.
[34] Ko Honda and Yang Huang. Convex hypersurface theory in contact topology.arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06025,
2019.
[35] Ko Honda, William H Kazez, and Gordana Matić. Convex decomposition theory.International Mathematics
Research Notices, 2002(2):55–88, 2002.
[36] Ko Honda, William H Kazez, and Gordana Matić. Tight contact structures on fibred.Journal of Differential
Geometry, 64(2):305–358, 2003.
[37] Ko Honda, William H Kazez, and Gordana Matić. Right-veering diffeomorphisms of compact surfaces with
boundary.Inventiones mathematicae, 169(2):427–449, 2007.
[38] Dongchen Li and Dmitry Turaev. Persistence of heterodimensional cycles.Inventiones mathematicae,
236(3):1413–1504, April 2024.
[39] Ricardo Mañé. Contributions to the stability conjecture.Topology, 17(4):383–396, 1978.
[40] D. McDuff and D. Salamon.Introduction To Symplectic Topology, 3rd Ed. Oxford University Press, 2017.
[41] DusaMcDuff.Applicationsofconvexintegrationtosymplecticandcontactgeometry.Ann.Inst.Fourier(Grenoble),
37(1):107–133, 1987.
[42] J.Palis.Aglobalperspectivefornon-conservativedynamics.Ann.Inst.H.PoincaréCAnal.NonLinéaire,22(4):485–
507, 2005.
[43] Jacob Palis. A global view of dynamics and a conjecture on the denseness of finitude of attractors.Astérisque,
261(xiiixiv):335–347, 2000.
[44] Workshop Participants. Aim problem list in higher dimensional contact topology, 2024.
[45] Leonid P Shilnikov, Andrey L Shilnikov, Dmitry V Turaev, and Leon O Chua. Methods of qualitative theory in
nonlinear dynamics part i, 2001.
[46] Michael Shub. Topologically transitive diffeomorphisms of t4. InProceedings of the Symposium on Differential
Equations and Dynamical Systems: University of Warwick September 1968—August 1969 Summer School, July 15–25,
1969, pages 39–40. Springer, 2006.
[47] Carl P Simon. A 3-dimensional abraham-smale example. InProc. Amer. Math. Soc, volume 34, pages 629–630,
1972.
[48] Stephen Smale. Differentiable dynamical systems.Bulletin of the American mathematical Society, 73(6):747–817,
1967.
[49] Dennis Sullivan. Cycles for the dynamical study of foliated manifolds and complex manifolds.Inventiones math-
ematicae, 36(1):225–255, 1976.
Department of Mathematics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90007, USA
Email address:julian.chaidez@usc.edu
Department of Mathematics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90007, USA
Email address:mshuang@usc.edu
