===== PAGE 1 =====
The universe is fine-tuned for technology, not
just life
Cosmological evolution selects for black-hole-creating universes
7th September 2026
 cite
Jeff Shainline | Founder and CEO at Great Sky and former staff scientist at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology.
2,126 words
Read time: approx. 11 mins
Enter Email Address
Sign me up
Related Posts:
The universe seems to be fine-tuned for life. Were nature’s constants even slightly
different, life wouldn’t exist. To explain this, scientists reach for bizarre ideas, like an
infinite multiverse. But physicist and technologist Jeff Shainline thinks we’ve been
missing a crucial clue. The universe isn’t just fine-tuned for life, but also for the
creation of technology – humanity itself is just one step in this longer evolutionary
process. He uses this observation to build a new case for an overlooked explanation
of fine-tuning: Lee Smolin’s proposal that universes reproduce through black holes
and, like organisms, evolve across cosmic generations towards fecundity. Life and
technology, Shainline argues, are not the point of the universe, but parts of its
reproductive strategy.
 
news
Home Philosophy Science Politics Arts Issue Archive
Sign
In
iai
Player
iai
News
iai
Live
iai
Academy
iai
Podcast
More  Search...  Subscribe

===== PAGE 2 =====
New theory of
information
physics could
solve
cosmology's
gravity crisis
Hawking radiation
and the messy
truth behind black
hole physics
The quantum
world reveals
reality is made of
relations, not
objects
Schrödinger’s
blunder created
the quantum
measurement
problem
Related Videos:
A deep puzzle has loomed over physics since the 1950s. The world we observe—
from sub-atomic quarks to lightyear-spanning galaxies—has the properties it does
because a short list of numbers takes certain values. These numbers are often
referred to as constants of nature (I will refer to them as parameters), and they include
quantities like the speed of light, the masses of fundamental particles, and the
strengths of the fundamental forces. The puzzle arises because these numbers have
very special values that allow life to exist. This is called fine-tuning. As an example,
life depends on carbon, and carbon is made in stars. But the specific process by
which carbon is made in stars is extraordinary, relying on a very peculiar coincidence
of properties involving electromagnetism, gravity, and the strong nuclear force that
causes alpha particles to fuse into carbon nuclei. If the parameters that describe our
universe were even slightly different, stars would not create carbon, and life as we
know it would not be possible.
It therefore appears that the parameters of the universe are fine-tuned to enable life to
exist. There are several proposed resolutions to this puzzle. One is a statement of
observer bias. According to this worldview, a vast number of universes with different
parameters exist, and we find ourselves in this particular one simply because it is
hospitable to our existence. This is referred to as the weak anthropic principle. Many
physicists accept this explanation, finding it favorable because it gives no special role
to life or humans, while many others find it unsatisfactory because it assumes a
possibly infinite multiverse and only explains our residence in that infinitude by
appealing to random chance. At the other end of the spectrum is the worldview that
there is some property of nature that necessitates the eventual existence of intelligent
observers. This is called the strong anthropic principle, and it asserts that our universe
must eventually produce life. A third explanation is theism, which states that an
omniscient, omnipotent deity selected these parameters during intentional creation,
perhaps specifically for the purpose of allowing life to exist. Under some forms of this
worldview, humans specifically are the reason the parameters take the values they do.
SUGGESTED READING
Fine-tuning points towards a cosmic
purpose
By Philip Goff
To many, none of these explanations is satisfactory, since they involve profoundly
improbable chance, or lack clarity as to why intelligence is required, or invoke a deity
controlling nature from outside. To me, they also miss an important piece of the fine-
tuning picture: fine-tuning doesn’t appear to be limited to life; the parameters of the
universe also appear to be tuned to support advanced technologies—a fact
completely missing from the anthropic principle, and one that I think points to the
resolution, as I’ll describe below.

===== PAGE 3 =====
LATEST RELEASES
Join the conversation
Sign in to post comments or join now (only takes a moment).
Time's great
mystery
Our future
theories of the
universe
Physics has
misunderstood
time
The trouble with
string theory
Want to continue
reading?
Get unlimited access to insights from the world's leading
thinkers.
Browse our subscription plans and subscribe to read more.
Start Free Trial
Already a subscriber? Log in
Gender equality and the
freedom trap
Activists don't need to win in
order to achieve their aims,
with Sophie Scott-Brown
AI taking your job isn't the only
problem, it's dividing workers
too

===== PAGE 4 =====
© The Institute of Art and Ideas
Get iai email updates
I would like to receive updates from the Institute of Art and Ideas.
Click Here
No spam ever. You can unsubscribe at any time with just one
click.
