===== PAGE 1 =====
8.251 – Homework 2
B. Zwiebach Spring 2007 
Due Wednesday, February 21. 
1. (10 points) Problem 3.1 
2. (10 points) Problem 3.2 
3.	 (10 points) Lorentz invariants and their densities. 
We want to understand how the Lorentz invariance of charge (all Lorentz frames agree on the 
value of the charge in a system) implies that charge density is the zeroth component of a Lorentz
vector.
Consider two Lorentz frames S and S′ with S′ boosted along the +x direction of S with velocity v.
In frame S we have cubic box of volume L3 with edges, all of length L, aligned with the axes
of the coordinate system. The box is at rest and is ﬁlled by a material, also at rest, that has
uniform charge density ρ0. In this frame the current density vanishes ⃗j = ⃗0.
Use the Lorentz invariance of charge to calculate the charge density and current density (cρ′ ,⃗j′) 
that describe the material in the box according to frame S′ . Verify that the values (cρ0,⃗0) and 
(cρ′ ,⃗j′) behave as four-vectors jµ ≡ (cρ0,⃗0) and j′µ ≡ (cρ′ ,⃗j′), in the sense that the quantities 
(cρ′ ,⃗j′) are obtained from the rest frame values (cρ0,⃗0) by a Lorentz boost. Write a formula for 
the current jµ in terms of ρ0 and the four-velocity of the box, and check that your result works 
both for frames S and S′ . 
4.	 (10 points) Lorentz transformation of electric ﬁelds. 
Consider two Lorentz frames S and S′ with S′ boosted along the +x direction of S with velocity v. 
We have a large parallel plate capacitor at rest in S, with uniform but opposite surface charge 
densities ±σ0 on the plates. The capacitor can be aligned in two ways: 
(i) With the plates along planes of constant y, so that the resulting electric ﬁeld E⊥ points in 
the y direction, a direction transverse to the boost. 
(ii) With the plates along planes of constant x, so that the resulting electric ﬁeld E‖ points in 
the x direction, the direction along the boost. 
Use the Lorentz invariance of the charge to calculate the electric ﬁelds seen by the observer 
S′ in both cases (i) and (ii). Thus derive and state the transformation rules that relate the 
ﬁelds (E⊥,E ‖) seen by S and the ﬁelds (E′ ,E ′ ) seen by S′ . Use the tensor transformation law ⊥ ‖
F ′µν = Lµ
ρLν
σ F ρσ to conﬁrm your result. For this purpose take Ex = E‖ and Ey = E⊥ and 
assume no other ﬁeld exists in the S frame. 
5. (10 points) Problem 3.8 
6. (20 points) Problem 3.9. 
1
