


Skip navigation
Search



Create


Avatar image
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of the Klein Bottle | Janna Levin
Curt Jaimungal
Curt Jaimungal
548K subscribers

Join


1.5K


Share

Ask

Save

72,505 views  May 11, 2026  Theories of Everything with Curt Jaimungal
SPONSORS:
Accelerate your efficiency. Sign up for your one-dollar-per-month trial today at http://shopify.com/theories
Go to https://vanman.shop/curt to get 15% off your order
Go to https://www.plaud.ai/curt to get a Plaud device today
I personally subscribe to The Economist. TOE listeners get 35% off the annual subscription. No other podcast has this! https://economist.com/TOE

Janna Levin — Claire Tow Professor of Physics and Astronomy at Barnard College, founding Director of Sciences at Pioneer Works, and co-host of Quanta's The Joy of Why — is one of those guests who makes you feel the universe is stranger than you feared. Working with Brian Greene, she's exploring whether the shape of hidden dimensions, specifically a Klein bottle, could explain why matter won the war against antimatter after the Big Bang — no fudged parameters required. The geometry does the work. The universe's lopsidedness isn't a mystery to be plugged in; it's a consequence of the space we're sewn into.

FOLLOW:
Spotify: https://open.spotify.com/show/4gL14b9...
Substack: https://curtjaimungal.substack.com/su...
Twitter:   / toewithcurt  
Discord Invite:   / discord  
Crypto: https://nowpayments.io/donation/TOE
PayPal: https://www.paypal.com/donate?hosted_...

TIMESTAMPS:
00:00:00 - Universe as Gödel Sentence
00:05:24 - Unknowable Initial Conditions
00:10:28 - AI and Non-Computable Consciousness
00:15:36 - The Hard Problem Paradox
00:25:25 - Klein Bottle Topology
00:32:04 - Pin Structures and Chirality
00:39:56 - Breaking Matter-Antimatter Symmetry
00:51:26 - Topology and Dark Energy
00:57:00 - Black Hole Information Paradox
01:07:04 - ER=EPR and Firewalls
01:13:37 - Black Holes as Particles
01:18:42 - Emergent Gravity and Holography
01:23:43 - Rejecting Physical Infinities
01:31:41 - Narrative Truth vs. Axioms
01:41:22 - Insomnia and Mathematical Madness
01:47:22 - Scientific Mysticism and Honesty
01:53:34 - Biological Morality and Advice

LINKS MENTIONED:
Janna's Substack: https://jannalevin.substack.com
Janna's Books: https://amazon.com/stores/author/B001...
Janna's Papers: https://inspirehep.net/authors/1000438
Pioneer Works: https://pioneerworks.org
Whales Don't Want to Go to Mars [Article]: https://jannalevin.substack.com/p/bil...
Black Hole Blues [Book]: https://amzn.to/4cPOcfr
A Madman Dreams of Turing Machines [Book]: https://amazon.com/dp/1400032407?tag=...
Gödel Incompleteness Theorems: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/go...
Gödel Numbering: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6...
Wave Function of the Universe [Paper]: https://isidore.co/misc/Physics%20pap...
Janna & Penrose at Oxford: https://jannalevin.substack.com/p/pen...
Hard Problem of Consciousness [Paper]: https://consc.net/papers/facing.pdf
Klein Bottle: https://mathworld.wolfram.com/KleinBo...
Klein Bottle Cosmology [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.23447
Brane-World Motion in Compact Dimensions [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1103.2174
Dark Energy & Extra Dimensions [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/0707.1062
Particle Creation by Black Holes [Paper]: https://link.springer.com/article/10....
BH Complementarity [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9306069
Black Holes: Complementarity or Firewalls? [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3123
Thermodynamics of Spacetime [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9504004
Most Abused Theorem in Math [TOE]:    • The Most Abused Theorem in Math (Gödel's I...  
Roger Penrose [TOE]:    • Roger Penrose: Quantum Theory Is Wrong, No...  
Roger Penrose [Part 2]:    • Roger Penrose: "My Crazy Idea That Explain...  
Neil Turok [TOE]:    • The Most Astonishing Theory of Black Holes  
David Chalmers [TOE]:    • The Quantum Simulation Hypothesis | David ...  
Brian Greene [TOE]:    • Cutting Edge Traversable Wormholes Researc...  
Leonard Susskind [TOE]:    • The Crisis in String Theory is Worse Than ...  
Ted Jacobson [TOE]:    • The Physicist Who Proved Entropy = Gravity  
Juan Maldacena [TOE]:    • The Unreasonable Effectiveness of AdS/CFT ...  

More links at https://curtjaimungal.substack.com

Guests do not pay to appear. #science
Janna Levin explores the geometric foundations of physics, investigating whether the early universe and initial conditions could be inherently self-referential. Through the lens of non-orientable surfaces and higher-dimensional topologies, Levin discusses potential explanations for matter and antimatter asymmetry while examining the limits of what can be proven within formal systems.
Summary

Ask
Get answers, explore topics, and more

Ask questions
Chapters

View all
Explore the podcast
Theories of Everything with Curt Jaimungal
290 episodes
Theories of Everything with Curt Jaimungal
Curt Jaimungal

Podcasts
Transcript
Follow along using the transcript.


Show transcript

Curt Jaimungal
548K subscribers
Videos
About

Twitter

Discord

Dedicated Subredddit
365 Comments
Nathan McKnight
Add a comment...

Pinned by @TheoriesofEverything
@TheoriesofEverything
1 month ago (edited)
- Go to http://vanman.shop/curt and use code CURT for 15% off your first order
- Let AI do the note-taking. Go to https://www.plaud.ai/curt to get a Plaud device today
- Accelerate your efficiency. Sign up for your one-dollar-per-month trial today at http://shopify.com/theories

11


Reply


3 replies

@das_it_mane
1 month ago
Monday morning work? Nope... it's Klein bottle time

38



Reply


3 replies

@antonmarini3662
1 month ago
I' ve had the pleasure of seeing Dr Levin speak and host at Pioneer Works multiple times, was a nice surprise to see her on the channel - this is awesome so far - this channel never fails to deliver :) Thanks Curt!

30



Reply


@JuBerryLive
1 month ago
im a bartender and i loved everything about this episode. thank you.

7



Reply


@GreatPiP
1 month ago
Dude, you're so sick!  Intro went crazy and then a guest who's confident and bold, with a real command of the english language.  I'll be searching for Janna Levin's work in the future.  Thanks, Curt!

9


Reply


2 replies

@Eko-9999
4 weeks ago
Soon after 25:05, Janna sarcastically says "let's not make more human beings" but seriously, we shouldn't make more human beings in order to prevent more suffering. #antinatalism

6


Reply


@russgeorge49
1 month ago
It's not a muffin recipe. what a great take-away

8


Reply


@nickiesat965
1 month ago
I don't know what is more fascinating about Janna - her English expressions or her Astronomy and Physics knowledge 

3


Reply


@libertykrueger1433
1 month ago
On the subject of Insomnia; I struggled with that only as a consequence of my combat experience in the U.S. Army. Part of my PTSD was something called hyper vigilance. That prevented me from sleeping until my body just wouldn’t cooperate anymore. Then I would crash for 4-6 hours and remain awake for another 72-78 hours until I crashed again. That was very unhealthy. I got a lot of help from a sleep specialist and eventually discovered a specific formula for maximizing the number of sleep hours I can achieve nightly. 
1: Consistent sleep schedule. Go to sleep and get up at the same time everyday. 
2: Be fatigued. Don’t attempt to go to sleep early even if you are tired. Pick a time where you are consistently fatigued and stick with it. 
3: Stay in bed until your scheduled wake time. Rise only for necessary bathroom breaks and keep lights off and one eye closed until that rise time. 
4: Limit interruptions and avoid anything that engages your brain fully. No radio. No TV. Absolutely no phone! In fact, don’t even charge your phone anywhere near your bedroom. 
5: No stimulants after noon. No coffee. No chocolate. Seriously there are a lot of them. Research the complete list.

2


Reply


@tonebuddha
1 month ago
One of your most compelling guests ever

3


Reply


@KRGruner
1 month ago
What a guest! She is very impressive. Outstanding discussion.

6



Reply


@unixguy-t5v
1 month ago
Strings  become a bottle.

5


Reply


@Gregzilla83
1 month ago
I've watched this three times now. Once to see what it was about, twice to try and understand a Klein Bottle, and three times because her vibe is just amazing lol. Like she'd be the smartest and funniest person at any party. She's gotta be great to work with

2


Reply


@Polydactica
3 weeks ago (edited)
This one was a real treat. Not only because Levin is such an awesome person (I loved her on Mayim Bialik's podcast as well!), but it was very cool hearing you two discuss insomnia. I have a non-24 sleep cycle, and I am either in bed sleeping at 5 P..M. or up all night. I think all this time, unable to sleep, causes one to be inside their mind. I think that's why we are such introspective people. Or, maybe because of our comfort in our minds this happens.

P.S. - this may be a weird comment, but she is the Aubrey Plaza of physics!

1


Reply


@Beerbatter1962
1 month ago (edited)
This was an awesome interview.  What a charming personality.  She is so well spoken and fluid with her discussions; it just flows along nicely.  Also, I chuckled at Hairy Black Holes, and the fact that crushing two donkey's together to form a black hole is indistinguishable from one formed by a collapsing star.  We must figure this stuff out in order to save the donkey's.  And the elephants for that matter (Wheeler).

4


Reply


@anpsinhasinha8499
1 month ago
Both the Anchor and the professor are outstanding

18


Reply


1 reply

@rayklloyd
1 month ago
Curt, you continue to set yourself apart from other podcasts. You’re securing top-tier guests and asking poignant questions. Thank you for everything you do. TOE is the only podcast that I make sure I NEVER miss.

3



Reply

·

2 replies

@marestreet4429
1 month ago
She is one of the most well spoken and intelligent people I’ve ever heard. Long live Dr Levin.

1


Reply


@MarkPatmos
1 month ago
"If you want the system to be the entire universe..." This is itself an axiom

3


Reply


@Asporez
1 month ago (edited)
Janna is great and she narrates her own audiobooks, I strongly recommend them all.

3



Reply

    
In this video



Chapters

Transcript
Search in video
Universe as Gödel Sentence
0:00
There is no general relativity. There is   no space-time. There is only the  quantum threads, the embroidery,  
0:05
the threads out of which you embroidered  this illusion of a continuous space-time.
0:12
Professor Janna Levin, along with co-author  Brian Greene, published two papers just last  
0:17
month exploring what it would mean  for our universe to be compactified   on one of the most bizarre objects in  the history of math, a Klein bottle.
0:26
This is a non-orientable surface  with surprising physical properties,   potentially explaining the origin  of matter. Matter that composes you.
0:36
Is this related to  self-referentiality and unprovability? On this channel, I, Curt Jaimungal,  
0:43
interview researchers regarding their theories  of reality with rigor and technical depth.
0:48
Most approaches to CP violation, the  matter-over-antimatter asymmetry that is   the reason we exist rather than annihilate,  put in that violation by hand as tuned  
0:59
parameters. Janna Levin's papers don't. The  geometry of the universe breaks the symmetry.
1:06
Today, we discuss what Gödel  has to do with the universe,   black holes as elementary particles,  and even ER equals EPR, piggybacking  
1:15
off of the previous Juan Maldacena  podcast on this channel as well. The question underneath everything is,  
1:21
what if the deepest laws of physics  are not laws at all, but geometry?
1:29
Professor, is the universe a  Gödel sentence about itself? So, this is something I've definitely  struggled with. I think the early universe,  
1:39
the creation of the universe, the idea  of setting initial data for the universe,  
1:44
all of that sounds really self-referential. It  sounds like the laws of physics are trying to  
1:50
say something about their own genesis. And that  ingredient, the self-referential ingredient,  
1:56
is kind of a flag that you might  be getting into Gödelian territory. I've never actually formalized this intuition,  though I talk about it occasionally,  
2:04
and occasionally I'll talk to somebody plausible  who can help me struggle through it. It's always  
2:10
good to have a collaborator. But  I haven't written it down yet,   in some sense. I haven't written down  that Gödelian expression. But it does  
2:19
seem to harken back to those original ideas  about there not being a theory of everything.
2:24
Ah, okay. Well, we've got to shut this interview  off right now, because that's the channel's name.
2:30
All right. You can add a question mark. Perfect, perfect. Now let's think about  this, because a Gödel sentence describes  
2:37
its own unprovability. So it's not merely a  self-referential sentence. Do you mean to say  
2:42
more like the universe may be a self-referential  sentence, or is there something Gödelian about it? Yeah, I think it's both. So let's just go back to  Gödel for people who haven't thought about it for  
2:50
a while. There was famously the liar's paradox,  which certainly Gödel would have been aware of,  
2:57
in which the liar says, "this is a lie."  So if it's a lie, it's true. If it's true,   it's a lie. And you have this  paradox that exists in language.
3:06
And I think metaphysicists were sort of  lightly, not overly concerned about this,  
3:11
but what Gödel did, which was to bring  this to absolutely the next level,   was to mathematize the idea. So he  moves from "this statement is untrue  
3:21
or a lie." He doesn't do that. He actually  formulates "this statement is unprovable."
3:26
And he mathematizes that concept. He says,  essentially, that there is a true statement  
3:34
about a proof belonging within an axiomatic  system that cannot be proven to be true,  
3:41
which is, of course, the claim of the statement. So the statement is true, but unprovable. And that  is not inherently paradoxical or inconsistent.
3:51
So Gödel says, look, I'm going to preserve my  faith in the consistency of this axiomatic system,  
3:58
but I did just show that not all true  statements, even in algebra, can be proven  
4:05
to be true. And that's fantastic. Now if you  look back at the time when he was doing this,  
4:11
the great mathematician Hilbert had made a call  to all mathematicians, not to prove all infinite  
4:17
true statements, which is impossible, but to  at least render the fairly obvious assumption  
4:23
that all true statements could be provable,  to at least ensure that that was the case.
4:28
And in fact, Gödel comes  along and does the opposite. So in some sense, Gödel's work doesn't talk  about paradoxes. It's perfectly consistent  
4:38
within mathematics. But it is nonetheless  stunning because it suggests that there can  
4:44
be no such thing as a theory of everything  for mathematics. You cannot prove some  
4:50
statements simply by marching through the  axioms of certain mathematical structures,  
5:00
that there are things, even among the  numbers, that we simply will never know,  
5:05
that we can't know, true  things that are unknowable. And I think that was a shock to  mathematicians, but also it should continue  
5:17
to interest physicists whose, of course, big  ambition is to have a theory of everything.
Unknowable Initial Conditions
5:24
So what can I do about the early universe  this way? Could it be that the early universe,  
5:31
somehow, the consistency  of the initial data and the   laws of physics are preserved? There are  relations that are true, but unprovable.
5:44
Now, could it be — okay, so two questions  here. You can take whichever one you like.   Could it be that the laws of physics or  the initial conditions are inconsistent,  
5:51
whatever that would mean? Okay,  so that's one horn, one question. And then my second question is,  what would the Gödel sentence,  
5:58
supposing this is true and more than just a  flowery analogy, what would the Gödel sentence  
6:04
of the universe's formal system be? Like the  sentences in a sentence in a certain language.
6:09
So I'd like to think that the laws of  physics and the universe itself and the  
6:15
way that the universe is crunching, possibly an  algorithm, crunching this initial data forever,  
6:22
that that is consistent. That is,  of course, the paradigm of physics.   If that's not consistent, then we've got  something really, really bad on our hands.
6:30
And I think Gödel would have said the  same thing about algebra. He said,   I'm going to accept the consistency, but  the unprovability, as opposed to saying,  
6:40
this is inconsistent. So I think it could be the  same thing, perfectly consistent laws of physics,  
6:47
just ones that don't allow us to prove  certain aspects of the initial conditions.
6:56
What would the statement be like? Again,  I've never really tried. So what Gödel did,  
7:02
which was so amazing, is he invented this code  where every symbol, every number, every operation,  
7:09
including a parenthesis, got a code, received  a numerical code. And so every proof could be  
7:19
mathematized as just a relationship among numbers.  Very simple algebraic relationship. So I've never  
7:28
gone to the depths of trying to actually do  this. But I mean, now you're kind of inspiring   me when we get off the phone not to go to yoga,  but instead to try to structure the sentence.
7:39
But I think if we look at "this  statement is unprovable," which is  
7:44
the kind of English translation of what  Gödel did, it would be something like,   "these initial conditions cannot be  predicted by the laws of physics."
7:55
Ah, okay. I would say that that kind of parallels  Gödel's structure. It is both self-referential,  
8:06
and it can be true but would  intrinsically therefore be unprovable,  
8:11
because you can't get to it  through the laws of physics. So, the laws of physics — it's usually  thought of as the laws of physics,  
8:18
and then we have initial conditions or boundary  conditions or what have you. And they're separate.
8:24
It's been a long struggle, yeah. If the Gödel statement is a statement  in the laws of, like, a law itself,  
8:30
then if it's referring to the boundary conditions,  it wouldn't technically be self-referential. I would say, if you're really talking  about the creation of the whole universe,  
8:39
you can't play that game. Like, I can  get away with it if I'm teetering a   ball on the top of a hill. And I say,  look, the laws of physics are Newtonian  
8:48
mechanics. And I'm externally to  that adding in the initial data.
8:55
But if I want the system  to be the entire universe,   I just don't think you can get away with that.
9:02
And I think that we felt the resistance about  why initial data is so strange when we want to  
9:11
apply it to the whole universe. That's been a long  problem people have thought about for a long time.  
9:16
Hartle and Hawking, principles for the initial  state of the wave function of the universe. Trying  
9:24
to say, maybe it's not a choice, maybe there's  not a range of initial data, there's only one   possibility, and the possibility is set by the  laws of physics. That seems more holistic to me.
9:34
I think we have an initial data  problem whether we like it or not,   if you're going to talk about the entire universe.  So that's why I think therein lies, at least...
9:45
And again, with Gödel's, once Gödel  proved this statement was unprovable,  
9:55
a whole slew of things followed, like uncomputable  numbers with Alan Turing. It was just the tip  
10:01
of the iceberg. Now we know that there's  an infinite set of uncomputable numbers,  
10:06
numbers about which we will essentially know  nothing. But they're numbers. They have facts   about them. But they're not numbers we can write  an algorithm to predict. They're not numbers about  
10:16
which we can know their intrinsic properties.  It's just simply a list of random digits. And  
10:22
the universe could be like this. The initial  data could just be the tip of the iceberg.
AI and Non-Computable Consciousness
10:28
Okay, well, let's talk about  Penrose, AI, and consciousness. Okay, fun. I just saw Roger — I like to call  him Sir Roger, although sometimes the British  
10:37
tease me for that because it's so formal.  Apparently, when someone is knighted,   you don't call them Sir Penrose, you call them  Sir Roger. And I think it's quite endearing to  
10:47
call him Sir Roger. But I saw him recently,  we had a conversation together at Oxford  
10:52
just in October, and he remains one of the  most interesting people I've ever known.
10:59
Great. I'll place a link to that on  screen and in the description as well. So, he also ties uncomputability to consciousness  
11:06
and says that AI is not conscious.  Computers may never be conscious. Now, you also take the view that AI, current AI,  
11:13
is not conscious, I imagine,  for a different reason. So,   I want to spell out where do you agree with  Roger and where do you diverge with Sir Roger?
11:20
Yes. Well, I'm not sure of all of his  dimensions in that. Last time I spoke to him,  
11:27
we were actually talking about black holes, in  fairness. But I think from my point of view,  
11:33
AI isn't yet conscious. I am not a person who  thinks consciousness is substrate-dependent.  
11:41
I don't see a barrier to consciousness in a  different material. That strikes me as really odd.
11:47
I can imagine it being way too hard for us to  simply algorithmically program. I can imagine  
11:52
that. I can imagine that this whole thing going  on with these biological systems took billions  
11:58
of years to evolve and are just very complex,  and so we're kind of stuck with biology because  
12:04
nature did this for us through evolution. But  I can't find a logical reason to preclude the  
12:12
possibility that it's conceivable that there  could be consciousness in a different substrate.
12:21
So I'm not against AI consciousness as a  possibility. I just believe we're so far off,  
12:29
even though I am stunned by  LLMs. They're incredible, man. And I'm not a big person using AI for  emotional nor intellectual support,  
12:40
but man, what a search engine.  It is unbelievable. This thing  
12:47
does talk to me. It won't stop using scare  quotes. I can't get it to stop doing that. What do you mean?
12:54
So anytime an LLM wants to  say something metaphorical,  
12:59
you'll find a lot of them will put quotes  around the word. And I keep saying,  
13:05
I understand what a metaphor is. You don't have  to keep putting a quote around this word. Like,  
13:10
the universe "chooses" — if we wanted  to say, the universe chooses a state,   it will put quotes around "chooses." I find  that I can't disabuse it from this habit.
13:21
Do you have custom instructions on them? So, I'm not that deep into it. I think I have  
13:28
tried that because this is  such a pet peeve of mine. I see. But anyway, I'm just a newbie in  some sense to this whole thing.
13:36
My pet peeve is it's not X, it's Y.  It's not that the universe cycles,  
13:43
it's that the universe does this and that.  It's so frustrating. And then the em dashes.
13:49
Right, the em dashes. I probably have a  bit of a bad habit with em dashes myself. Yeah, but that's because LLMs are  trained on you. You train the LLMs.
13:57
Right, right. I mean, there's a lot of things  to complain about the LLMs and what it's doing   to society, you know, and how people are less and  less original every day and more and more average.  
14:09
And how can we innovate if we're  simply copying ourselves frozen at   a particular moment in the history of  humanity? You know, all of this stuff.
14:15
But that's not the big questions. The  really interesting questions are these   ones about consciousness. And so  I guess what I feel about it is,  
14:24
if I think about human beings as being a  series of chemicals interacting according  
14:31
largely to electromagnetism — largely, right?  It's usually large molecules forming DNA, RNA,  
14:40
and proteins, and all of this stuff happening  just on the basis of electromagnetic interactions.  
14:46
Really basic laws of physics. At what stage  does that become human consciousness? Of course,  
14:53
one of the most tremendously thorny and  elusive questions that humanity's ever asked.
15:01
So I don't see why we're expecting the LLMs or  any AI for us to be able to solve that problem  
15:10
before we can solve this problem. Like,  we don't understand how this happened. I still cannot, in a laboratory, go from  molecules interacting electromagnetically  
15:21
to comprehending why there's  an interiority and a sense,  
15:27
an imagination that hallucinates the  color red. That absolutely evades us.
15:34
So as a physicist, where do  you stand on the hard problem? So David Chalmers is a good friend. It's funny  because David Chalmers has basically become  
The Hard Problem Paradox
15:46
superb at dismantling any attempts to  solve the hard problem. That's his job.  
15:52
He is this gatekeeper, and no matter  what solution you come at him with,   he's going to dismantle your  attempt to solve the hard problem.
16:00
Sometimes I have other friends in neuroscience  who think that it's just a total red herring,  
16:06
that it's just really not the question  we should be asking, and it's just silly.
16:13
It's the how question. So we  can say where, what, who, when,  
16:20
why. We can answer all of these questions  about consciousness somewhat. It's evolution,  
16:25
where it happened, where the  biological correlates are,  
16:30
and all of these things are answerable.  Nobody thinks that those are the hard problem. The hard problem is how. Like, how does a  photon hitting my eye and triggering some  
16:42
electromagnetic interaction along  some fibers result in me imagining,  
16:48
hallucinating the color red? Nobody knows  that. And nobody's come, in my opinion,  
16:56
anywhere close. And when people try, they're  really usually answering a why question.
17:02
Human beings evolved consciousness. Why?  Well, because our compute is low. We don't   have infinite compute. We struggle  to understand all of this data. So  
17:12
we evolved a mechanism to approximate really  quickly. I can, out of the corner of my eye,  
17:17
know it's a baby. Out of the corner of my  eye, I know it's a tree. Or a car is speeding  
17:24
at me. All of that consciousness is a really  good tool with low compute. This approximate  
17:32
hallucination I have allows me to survive and  very quickly with very approximate understanding.
17:40
And so I understand a lot of the whys. You can  talk about whether emotions are important or   the unconscious. All of this is why stuff.  It's all interesting. But none of it really  
17:49
explains how. How I have an interiority and  how I have this hallucination of the world.
17:55
And I think it's a fascinating and  wonderful thing. We're all obsessed with   our hallucinations of the world.  It's everything to us, right?
18:03
But I would say that I sometimes wonder a stronger  thing, which is if a machine has tremendous  
18:13
compute, like practically infinite compared to  us, will it need to evolve consciousness? Is  
18:21
there any reason why it would have to? Or can it  just continue to do perfectly well by pretending,  
18:29
by simulating consciousness the way an LLM  does, a large language model? And that,   I don't know, maybe consciousness is a crutch  AI won't need. And so it will never develop.
18:43
You know, I have a bone to pick with you. Oh, please. I can hang up  now and take my toys and go.
18:50
I subscribe to The Economist.  Their science and their AI coverage   is among the best I've found anywhere. And  I say that as someone who reads plenty of  
18:59
it. I'll give you some examples. They  just ran an analysis on how attitudes   towards science are changing in American  politics and what this means for research  
19:08
and funding in scientific institutions  moving forward. This sort of high-quality  
19:14
reporting is fantastic. They even covered  how dark energy may be weakening over time.
19:19
Now, if that holds up, it completely changes  our understanding of the universe's fate. If   you watch this channel, those are exactly the  kinds of questions that we explore every week.
19:29
I subscribe to The Economist because their  science and their AI reporting regularly   surprises me with how deep it goes. And they're  also, of course, known for global affairs,  
19:38
both political and economic reporting. They are  top-tier, and interestingly and flatteringly,  
19:44
TOE is one of the only podcasts  that The Economist partners with. So as a listener, you get an exclusive 35% off.  That's not a deal that they have just anywhere.  
19:55
Head to economist.com/TOE to subscribe.  That's economist.com/TOE for 35% off.
20:06
Do you think Dr. Squatch, Burt's Bees, or  Native are small wholesome operations? Think  
20:12
again. They've all been swallowed by private  equity. This channel, Theories of Everything,  
20:17
unlike other channels, is not owned by  private equity, and I'm glad that Van Man,  
20:22
today's sponsor, also has that as a value.  They're at the epicenter of the pushback.
20:27
Let's play muckraker for 10 minutes with their  ingredient list. Take a look at other brands'   ingredient lists, and you'll find the same  corporate slop wearing different labels.
20:36
Van Man started the tallow trend a few years  back with grass-fed tallow moisturizers,   and they've been crushing it since. You may have  noticed that Curt's been looking extra dashing and  
20:45
handsome lately. I've been using Van Man's tallow  cream, in fact, this one here. And I've been   using their sweet onion shampoo. I even love how  their packaging is a joy to open, look at that.
20:55
Now, here's the thing about tallow. The fatty  acids are nearly identical to the oils in your   own skin, so your body recognizes it. One use,  and you'll feel the difference. It's softer,  
21:06
it's smoother, there's no filler garbage. It  replaces lotion, night cream, wrinkle cream,  
21:11
even Neosporin and diaper balm. Actually,  right now I even have their lip balm on.   And it's not just for men, even though it's  called Van Man. My wife loves it as well,  
21:21
and when I put it on, I always go, "I'm Van Man." So whether you're a refined philosopher or an  artist or researcher in physics, it will assuage  
21:29
dry, cracked skin overnight. Powerful enough  to heal and safe enough to spread on toast.
21:35
Ready to ditch the corporate chemicals? Go to  vanman.shop/CURT and use code CURT, C-U-R-T,  
21:42
for 15% off your first order. That's  vanman.shop/CURT, code CURT. Van Man,  
21:50
real ingredients, no exceptions. I'm Van Man. I recently signed this book deal with Penguin.
21:57
Penguin is fabulous. Penguin is wonderful. Yes, yes. So in it, I made this analogy  to averted vision. And I haven't heard  
22:05
anyone make that analogy before. And  also, I have the characters of Gödel   and Turing as well. And then I see, oh  gosh, Janna Levin just beat me to it.
22:14
I gave a lecture a couple days ago  at the Mind at Large conference,   which is a conference on panpsychism. And  I was saying that, look, some phenomenon  
22:22
may be such that when you try to look  at it directly, it actually disappears.
22:28
Right.
22:56
And I think that's akin to looking at something  directly, not seeing it, feeling it in a sense by  
23:02
not looking at it, but then you try to make  it explicit and then it disappears. And then   I saw that you also made a similar  analogy and I was upset with you.
23:10
I'm so sorry. Yeah, that's in A  Mad Man Dreams of Turing Machines,  
23:16
where truth is just like that. You can see it,  but only out of the corner of your eye. And it  
23:24
disappears when you try to look at it directly. I  think it's a beautiful analogy for what happens.
23:30
What I was trying to do in A Mad Man Dreams  of Turing Machines is admit that you could   not get to the truth of the stories  of these lives in an axiomatic way,  
23:41
simply as though rolling from theorem to theorem,  listing biographical facts. I couldn't write,  
23:48
in other words, nonfiction and get  any closer to the truth about them,   in the same way that Gödel's true statement  can't be arrived at through theorems.
23:59
And I felt that that underscored sort of this  idea of, well, sometimes our human narrative,  
24:06
which destroys things in the process of  telling the story, is as close to the  
24:11
truth as you're going to get. You can only get  to it out of the corner of your eye, you know.
24:17
Yeah. So well, now I'm looking forward  to your book. Is it fictionalized? No, no, no. I wanted to bring people to  the frontier of physics because people  
24:25
keep thinking the frontier  of physics is string theory,   it's AdS/CFT. And I'm thinking that's 20  years, 30 years old. Like, what's the frontier?
24:32
As I was going through this, I was thinking, okay,   because I'm not a physicalist, but I'm  not an idealist either. I'm not a monist  
24:39
in the sense of any traditional sense  of the word, but I'm philosophically   homeless. I don't know what I am. I just am  unconvinced of all the mainline positions.
24:49
Well, there's always more to be done. I mean, it's  almost this idea that we should be re-approaching  
25:00
theories and ideas and saying them different  ways and each person having a unique approach.   You know, this idea that, oh, the novel's already  been written, there's no new novel. Of course,  
25:08
that's absurd. It's almost like saying, well,  let's not make more human beings because a   human being has already experienced the world.  So nobody else should experience the world.
25:15
And, of course, that's not what we actually  believe. We actually believe that each   experience of the world is unique and brings  something and experiences something unique.
Klein Bottle Topology
25:25
Klein bottles. Klein bottles, yeah. Well, I'm  a little obsessed with them.  
25:32
Can I show you? I have a little Klein bottle. Oh,   I should have brought my glass Klein bottle. I  have this. Can you see this little Klein bottle?
25:41
Yeah, yeah. I actually have a glass 3D Klein  bottle. So my friend's an artist,   Andrea Lauer, and she makes these  little things for me for various  
25:50
events I do or ideas I'm thinking about.  It's really kind of a fun collaboration. But this, of course, is not really the Klein  bottle. This is what the Klein bottle looks like  
26:00
if I force it to live in three Euclidean  dimensions. I have to really mess it up.
26:06
Okay. The Klein bottle, as it lives in two  dimensions without forcing it to embed in three,  
26:14
is a very symmetric object. It's very  symmetric. Now, some symmetries are lost,   but not all symmetries are lost.  So the idea of the Klein bottle,  
26:23
if it lives in just 2D, it can be a perfect  square, meaning it's as wide as it is high.
26:32
And I can't do that here. It's all messed  up. It looks like it's smaller and bigger.  
26:40
I've had to change the local  geometry in order to represent  
26:45
the global topology. But you can have  both if you stick in two dimensions.
26:51
So then you're really playing a  video game. The idea, for instance,   let's take the simpler structure, the torus.  In the torus, if you exit the right face of,  
27:02
let's say, a square, you re-enter the left face,  just like a video game. It's no big deal. You  
27:07
fly off one edge, you re-enter the other edge.  It's just a rule of how those edges are glued. You can do the same thing in the video game,  going off the top of the screen and re-entering  
27:16
the bottom of the screen, right? And if  I want to see what that looks like to me,   my three-dimensional self wants to say, well,  what does that look like? I want to lift it  
27:24
into three dimensions. I want to glue the sides,  make a cylinder. Then I want to take the ends of   the cylinder, and I want to glue those together  and make a donut. And I go, oh, look, the torus  
27:33
is a donut. But in doing so, I've changed  its local geometry. I've made it shorter on  
27:39
the inside and longer on the outside and shorter  around the donut part. And all of that's false.
27:44
All of that's a false projection of what  I did to force it to show me the object  
27:52
with which it is topologically equivalent.  So the surface of a donut is topologically  
27:59
equivalent to the real torus, but the real  torus lives just in two dimensions. I never  
28:05
lift up the sides. The real torus  can be equally wide as it is high. So the Klein bottle is just like the torus,  
28:12
except when I glue the sides together I twist  the sides by 180 degrees. So in other words,  
28:20
let's say this twist happens when you're going  out the top. If I go out the top, I come back in,  
28:25
and I have a left-handed glove. It comes back in  the bottom, flipped into a right-handed glove.
28:31
I'll be showing some animations on  screen over this, so don't worry. Okay, cool. Yeah, so that makes the Klein bottle.  It's completely compact. And it is  
28:42
what's called non-orientable because when  I go one journey around the Klein bottle,  
28:48
it's almost as though, because of this twist,  I've come to the inside of the Klein bottle.  
28:58
There's no real inside or outside. And if  I go back around, I'm on the outside again,   and that's a continuous surface, so it's as  though it has no well-defined inside or outside.
29:08
Okay, now the donut does. I can tell what's inside  the donut versus what's outside the donut. The   Möbius strip or the Klein bottle, which is the 2D  analog — it's not orientable in that sense. And  
29:21
because it has this funny left-right property,  if I take a left-handed glove one time around,   it's now a right-handed glove. It doesn't  fit my left hand anymore. I have to send  
29:30
it around the universe another time for  it to come back and now fit my left hand.
29:36
And they're just fascinating little spaces.  The original idea for working on them recently  
29:41
was I wanted to make a ray gun where you shot  left-handed particles into the Klein bottle. So  
29:52
you had a universe as we know it, three dimensions  of space, one dimension of time, large spatial  
29:57
dimensions, plus two additional dimensions  that were wrapped up into a Klein bottle.  
30:03
And those dimensions exist everywhere, but they're  hard to access because maybe they're small. Maybe  
30:09
we live on a brane. There could be various  reasons why we don't notice that they're there. Wait, sorry. Can you repeat that? What's  the structure of our large dimensions,  
30:17
and then where do the Klein  bottle dimensions live? Yeah, so at every point in our space, just like at  every point in our space there's up, down, left,  
30:25
right, forward, backward, there's also these  two other dimensions at every point in space,   and they're wrapped into a Klein bottle.  And so everywhere I am, in principle,  
30:35
if the bottle was large enough, I  should be able to stick my hand in   there and watch it come back right-handed.  My right hand will come back left-handed.
30:43
I see. But it's possible that it's just too small  for me to do that. And the common analogy  
30:49
is imagine you lived on a very, very,  very thin straw, and you were bound to   that straw. You might think the universe was  only one-dimensional. And it might take the  
31:00
whole other straw dimension inflating before you  realized, oh, wow, there's this other dimension  
31:05
that I live on that I could go round and round.  And if I make it big enough, I might even think   I lived on a flat plane. I might lose the  sense that I lived on a straw altogether.
31:15
So it could be that those dimensions are just  really small and we think we only live in three,   but we really have five spatial dimensions.
31:22
Got it. And maybe that's the reason, or maybe there's  another reason why we can't access them. Like,  
31:28
we're bound via some interactions  to the three-dimensional space,  
31:34
and that's like a brane. Sometimes that's called  a membrane, a high-dimensional membrane in this   five-dimensional space. And we're glued to this  membrane, so we just, even if that space is big,  
31:44
the Klein bottle's big, and our whole membrane  is moving through the Klein bottle. Our whole  
31:50
universe, all the galaxies, everything stuck to  this vast universe that we see is moving through  
31:56
this higher-dimensional Klein bottle. We just  don't even notice it. That is a possibility, too.
32:03
Yeah. So, firstly, physicists tend to not like  non-orientable surfaces because you can't  
Pin Structures and Chirality
32:09
put spin on them. You can put pin. So,  I want you to tell us the difference   between spin and pin and why this is  not as much of a concern as we thought.
32:19
Yeah. So we're not the originators  of the mathematics of pin structures,  
32:24
but spin structures are just a way that  people understood they could do things  
32:31
like put fermions or spin-half particles in a  universe. And this is what the Dirac equation  
32:40
describes for us. It describes the evolution of  a spinning particle in ordinary space. We don't  
32:48
put anything topological on it. We don't assume  it's finite. Just three nice dimensions. The Dirac  
32:53
equation was originally written in three plus  one dimensions, including time, four dimensions.
33:00
The problem with non-orientable  manifolds is people thought,   oh yeah, maybe you can't orient the  spin structure either. You know,  
33:06
there is an orientation to the spin structures,  and so maybe they just can't live there.
33:12
But it was shown that you have different  structures called pin-plus and pin-minus  
33:17
depending on the boundary conditions  for the fermion, meaning does the  
33:24
fermion field come back to itself on one  trip around the non-orientable space,  
33:30
or does it come back to minus itself? Because  that's not an observable, you can't tell the  
33:36
difference. So both are possible outcomes  of taking one full trip around the space.
33:43
And simply it's just been shown that those  structures exist, so there's a reassurance   that you can do the Dirac equation even on  these non-orientable manifolds. It is not  
33:51
an obstruction. You talked earlier about  obstructions. It is not an obstruction   to building fermions. So we know we can  build fermions. We have trouble building  
34:00
what's called chiral fermions. And chirality is  this left-handedness versus right-handedness.  
34:06
Chirality describes your handedness. And  we know that particles do come in a hand.
34:12
It's a peculiar thing that left-handed particles  interact weakly and that the right-handed  
34:22
counterparts behave differently. So we want to  be able to build left-handed particles because  
34:30
the laws of physics that we observe are partial  to left-handed particles. We don't know why.
34:38
But it turns out it's really hard to build chiral  fermions. So there are reasons why we kind of want  
34:45
to restrict the world that we observe to this  brane where we can have chiral fermions, where  
34:51
we don't have this problem of the left and right  being mixed up in these non-orientable manifolds.  
34:58
Because if you're a left-handed particle  and you travel into this higher dimension,   you come back right-handed. That seems really  bad because now you've broken something about  
35:07
the gauge symmetry, right? Because you've  broken something in a really bad way that's  
35:13
inconsistent. So we're trying to understand many  things about these higher dimensional spaces.
35:21
I thought they might do us some good in  that we could take left-handed particles,   shoot them into the extra dimension,  have them come back right-handed,  
35:30
and by their right-handedness  they would be non-interacting. Hmm.
35:35
And so I thought, oh, that's  kind of cool. You've made   something dark. You've made something  that was interacting, and you've made it  
35:43
non-interacting. So you've turned off, you've  made it dark. Or effectively, as I often say,  
35:50
and many people say, it's better to call things  invisible, because you've made them invisible,  
35:55
not dark. They don't cast a shadow,  they're just technically invisible. And I thought this was a really cool idea,  but instead what we got was something really  
36:04
different. And I really should say I have  the most fabulous collaborators in this. This  
36:09
is work with Brian Greene and Massimo Porrati,  who is just absolutely brilliant, a particle  
36:15
physicist and string theorist, and Dan Kabat,  just an incredible talent in particle physics   and string theory. And I'm sort of the space  person, you know. I call them my guys, you know,  
36:26
and it has been one of the greatest pleasures  of my research life to work with them and just  
36:36
run into the cloud of ideas and  try to find our way through. But yeah, so what we ended up  finding was equally really exciting,  
36:45
but completely unexpected, at least to us,  at least to me. I can't speak for them. Tell me about what you bring to the  table and what Brian brings to the  
36:53
table. What are the relative strengths of  everyone? What's your dish at the potluck?
36:58
You know, it's all different. Brian and  I have worked together for many years,   as have Dan and I, Massimo a couple of  years, just a wonderful collaboration.
37:07
Sometimes one of us just sees something  the others aren't seeing. It's just...  
37:14
we are all bringing different things, but it's  not stark. It's not like, this person calculated  
37:19
this section of the paper. It's not like that. So  everyone has a global view. In some more astronomy  
37:28
fields than in theoretical physics, people will  be, I did this data analysis, and I did these  
37:34
figures in this larger paper. I think for us, we  all have to have the whole view. And so what we're  
37:40
bringing for each other is sometimes challenging,  pressure testing the ideas. Each of us will bring  
37:47
different ideas to the table and we'll work on  them as a group. And I think sometimes you really  
37:53
want to be pressure tested by your collaborators  in your group and not go out there without having  
37:58
fortified your ideas and really crossed your  T's and dotted your I's, doing all of this.
38:06
A lot of what we're doing is pushing on it  and pressuring it. And then streamlining. I  
38:13
think for a long time we just didn't know what we  had. So you're going to your friends and saying,  
38:21
is this a mistake? I'm calculating this.  I can't get it to go away. Am I making  
38:28
a mistake? We all know lots of ways of  calculating. Do you see a calculational   error? Or do you see a different  way of doing this calculation?
38:36
And sometimes we'll have two different ways  of doing it and getting the same result,   which is really important. So  yeah, I would say that. And really,  
38:45
it's just a lot of fun to get together for a  few hours, and there's always some point where  
38:52
people will walk past my door, and we're all  in here, and we're all quiet. Nobody's talking.
38:59
Why? Because you're thinking? We're all thinking. And it's a really funny thing. Does it look tense from the outside? They  think you're upset with each other, or what?
39:07
I think physicists are used to this phenomenon,  but people who are not physicists remark on it.  
39:12
The strange phenomenon that you'll get together,  there's a flurry of talking, flurry of activity,   and then it could be 10 minutes of utter silence.  And no discomfort. Until somebody kind of picks up  
39:24
a piece of chalk and meanders over and says,  "Well, what if..." and it starts. But yeah.
39:33
So I think what has been interesting is  that what we discovered is that these spaces  
39:41
violate certain symmetries that you would  have had. So if you're starting with a  
39:48
two-dimensional sheet of paper before you've glued  it together, and that sheet of paper is infinite,  
39:53
so you imagine two extra infinite dimensions, you  should have this symmetry under translations. You  
Breaking Matter-Antimatter Symmetry
40:00
expect the universe to be the same wherever  you are, and you don't expect to have  
40:07
parity violation, which is this violation  of this handedness, this left symmetry  
40:12
gets broken. And something else subtly gets  broken. You can also break charge symmetry,   which says that the universe or the laws of  physics look the same for the particle and,  
40:22
let's say, the antiparticle. The topology can  break that for you. So it gives you something that  
40:32
we actually know we have, which is an asymmetry  between matter and antimatter that we don't know  
40:38
how to explain. We don't know why after the Big  Bang there weren't equal proportions of matter  
40:45
and antimatter, why those proportions didn't  come together and annihilate and obliterate into  
40:51
light and thereby leaving us an empty universe  devoid of certainly human beings, planets, stars.
41:01
And we've been trying to understand this,  why there's something instead of nothing.  
41:06
And actually, the Klein bottle is just a  simple example of a space where the geometry  
41:12
of the universe breaks the symmetry and can  preferentially favor matter over antimatter.  
41:20
It would explain why there's something instead  of nothing. So it does some funny things.
41:26
I remember the doubt before  launching this podcast. What   if no one listens? What if I'm wasting my time?
41:32
If you've ever felt that way about starting  a business, Shopify is the partner that turns   uncertainty into momentum. They power millions  of businesses and 10% of all U.S. e-commerce,  
41:42
from Allbirds to Gymshark to brands just  getting started. No straggler left behind.
41:48
Shopify's AI tool writes your product  descriptions fully and it enhances your   photography, it builds you a stunning store  from hundreds of templates. Forget about the  
41:58
dormative haze of bouncing between separate  platforms. Shopify puts inventory, payments,  
42:04
and analytics under one roof with the propriety  of a true commerce expert. Their award-winning  
42:11
24/7 support means you're never alone, and that  iconic purple ShopPay button — it's the backbone  
42:18
of their checkout, the best converting on the  planet, turning abandoned carts into actual sales.
42:24
It's time to turn those what-ifs  into wins with Shopify today.  
42:30
Sign up for your $1 per month trial at  shopify.com/TOE. That's shopify.com/TOE.
42:41
Half of my day is spent in conversations  and research, the other half is spent   trying to remember what was said and read.  That's where Plaud comes in. P-L-A-U-D.
42:51
I have far too many thoughts. I always tell myself  that I'm going to remember them and then I almost   never do. It's incredibly frustrating. But I've  been using Plaud for many months now, and it's a  
43:01
huge game changer. It's actually ridiculous.  I've noticed that this channel's output,   Theories of Everything — if you've also noticed  that it's increased in quality and clarity over  
43:10
the past few months, if it's improved at all,  Plaud is responsible for a non-trivial chunk  
43:15
of that. I would say something like a 5% gain  in thinking, and that workflow compounds fast.
43:21
If you're in knowledge work, you know  how valuable even incremental small 1%,   2% changes are. This trounces that. What I like  is that it removes friction. I'll use the Note  
43:30
Pin S when I'm walking, moving around, or  just thinking out loud. It's hands-free.   I don't have to look at a screen and I can  stay present with the world. I don't have to  
43:38
worry that I'm going to drop my phone. Then  I use Note Pro in more structured settings,   when I actually want to capture and organize  conversations more deliberately. So instead  
43:47
of ideas slipping away, everything is captured,  processed, and then turned back into something   usable. It's basically a system for extending  one's working memory into the real world,  
43:57
and if you know anything about intelligence,  intelligence is highly correlated with working   memory. So if your work depends on conversations,  research, business, medicine, law, this kind  
44:06
of thing matters far more than you'd expect.  They're also serious about privacy and security,  
44:12
SOC2, HIPAA, and GDPR compliant. If you want to  check it out, go to plaud.ai and use code CURT.
44:23
Now, does it just permit CP violations  or does it predict? Like, what would be   the difference between permitting and predicting?
44:29
Yeah. So I would say first we said it permits.  That's the first step. And there again,  
44:39
all kinds of different boundary conditions  you can impose and they all lead to slightly   different predictions. And so  some of the spaces predict this  
44:49
violation and some boundary conditions  won't, but you really just need one.
44:55
I just need one. And then to predict, I do think,  is another layer, because then you have to say,  
45:01
well, how do I interact with this higher  dimensional space? And now to have prediction  
45:09
requires more understanding of the cosmology. So  do all of our fundamental quantum fields permeate  
45:21
the higher dimensional space? Or are we stuck  to a brane? And so then these details start to  
45:27
become important in the actual cosmology of  how you convert the breaking of the symmetry  
45:34
into the cosmological consequence you want,  like there's more matter over antimatter. And  
45:40
that's... I wouldn't say it's a prediction.  I think you're trying to match a model to  
45:48
what we observe. So if I have a brane and  the brane moves through this Klein bottle,  
45:57
it interacts with this in a way that breaks  the symmetry, and so you're predicting the  
46:04
way the interactions are written. You  can predict all kinds of interactions,  
46:11
and the model will select values for  the... you'll be fitting your model to  
46:16
the observations kind of thing. So I'd say it's  not exactly predicting, it's allowing. Permitting.
46:23
I see. It is more permitting. And then the model  building uses that permission to do what it wants.
46:31
If I recall correctly, there was a  footnote about you weren't able to find   a pin-minus structure on the boundary  conditions with charge conjugation.
46:40
It was... yeah, with charge  parity, we weren't sure...
46:52
Yeah, even I can't remember the exact statement.   There's a famous line — do  you know this play, Proof? No.
46:58
It's a famous play. Tell me about it. It's about mathematicians, where the father in  the play is a Fields Medal-winning mathematician,  
47:08
and the daughter is following in his footsteps,  but nobody believes she's written her proof. Her   own sister doesn't really believe her, and  she says, "Well, here, I'll show you proof,  
47:18
I'll walk you through it." And she says,  "But you have to give me my notebooks." And   the sister says, "Well, why would you need your  notebooks if you wrote the proof?" She's like,  
47:26
"It's not a muffin recipe. I need my  notes to talk you through the proof."  
47:33
It's not a muffin recipe. So that's a great  line. So sometimes Brian and I joke about   that. It's not a muffin recipe. Who has the  notes? We've got to look at our own notes.
47:43
But yeah, for the charge parity, we couldn't  be sure that we had a minus boundary condition,  
47:55
essentially, that we can enforce a  minus boundary condition. We kept   getting the pin-plus structure.  It might be that there's just a  
48:04
phase that one could add. We're not  saying we've proven it can't be done. And what's the significance of that?
48:09
I don't think it's particularly significant. I  just think that the topology and the boundary  
48:16
conditions force you to use certain  spin structures. That's all we know.  
48:21
Maybe somebody who's worked on  the spin structures specifically,   really deriving them, would find  some big significance in it,  
48:29
but I think it might just be with charge parity  that you're forced to use a spin structure. I  
48:38
don't think... it's a little surprising.  We kept going around in a circle on it. So you just mentioned branes, and  people who are listening may know  
48:45
of branes from string theory. Are you  just borrowing a tool from string theory,   but this particular approach is not  string-contingent? It just uses a tool?
48:53
That's exactly right. Yeah. So I like to  say string theory requires extra dimensions,  
48:59
but extra dimensions don't require  string theory. And so, this could be any  
49:07
fundamental model that could have this kind of  dimensionality. The CP violation would be broken  
49:13
by the geometry. Nothing stringy about that.  Even brane worlds don't have to be stringy,  
49:19
though they did come — they were motivated by  the idea that beyond strings you had higher  
49:24
dimensional membranes, and maybe we'd be  stuck on one of these membranes. And that's   why we don't notice the extra dimensions, as  opposed to requiring that the extra dimensions  
49:33
be small. It's very clever stuff, but all of  it can migrate outside of the stringy context.
49:41
But the brane world was just a simple way to  show proof of concept by example. Just to say,  
49:49
look, I can actually show you that I can  calculate an asymmetry in particles if I  
50:00
invent a coupling where they live on a brane.  And as the brane moves through the Klein bottle,   it gets these bursts of particle production.  And it notices where it is in the Klein bottle  
50:10
because some of the symmetries have been lost  of the space. And it was really just a way of   showing how you could get particle production  and how you could get the main ingredients  
50:20
that are required for creating matter over  antimatter. But you don't necessarily need  
50:28
a brane scenario to do it. It was just a very  clean demonstration of how to exploit the fact  
50:36
that these topological spaces could be  CP-violating, charge parity-violating.
50:42
I see. Yeah. It was just a demonstration. Yeah. Okay, so let's see if I got this correct.  You're not claiming that our four dimensions,  
50:50
our three plus one, is a Klein bottle.  You're saying that our potentially five  
50:55
plus one, with the extra two dimensions, is  somehow a small Klein bottle. I mean, well,  
51:01
you were actually thinking, how can I violate  CP symmetry? Okay. And then this is one way.  
51:08
You're not saying that this is necessarily  how the universe is. You're using this as   a tool. And you're concerning yourself with  CP violation because you want to know about  
51:16
baryogenesis. And there are three conditions.  And so one of the main conditions that has  
51:21
been unsolved is about CP violation. Is  that roughly correct or am I off track? That's roughly correct. No, no, you're... I think  that's about right. There's a bigger picture. One  
Topology and Dark Energy
51:30
is saying those large dimensions that we live in  could also be topologically wrapped up. We just  
51:39
don't know it because it's so big. The universe  is so big that we're just unaware of that. So I  
51:45
think that there are multiple things beyond the  CP violation that the extra dimensions can do  
51:50
for you. So having the extra dimensions, Klein  bottle being a simple example, could do things  
51:57
for you like give you dark energy, which is  something that we had talked about in previous   papers. And the way it can do that is because  a small space has a quantum energy associated,  
52:08
again, with the topology of the space called the  Casimir energy. And this is a well-known result.  
52:13
We can see Casimir energies in the laboratory  by trying to confine two electromagnetic plates.  
52:22
We find that there's a pressure between them  because of the difference in the energy between  
52:27
plates where there's a boundary because of the  plates versus if there were no plates. That's  
52:32
called a Casimir energy. You can trap energies by  forcing a boundary condition. And topology forces  
52:39
a boundary condition on the vacuum in such a  way that it creates a quantum energy that is  
52:46
different than you would have in infinite  space. So it can create a quantum energy.  
52:51
That quantum energy would be felt everywhere.  And that is what we think of as a dark energy.
52:57
Dark energy is this weird vacuum  energy that's felt everywhere. We   don't know why it has the value it has.  But it could be that extra dimensions  
53:08
are a way of trapping that energy  for you. So it could give you dark   energy. There's reasons to think it could  contribute to dark matter models as well.  
53:19
That excitations in the extra dimensions could  be acting as kind of dark matter particles.
53:27
It could also be, as we found here, that the same  mechanisms are also giving you the CP violation  
53:34
and explaining matter over antimatter. So it's an  all-stop shop. Potentially. And this ray gun — is  
53:44
that a pipe dream or was that an actual...  you were hoping to make it an experiment? We... I think we can shoot left-handed particles  and have them come back right-handed. I don't  
53:53
think those particles can be the dark matter for  subtle reasons, having to do with being unable  
53:59
to make chiral fermions in the higher dimensions.  So anything that can go into the extra dimension  
54:06
left-handed can come out right-handed. That I'm  confident of. And the space can do that for us.  
54:12
And thereby, you might say, oh, it makes  something dark. But then we would say, oh,   we have a problem making chiral fermions  that interact in a chiral gauge theory  
54:22
at all because they're always mixtures of  left and right. They're always mixtures.
54:27
So I can't make them only left and only interact  left-handed. And so that problem is a problem.  
54:37
So I think it works. We had more problems than  we solved with that particular... But again,  
54:48
it doesn't have to be a Klein bottle. It could  be a different topological space that breaks CP   violation. So I think the idea is that it's  more general than any specific claims about  
55:00
the specific space. It's a general result in  that sense. In other words, the shape of space  
55:07
might have a lot to do with the universe that we  live in. You know? It's just pretty interesting.
55:13
Is the shape of space what's exciting you  right now? Is that where your mind is at?
55:18
I have always loved that topic. I think we  could also say something like, we'll learn  
55:26
what the geometry of the large dimensions must be  by looking at the shape of the small dimensions.  
55:32
That's also very exciting. The idea that maybe in  the early universe, there was a democracy of these  
55:38
finite dimensions. And what we're really trying to  understand is why did three spatial dimensions get  
55:44
so big? And the others, however many there may be  of them, stayed small or inaccessible. And that,  
55:54
if there is this causal relation between why the  other dimensions are small and why these are big,  
56:02
it might mean that we could, by probing  particle physics, understand the shape  
56:07
of the universe on the largest scales. That  stuff, I thought, has always been exciting.
56:12
I am thinking about it some more because I think  that this topic has given us a lot of really  
56:21
interesting results that are potentially  very fruitful for cosmology. So yeah,  
56:29
I'm still thinking about some offshoots of that.  But I also do black holes. I think the joke for  
56:35
me is that when I work on black holes, for me  that's like concrete reality. I'm being practical.
56:43
Yes, yes. So sure, I'm still thinking about black holes. So  why don't you walk us through some of the recent  
56:49
results in, say, black hole information,  like the Page curve or the island formula?
56:56
Well, I know less about the island formula, but  I'm sure your audience has heard about this a lot.  
Black Hole Information Paradox
57:01
But I think it's always for internal consistency  worth sort of stating the problems. The problem,  
57:10
of course, being Hawking's provocation that  black holes, just by doing a little sprinkling  
57:17
of quantum mechanics just outside a black hole,  not doing anything dramatic like quantum gravity  
57:22
— just this has got to be true — a little bit of  quantum mechanics on a mildly curved space-time.
57:30
And black holes are mildly curved if  you make them big enough. I think that   surprises people. But it's the same as  saying the Earth, when it's really big,  
57:38
looks flat locally. The bigger it is, kind of  the less you notice the curvature. So you're  
57:43
in this mildly curved region around a big black  hole and you have a little quantum mechanics.   And the black hole steals one of the particles  that come out of a quantum vacuum fluctuation.  
57:56
And it doesn't sound like such a big deal. It's  perfectly consistent with quantum mechanics.
58:01
If we want to take a step back even from  there, we can say, look, the Heisenberg   uncertainty principle tells us that I can never  know for sure where a particle is exactly,  
58:13
but that also means I can never know for sure that  it's not there. So Heisenberg uncertainty seems  
58:20
to require the possibility of particles kind of  frothing around. So I can have empty space, but by  
58:27
Heisenberg uncertainty, I can make a particle and  its antiparticle, an entangled pair, in precisely  
58:33
such a way that they cancel each other's details  so that they can go back to the vacuum again. What  
58:40
I can't do is make a particle with spin a half  and a pair that has spin one. I can't do that  
58:45
because they can't cancel each other. I have  to make a half up with a half down. They can   cancel each other. Spin goes away. Positive charge  with negative charge. They can cancel each other.  
58:54
Charge goes away. But they have to be paired  so that they neutralize each other perfectly.
59:00
This is perfectly consistent with what we mean  by a vacuum. It doesn't necessarily mean it's   exactly empty. It doesn't necessarily mean it  has no energy. It really means that on average,  
59:10
it's got no charge, no spin, no color, you know.  So anyway, a particle-antiparticle pair comes up.  
59:17
The black hole can steal either one. It doesn't  matter if it's the particle or the antiparticle.   And it can steal it in such a way that the  other one is left outside of the event horizon,  
59:28
no longer has its pair. It can't neutralize.  It can't get rid of its charge or its spin or  
59:35
any of its other details. It can't go back to  the nothingness from whence it came. And so now  
59:40
it lives. It's stuck. It's stuck out here now.  And that particle escapes to infinity, far away,  
59:47
and some observer from far away sees  this particle. Maybe it's a photon.   Maybe it's an electron. Maybe it's  a positron. And it says, oh my gosh,  
59:54
the black hole just radiated a particle,  because that's kind of what it looks like. Right.
1:00:00
But from the black hole's perspective, nothing  came from inside. This is crucial. So whatever  
1:00:05
went into the black hole is not making it out.  And that's a disconnected story, according to  
1:00:11
the original story that Hawking was telling.  And now you have the following provocation,  
1:00:17
which is that, look, eventually the black  hole is shedding its mass as it's absorbing  
1:00:23
these particles. And we can talk about why it  gets less massive and not more massive when   it absorbs these things. I'll talk about that  in a second. But it will get less massive. The  
1:00:32
energy will be conserved. But eventually  the curtain is yanked up. The black hole   has evaporated. It's given off all of its  mass to this form of Hawking radiation. And  
1:00:43
the curtain's gone. The event horizon's  gone. And if the event horizon's gone,   I'm no longer protected from this terrible  confusion about what happened inside the  
1:00:52
black hole. I should be able to see what happened  to all the stuff that fell into the black hole.
1:00:59
And it seems this great crisis that the stuff  that went into the black hole seems to be gone,  
1:01:05
but it's not the same stuff that was radiated  away. Those were two separate things.   And this is what led to the famed information loss  paradox. Quantum mechanics says you cannot destroy  
1:01:16
information. What happened to the stuff that  fell in? It's not in the radiation that came out.   That's really bad. And general relativity says,  well, nothing can get out of the event horizon.
1:01:27
So by the time the event horizon is  yanked up, it's too late. The stuff,   you know, it's over. So nothing can make it out.  So this leads to a real conflict, a real paradox.
1:01:37
Well, so this is all very interesting  stuff that everyone's thinking about now. So the standard story is that there's some  event horizon, let's just imagine it as a wall,  
1:01:47
and the black hole, the black holiness is over  here, and nothing can come out, but then the  
1:01:52
regular space is over here. And that there  is some pair production that occurs here. And  
1:01:58
from the outside, we see something come out of the  black hole. But from the black hole's perspective,  
1:02:03
something just falls in. So why would it be  that the black hole is evaporating rather   than getting larger? Because from the black  hole's perspective, more is just coming in.
1:02:11
Right. Sometimes you'll have people say, oh, it  absorbed the negative mass particle. That's   not right. There is no negative mass particle.  It's not absorbing negative mass and thereby  
1:02:19
getting lighter. But the difference is that time  and space, in some sense, have switched place.
1:02:25
So from outside, I might say that's a positive  energy particle, my pair, that fell in and it  
1:02:32
was directed spatially inward in momentum. But  because of the relativity of space and time in  
1:02:38
the interior of a black hole, you say, oh no,  that negative momentum is a negative energy. I  
1:02:44
call that the time direction. I call the direction  which it's moving the time direction. And it is  
1:02:49
imparting negative energy. What you're calling  negative momentum, I'm calling negative energy.
1:02:57
That's totally fine. So you don't have negative  mass particles. You haven't violated anything.  
1:03:03
It's just the relativity of energy and momentum  directly reflects the relativity of space and  
1:03:08
time. And so you actually absorb, in your frame  of reference, in the interior of the black hole,  
1:03:15
a negative energy, and the black hole gets  lighter. So it's completely consistent. Yeah.
1:03:24
Do you have a preferred resolution to the black  hole information paradox? Or do you not even see   it as a problem? So for instance, Sir Roger, when  I spoke to him about this, he said, why do people  
1:03:35
put up so much of a fuss? Maybe information is  destroyed in black holes. I see no reason why not. Yeah. He's not the only one. I think the  relativists tend to be like, I can live with that.  
1:03:51
And the particle physicists are the ones who say,  I cannot live with that, and nor should you be   able to live with that. You should not. I don't  care. You should not be able to live with this.
1:04:00
I think there is definitely a resolution.  I don't think it's just, ah, information's   destroyed and it's no big deal. I don't think  that's the case at all. And I think, in fact,  
1:04:09
it's this gift we have. It's like the siren  song. It's like the two laws that we love so  
1:04:14
much are signaling their demise and telling  us where to look. They're guiding the way.
1:04:21
So I think it is the most wonderful direction  for fundamental physics. I don't think it's a  
1:04:26
waste of time. But I think that the answer  — and I'm not actively working on this,  
1:04:32
although I'm mostly just chatting with people  about it, but I'm observing from afar — I think  
1:04:38
the answer to this will really be a big deal.  It will really be a big deal. And we are already  
1:04:45
seeing that in some of the ideas that are floating  around, which I suspect are probably right. Lenny  
1:04:50
Susskind's holography, Juan Maldacena's AdS/CFT.  These are all, I'm sure, on the right path.
1:04:59
But if you take a step back and you say, we  still don't nitty-gritty have the answer,   what it seems to suggest is that — and this  is even harder in the context of what we were  
1:05:09
just talking about — we can't even trust the  dimensionality of the universe as a firm fact.  
1:05:17
Holography says it might look three-dimensional,  but really you only need two. And all of this is  
1:05:22
an illusion. And it is granted that the two  can be interpreted in a different language  
1:05:28
as though it's three, but you only really need  the two. And this is what AdS/CFT is all about,  
1:05:35
the anti-de Sitter space and  the conformal field theory. I think the answer is that I might have a universe  in a box, but it's exactly translatable into  
1:05:43
a universe just on the lower dimensional  boundary. Those are equivalent worlds. So  
1:05:52
I think the things it's saying about the nature  of reality are really big things. It's not like,  
1:05:58
oh, now I know how to quantize the metric. Now I  know what the indivisible unit of space-time is,  
1:06:05
and now I can just do normal quantum  gravity. I don't think we're going   to get quantum gravity. I think  we're going to get something else.
1:06:12
And that's why I love watching that. Yeah. Let's linger on black holes. So you said  something — if I'm recalling correctly,  
1:06:20
and as you know, I haven't had much  sleep the past couple weeks. I'm   in a horrible bout of insomnia,  which you've also suffered with.
1:06:27
Yeah, so sorry about that. Oh yeah. We'll talk about that later on. If  anyone's listening and you're going  
1:06:32
through something similar, we'll get to that. Yeah. Some practical tips from Janna. You've  solved it. You told me. You promised me.
1:06:40
Oh, I have not. You can cure me. Okay. But if I recall correctly, you said  something about, you've dismissed fuzzballs  
1:06:46
or soft hair and firewalls, if I recall  correctly. Oh, yeah. And that ER equals EPR  
1:06:51
cannot follow the chalk or doesn't follow chalk.  Something like that. I would pick those apart. So I would say, I think there's something to  ER equals EPR. And I'm not going to go into  
ER=EPR and Firewalls
1:07:04
great detail because I don't think it's there yet,  either. I think even the people who I'm learning   this from are struggling to formulate it in a  more precise way. So I'm not going to pretend I'm  
1:07:14
going to do better than that. But I think there's  something to ER equals EPR. The idea being that,  
1:07:20
oh, maybe when I entangled a particle with  its pair that fell into the black hole,  
1:07:28
that that thing that fell in is,  like, by a wormhole actually also   the particle on the outside. And so now  those being entangled too isn't violating  
1:07:37
the monogamy of entanglement. Like, I think  there's something there, got to be honest.
1:07:45
But firewalls are a little bit different.  Firewalls are what provoked people like Lenny  
1:07:51
Susskind to think harder again about something  that they thought they had made real progress on.
1:07:59
So, for Lenny for a while, I think —  and again, I don't want to speak for  
1:08:05
him. Lenny can be really intimidating, so  I don't want him yelling at me or anything.
1:08:10
I spoke to him on the podcast, actually. He's so wonderful. He's one of  my favorite people. And just   such a dream to talk to. I mean,  what an imagination that man has.
1:08:20
Why is he intimidating? What do you mean? Oh, I just, you know, he can get really  hot-tempered. So he talks about like how  
1:08:29
pissed he was at Hawking for having  suggested Hawking radiation. I mean,  
1:08:35
he literally describes being pissed  off, like he was in a bad mood,   you know, which is kind of funny  but also passionate, you know.
1:08:44
Yes, yes. He said a lot of people didn't think it was a  big deal, but right away he was in a really bad  
1:08:49
mood about it. And I think 't Hooft also  took it very seriously originally. But  
1:08:56
I think Lenny's ideas of complementarity  — that oh, maybe it's not such a big deal,  
1:09:01
that you have complementary observables, that  I can't simultaneously know the momentum of a  
1:09:07
particle and its location and they're  complementary, we've learned to live   with this stuff. So maybe simultaneously the  information falls in according to an observer  
1:09:16
that crosses the event horizon, but not to  an observer on the outside. And it's not a   big deal because there's nobody who can raise  the complaint. Nobody can file the complaint.
1:09:25
So this idea of black hole complementarity, I  think Lenny felt really confident about it. And  
1:09:30
then when people like Polchinski came along and  started talking about firewalls, he just thought  
1:09:37
they were wrong. And then again, he was really  pissed off when he realized they had a point.
1:09:46
And I'm trying to think of how to  express the firewall point. Basically,  
1:09:52
they argued because a particle  has to be entangled monogamously,  
1:10:00
you can either entangle it with the pair that  came out of the vacuum that needed to neutralize,  
1:10:22
or you can entangle it with the Hawking radiation  that's already gone out. But you can't do both.  
1:10:28
And that's the monogamy of entanglement.  And so there are additional constraints,  
1:10:34
which I don't think we should belabor. But  essentially, even in Lenny's formulation,  
1:10:43
the pair couldn't then also be entangled with  the one that was created out of the vacuum. So  
1:10:49
it meant that the vacuum had to be messy. So if  you can't be entangled with the thing you came out  
1:10:55
of the vacuum with, you can't neutralize. If you  can't neutralize, you're not empty, regionally.
1:11:02
You are a mess. You're a hot  mess. You have charges. You   have spins. You have particles.  Because they're not neutralizing,  
1:11:10
I think is one way of saying it.  That's my big shortcut to saying it. And I don't think firewalls are true. I think  that they're just too outrageous. It would mean  
1:11:18
that even relativity at a very non-quantum scale  would have to have firewalls. And I just don't  
1:11:27
think that can be the case, that there's a  blazing hot region outside the black hole.
1:11:36
Now, I think there are — maybe even Lenny  does this too. Lenny would say, well,   I think a firewall is a little different.  What I think is you would see a firewall if  
1:11:44
you resisted your fall into the black hole. So  let's say you're accelerating like hell so as  
1:11:51
not to fall into the event horizon, then you are  going to see a firewall. It's a firewall because  
1:11:58
you're not in the vacuum state yourself. You're  resisting. You're not in free fall in the natural  
1:12:03
vacuum there. You're actually, you know, if you  brought a detector, you're waving your detector   around like crazy under this acceleration trying  to fight the black hole. So yeah, you're detecting  
1:12:13
a lot of particles. But, you know, so you see a  firewall. So there's a lot of different ways to  
1:12:19
talk about the firewall. That argument, I would  say, yeah, I would say you would see a firewall.
1:12:25
But you don't want the observer who's  falling gently across the event horizon,   who's not resisting, who's in free fall, who's  not experiencing any forces, who's not firing any  
1:12:35
fuel — you want that person to have an experience  of no drama as they cross the event horizon. And  
1:12:42
I think that indeed that is what one wants. And  so that's why people started saying, oh my gosh,  
1:12:50
maybe there's some way of entangling the interior  to the exterior and making the outer particles  
1:12:56
that they have to be correlated with the same as  the ones that they're correlated with, so there's   no violation of the monogamy. Yeah. Something  about that seems to me to be interesting.
1:13:08
But you know, when I talk about black holes too,  sometimes I'm just doing astrophysics. I mean,  
1:13:13
sometimes I'm just like, there's a black hole  in the galaxy that collapsed from a star. And  
1:13:20
that's what I mean by being really concrete. Those  guys are real. And observers can look at them.
1:13:26
Yeah. Okay, let me be non-concrete. Let's imagine  you had a black hole gun. So not a ray gun,  
1:13:33
just a tiny microscopic black hole gun. What do  you think would happen in your Klein model if   you shot a black hole into one of these small  dimensions? Does anything interesting happen?
Black Holes as Particles
1:13:43
I wish I could say it's a simple thing  to calculate, because even the black  
1:13:48
hole metric I have to rethink in the Klein  bottle. Because the black hole metric that  
1:13:54
we're accustomed to doing has an asymptotically  flat space at infinity. And so a lot of people  
1:14:00
have done black holes in higher dimensional  spaces. It can be tricky. It's not just a  
1:14:06
given like a marble. I threw a marble in the  space. So it helped to first of all see — It's not a muffin.
1:14:12
It's not a muffin recipe. Not throwing a muffin  in there. So can I make a 3D black hole? Is it a  
1:14:21
5D black hole? Does it have an event horizon  in all five directions? Or does it only have  
1:14:28
an event horizon in three? Like, I'm already  like, oh, I've got a lot I have to think about.
1:14:34
So, it sounds like an interesting thing to try.
1:14:39
Even though black holes are extremely  complicated, they're quite simple in   many respects. They're characterized by just a  couple numbers, like mass and charge and spin. So,  
1:14:49
also particles are characterized by just a few  quantum numbers. So, do you think black holes  
1:14:55
should appear on the particle spectrum? And then,  if not, then where does this analogy break down? It's a great question. I absolutely do think they  should. I think black holes being an interesting  
1:15:05
terrain on which to understand quantum gravity  or the information loss paradox is not just a  
1:15:11
coincidence. It's because there's something  fundamental about black holes. They are somehow,   I believe, part of the original ingredients of  the universe. And I think exactly what you said  
1:15:22
is true. What does it mean to be an electron?  It means exactly its quantum numbers. It's  
1:15:28
charge. It's mass. It's spin, whatever list you  want to add to that to make it an electron. And  
1:15:34
that's the only thing an electron is. It has  no other detail than that. You cannot say, oh,  
1:15:42
the electron in my body is somehow different  than the electron in an asteroid. They're  
1:15:48
interchangeable. And that interchangeability  is what we expect of a fundamental particle.  
1:15:54
And it's very odd that black  holes have that property as well. I think they can have a whole continuum of  masses and spins and electric charges. So  
1:16:05
that might seem a little different, but really  the fact that every single black hole with a   given set of numbers — charge, mass, spin —  is indistinguishable by the definition of the  
1:16:16
event horizon. It has no features. It can have no  hair. That's the statement. It can have no hair.  
1:16:22
No details about the interior of that black  hole can be expressed except its charge,  
1:16:27
mass, and spin. And that makes them  feel like fundamental particles. I think black holes were already telling  us something about themselves even when we  
1:16:36
looked at pure relativity, because that's  a result from pure relativity that they   are featureless. They're timeless and they're  featureless. If I turn off quantum mechanics  
1:16:45
and Hawking radiation and I just think  about general relativity, they do not age.  
1:16:52
They are utterly timeless in the same way  an electron is utterly timeless. Now they   can get heavier. That's true. There are  processes. But left to its own devices,  
1:17:01
there's no clock. There's no watching that thing  and seeing what's happening. How long has it been  
1:17:06
there? Or is it different than this one? This one  was formed by a star and this one was formed by,  
1:17:12
you know, crushing donkeys together. Like, there's  no way you can tell these details about it.
1:17:18
And so I think that it was reasonable to suspect  that in the early universe a primordial black   hole would form, or a spectrum of primordial  black holes will form in the early universe.  
1:17:27
I think that's completely reasonable to  expect. There are stars. A black hole is  
1:17:32
not a dead star. A dead star is just a way  nature figured out how to make a black hole.  
1:17:39
But there are other ways to make a black  hole. Maybe at accelerator experiments.   Maybe particles crashing together naturally  at high energies. Maybe the Big Bang. Yeah.
1:17:52
Is there something more to this analogy? Because I   imagine that there are two  disanalogies that occur.
1:17:59
One is that for a particle, you want  there to be a field that corresponds,   like an electron field or a Dirac  field or what have you. There's no,  
1:18:06
as far as I know, a black hole field  that creates or annihilates black holes. And then second, the black holes  have extreme entropy. So it's like  
1:18:15
they have some microstructure. They have  something else going on. And particles,   as far as we know, don't. So do you  see those as insurmountable or what?
1:18:24
No, I think both of those things is what marches  us towards the information loss paradox. Right?  
1:18:31
It's precisely its entropy that is reflected by  its temperature, and it's because it's hot that  
1:18:39
it's emitting particles. We can think of it that  way. And so it already was marching us towards  
Emergent Gravity and Holography
1:18:45
something, marching us towards the information  loss crisis. But it doesn't seem like the answer  
1:18:52
is, oh, it's just made up of a bunch of stuff on  the inside and that stuff eventually comes out.  
1:18:57
So I think it's saying something really strange  about thermodynamics and really strange about  
1:19:06
gravity being fundamental. I would be  less surprised if you told me gravity   is not fundamental. And that's why there's no  fundamental field. And that's why the black  
1:19:17
hole is not an excitation about a fundamental  field. It's because it's only quantum mechanics.
1:19:24
Interesting. Now, there are some  people, some of your colleagues,   I'm sure, who don't believe gravity's fundamental.
1:19:30
Yeah. I think a lot of these people know. Yeah.  So what are your conversations with them like?
1:19:36
I think the answer is to look  to somebody like Ted Jacobson,  
1:19:43
who was doing extremely interesting work  about thermodynamics of black holes. And who,  
1:19:50
unless I'm projecting or misinterpreting,  very early on was saying things like,  
1:19:57
maybe it's not fundamental. I mean, after all,  whenever you're in a thermodynamic situation,  
1:20:02
you better start to suspect that you're looking  at lots of things and not a fundamental property.  
1:20:09
Right? Like, the temperature in this room  is an emergent property of a collective of  
1:20:15
a bunch of molecules moving around. But if  I look deeper and deeper, I'll never find  
1:20:22
a quantity called temperature. I'll just never  find that quantity. And I think he was thinking  
1:20:29
about that because of black hole entropy and the  laws of black hole thermodynamics very early on.
1:20:37
And I think a lot of the attempts to beat black  holes into submission and get them to give up  
1:20:48
their information has kind of brought people  a long way around to start to say, oh yeah,  
1:20:55
maybe it's really just quantum mechanics all  the way down. And again, going back to AdS/CFT,  
1:21:02
which I am not an expert in, to be clear. I've  never written a paper in AdS/CFT. But just to say,  
1:21:07
again, that seems to say, look, I can describe  the entire universe just in terms of quantum  
1:21:12
field theory with no gravity whatsoever.  None. And that is an equivalent dictionary,  
1:21:20
on the boundary, to the universe in the box  with gravity. So gravity — and that's in,   at least there, it seems to say — well,  then I could just talk about only quantum  
1:21:27
fields and there's no gravity. And I have a  complete description if it holds up. Right?
1:21:36
I think this is exactly where it's all going. But we just haven't figured  out how to exactly do it yet.
1:21:45
You know, I just haven't figured out how  to start with pure quantum mechanics. Like,   let's say I take ER equals EPR really seriously.  And I think, look, fundamentally, it's only  
1:21:55
wormholes and wormholes with entanglement and  making bridges that feel like, out of, you know,  
1:22:09
causally separated space-time separations. And  I just imagine using these as like threads.
1:22:15
I can only give my analogy. So it's like you  sew all of these threads, all these quantum  
1:22:21
entangled wormholes. And from a distance, those  threads begin to look like a smooth and continuous  
1:22:29
space-time that has an event horizon. Right?  It's like embroidery. And from a great distance,  
1:22:35
it resolves into the smooth event horizon  that behaves exactly as general relativity   dictates. But on closer inspection, there is no  general relativity. There is no space-time. There  
1:22:46
is only the quantum threads, the embroidery,  the threads out of which you embroidered this  
1:22:52
illusion of a continuous space-time. I think  that that is very possible, that that's how  
1:22:58
this whole thing plays out. And that's why  they're acting like fundamental particles, but   they're acting like they have microstates. Their  microstates are maybe these ER equals EPR things.
1:23:11
What do you have against infinity? I love infinity. I love infinity  in mathematics. I've just never...  
1:23:21
I was just taught anytime you have an  infinity, you've made a mistake. Even  
1:23:26
to the point when Roger Penrose shows that it's  generically, under catastrophic gravitational  
1:23:36
collapse, general relativity will create a  singularity. In the next breath, he says,   yeah, but I don't really believe it. Quantum  mechanics will probably get rid of this.
Rejecting Physical Infinities
1:23:43
So, this idea that suddenly we accept infinity in  this one way just always struck me as odd. Now,  
1:23:51
maybe it's not as lethal an infinity. The idea  that the universe is infinite is not as lethal   an infinity. I can think of consistent ways in  which my illusion of time unfolding actually  
1:24:02
appears to me to be an infinite spatial dimension.  I can imagine being fooled. You know what I mean?   I'm not saying I'm dead set against  it. But, I mean, if I'm betting,  
1:24:13
and I'm already interested in extra dimensions  and the possibility extra dimensions are playing  
1:24:18
a large role in our cosmology, then why am  I accepting their finitude but the rest of  
1:24:28
the universe is infinite? And I just would much  rather begin with the universe on a democratic  
1:24:35
footing and struggle with the explanation of why  did three get large and the others stay small?
1:24:45
But infinity in mathematics I absolutely  love. You know, the whole Cantor idea — if   I look at the numbers between zero and one  and I extract all the infinite rationals,  
1:24:55
all of them, I take an infinite  number of rationals out of there,   I will still have a completely thick, dense,  populated interval between zero and one. I mean,  
1:25:05
infinity is fascinating. The irrationals are a  larger infinity than the rationals. It's amazing.
1:25:12
What is it about a physical infinity that you  don't like? And what type of physical infinity?
1:25:17
Well, the singularity is, you know, again, I mean,  I can imagine yielding to a spatial infinity in  
1:25:25
certain circumstances. But if I'm having a gamble  and when we ask questions like, I'm going to spend  
1:25:33
my time working on extra dimensions, that's  a gamble. That's a risk I'm taking. To invest  
1:25:41
my time that way. I'm making that decision to  take that risk because I do have a sense that a  
1:25:51
universe that begins instantaneously infinite is  an unsatisfying narrative. I mean, sometimes we  
1:25:57
are motivated by aesthetics. This is unsatisfying.  This explanation is ungratifying. Just the way it  
1:26:05
is is not an explanation we like to accept. But,  you know, sometimes maybe it's just the way it is,  
1:26:11
right? But as physicists, we don't take that. It's  like we want to dig deeper. We want to dig deeper.
1:26:17
So, yes, the idea that the universe is  instantaneously infinite strikes me as  
1:26:22
silly. At least we should be motivated to consider  the possibility that the universe is geometrically  
1:26:29
finite. And it's very rewarding. It sculpts the  universe in which we live in all of these ways   that we've described. It might be responsible  for dark matter. It might be responsible  
1:26:38
for dark energy. It might be responsible for why  there's something instead of nothing. That all   of this could be traceable to our geometry. And  if I imagine the universe trying this experiment  
1:26:46
over and over and over again, making universes  with different topologies and different shapes,  
1:26:51
they'll all be slightly different universes. Our  matter-ray symmetry isn't guaranteed. You know,  
1:26:58
it's not guaranteed. It's just in  this one. I find that interesting.
1:27:03
So, volume infinity you don't want. But  what about the points? Aren't there still   an infinite amount of points in any given  region? Or no, you don't like that either?
1:27:13
Well, it's not that I don't like that. I just  don't know what to do with it. That, to me,   is just a coordinate. That's a math thing.  If you gave me energy density at every one  
1:27:22
of those literally infinite points so that I had  an infinite energy density, then I'd be concerned.  
1:27:27
Like, what are observables? What are observables?  Are there any observables that are infinite?
1:27:34
And you don't want your energy density  to be infinite. Because the same idea,   if I was putting energy density at every point,  I don't even really know how to do that because  
1:27:42
I have an infinite number of points, then I  presumably would make a black hole. So even  
1:27:52
the idea of an infinite number of points —  if you do think quantum gravity is going to   survive the current crisis, and that at the end  of the day, we will discover that there is a  
1:28:03
smallest unit of space-time, that would also  be a natural way to resolve the problem. So,  
1:28:10
it's almost like the inverse of calculus.  You know, Zeno's paradox — how do you make   progress at all? And you use calculus in an  infinitesimally small region, but also in  
1:28:19
an infinitesimally small time, and you actually  can have a velocity and cross space-time. Well,   it's almost the opposite. Eventually I get to the  rock bottom size of a little piece of space-time.
1:28:33
But infinities that I don't like — yeah,   infinite energy densities, infinity in  physical observables, I don't so much like.
1:28:42
Ah, okay. But not a potential infinity. Well,  what other kinds of infinities are there? I mean,  
1:28:48
we dislike infinities enough in string theory that  we invoke extra dimensions to get rid of them,  
1:28:54
right? So string theory has infinities. You  can't progress past an infinity. It's a failure.  
1:29:02
So you invoke extra dimensions and you can  regulate infinities that would have occurred  
1:29:08
in string theory. You could say string  theory is predicting the extra dimensions  
1:29:15
because other dimensions aren't viable.  They don't make sense. They're not viable.
1:29:22
So, yeah, we don't have it. I mean, if you try,  you can't name a single observable infinity.
1:29:29
The reason I was asking about potential  infinity is that if we're going to   take Gödel's theorem or Gödel's sentence  seriously, Gödel's theorem only applies if  
1:29:39
you at least have a potential infinity.  Because you have to model arithmetic.
1:29:44
So if we're going to say that if we're finitists,   like ultra-finitists, then there's a bit  of a trickiness with the Gödel theorem.
1:29:51
Oh, you're saying you only have a Gödel theorem  in a continuum? I'm not sure that's the case.
1:29:56
Oh, no, no, no. I just mean that if we're  going to take that whole Gödel reference,  
1:30:02
Gödel's theorem about the universe seriously,  well, Gödel's theorem requires a potential  
1:30:08
infinity at least somewhere because you have to  model arithmetic. So whatever form of language  
1:30:14
this sentence is in has to be something  that has some form of potential infinity.
1:30:20
Well, we can have potential infinities if you  mean things like time going forever. I mean,  
1:30:27
I don't have a problem with that, right?  I don't have a problem with saying there's   an infinite number of points between  zero and one if I take a ruler — that  
1:30:36
my coordinate mathematical system has  an infinite number of points. Neither   of those infinities are troublesome. They  don't involve anything measurably infinite.
1:30:47
I also do wonder — okay, so you could say,  like, here's an infinity which I could tolerate,   I think. The initial data of the  universe, however it's seeded,  
1:30:57
I can suppose entertain the idea that  it is an uncomputable number. Meaning  
1:31:05
that the algorithm that is the laws of  physics will compute that number for infinity.
1:31:18
So, I have a funny question about your writing.  Yeah. You mentioned how sometimes narrative can  
1:31:24
get to a truth that you can't get  to otherwise. Did writing teach you   anything about physics that doing straight  physics, whatever that means, couldn't?
1:31:35
That's an interesting question. Yes and no.  I don't think I ever calculated differently  
1:31:40
because of how I've written something. But  I think I've understood calculations better  
Narrative Truth vs. Axioms
1:31:46
having written about them. So even a calculation  that I've done, I will understand better being  
1:31:55
forced to write about it. Or I would say,  understand it from a different angle. I've  
1:32:04
had ideas from writing, you know, ideas  about physical projects just by writing.
1:32:12
I think that translating into this  more familiar language has been  
1:32:19
really important for me personally  in terms of having a kind of more  
1:32:24
holistic sense of what I'm working  on, why, what the ideas are about.
1:32:32
Is writing painful? Oh, excruciating. Okay. So I'm not the only one.
1:32:37
Somebody said, oh, well, you're a writer,  so you love writing. And I was like, "No,   no, no. I'm a writer, so I hate  writing." Like all good writers.
1:32:45
Yes. It's excruciating. I don't know how anyone  gets it done. I cannot tell you. I don't  
1:32:53
know how anyone has written a book. So tell  me your writing process then. What do you  
1:32:58
do? Are you getting out a first draft and  you don't care about how your first draft   is? Or are you just writing notes to yourself  on your phone and then you take those little  
1:33:07
sticky notes in a sense and then compile  them? What's your writing process like? All of those things. I think sometimes  I'm just trying to dislodge. I know I want  
1:33:15
to write something. I kind of have an idea,  but I don't have the whole thing mapped out. So sometimes you're just laying out ideas,  just trying to get them out imperfectly. And  
1:33:25
it's so much easier to be your own editor  than it is to write the original draft. So  
1:33:32
I love getting to the stage where I'm editing  a piece. I can do that anytime, all night long. Same. You could say to me, "By Tuesday morning,  I need the edited version." That's just  
1:33:40
of this. I have to get it done. But  if you told me by Tuesday morning,   I need an original draft, I'm like, I just can't  promise you that. I just don't know, you know?
1:33:50
Yeah. It's interesting. Do you have a good editor? I haven't had an editor in some sense in  a long time. My book editor was wonderful,  
1:33:58
Dan Frank. He passed away, sadly, very  unexpectedly. And he was a wonderful editor,  
1:34:06
but just, he was so many people's editor.  I mean, he was Cormac McCarthy's editor. Oh, wow. Just a wonderful person. But it's not like he's  sitting there, you know, dissecting your every  
1:34:17
sentence. He's not that kind of an editor. And  he's also sort of hoping by the time you're with   Dan, you're not really requiring that. So  he's working with you at a different level.  
1:34:27
But I haven't really had an editor since,  in a way. Like that kind of a relationship,   like that Steinbeck had with his editor,  you know, those special relationships.
1:34:37
But Zadie Smith — I was just going to say,  one time a famous novelist said, "You know,   some days I sit down to write and just nobody  shows up." Just a good writer doesn't show up  
1:34:46
that day. And some bad stuff comes out. And I  just thought it was such a relief to hear that. Yeah. So do you set yourself a quota each  day or a habit of a certain schedule or what?
1:34:57
No. I try to set certain days of the week. Like,  on these days, I'm going to make sure I'm not  
1:35:03
booked for anything and I'm going to sit down  and I'm going to try to write on these days. I'm   not the kind of person who can sit down and write  between 10 and 11 if I had a meeting at nine and  
1:35:11
I have teaching at, you know, I can't do that. I  just can't do that. There's just no point unless I  
1:35:16
have a lot of time to get up and pace, to try some  of the things you said, try to make some notes,  
1:35:24
read some stuff, you know, try to turn on some  music. I mean, there's just no point if I don't  
1:35:29
have a whole lot of time, because I might not  get my first word down until the end of the day.
1:35:35
Yeah. But once it gets flowing, I can get a few things  down. Right? A few paragraphs down, even maybe,  
1:35:42
on a good day. And then coming back to  it is a lot easier. Because you've got,  
1:35:48
you know, you're talking to something then. Yes. You're relating to something. And you  have a whole tone. And what is it that's  
1:35:55
holding you back? Is it perfectionism? Or  just lack of ideas? Or what? Too many ideas?
1:36:02
Yeah, sometimes just... I don't  know. Sometimes, like... You know,   I've been writing for Substack.  I've been self-motivated writing.
1:36:11
I'll place a link to that on screen as well. Yeah. Thank you. I call it Higher  Dimensions. I keep changing the name,  
1:36:17
though, so I might change the name again.  But I like the title Higher Dimensions.   It made it sound ecclesiastic, you know,  like I was running a cult or something.
1:36:26
But it's really hard. Sometimes I have  a feeling about what I want to write,  
1:36:35
but I don't have the actual idea,  or I don't know what the hook is,  
1:36:40
or I don't know how to get  into it, or how to lead me in. What's the hook mean? Well, so for instance, I have a piece,  "Whales Don't Want to Go to Mars." And to me,  
1:36:52
that was really the hook. I knew I wanted to write  about why we might not be a successful species,  
1:36:59
why our example of industrialization  might make us doubt that we'll ever  
1:37:05
encounter extraterrestrial life that is also  industrialized as we are. And that they will  
1:37:11
also have been an unsuccessful species, that  they will also have had a climate crisis,   that they will also have made weapons of mass  destruction. And that might be our kind of  
1:37:22
tragic flaw. Like, we're this apex predator on  this planet. We're ingenious. We're creative.
1:37:28
There's a lot to be proud of in the human  sort of expression of art and science. Just  
1:37:38
so much that's so extraordinary about us. And  it's our tragic flaw because it also makes us   willful and violent and greedy and unable  to control ourselves and suicidal. I mean,  
1:37:49
we're a suicidal species. We're the only  species on the surface of the earth that   I'm aware of that developed the  capacity to wipe itself out.
1:37:56
And so talking about it — it wasn't a big part  of the essay, "Whales Don't Want to Go to Mars,"  
1:38:03
but it was my way in. Here is a successful  species. They've been here for 50 million  
1:38:09
years. They can sing, they can tell stories,  they can teach their young, they have some kind  
1:38:16
of culture that propagates over centuries. But  they don't want to go to Mars. You know, they're  
1:38:21
not trying to build rockets. They're perfectly  content and in balance with their ecosystem.
1:38:30
And so I kind of wanted to project  about the possibility of a utopia,  
1:38:36
a future in which human beings get  over the stage that they're at,   where we live in greater harmony and balance  with nature and not in such discord and imbalance  
1:38:48
that we find ourselves in. And if we get there,  then maybe there's some hope for industrialized  
1:38:55
civilizations to actually spread through  the galaxies and for there to be others.
1:39:00
I don't know if you know these quotes.  Any sufficiently advanced technology is  
1:39:05
indistinguishable from magic. That's a famous  quote. I think it's Arthur C. Clarke. And then  
1:39:10
there's somebody else, Schroeder, I can't remember  his name. I think he's also a sci-fi writer,   who said, "Any sufficiently advanced  civilization is indistinguishable  
1:39:18
from nature." Because it's gotten past its  disharmonies and has a harmony with nature.
1:39:26
Hmm. But the whales are going  extinct, no? From us. From us.
1:39:32
Would you rather be a whale or a human right now? Well, I don't know about what I'd rather, because  I wouldn't be I, right? So the philosophers would  
1:39:39
say, you know, it's a flawed construction.  It's not that I would rather be a whale,  
1:39:45
or that I would rather human beings don't exist,  like that we would never have invented tools. I'm   not saying that. I'm just saying we might just  not be successful and we shouldn't be surprised  
1:39:53
that we haven't encountered others who are flying  around with fuel, trying to colonize celestial  
1:40:02
bodies. Maybe we just won't last very long. I  mean, human beings have only been here hundreds   of thousands of years tops, right? That's not  a long run. It's a short run. And the whales,  
1:40:15
I mean, one of the things I was commenting  on in this essay, the whales might be here   a lot longer. When we're gone, they're going  to be fine, right? So whales might be singing  
1:40:25
songs about us. These crazy bipeds that tried  to leave the Earth, you know, and go to Mars.
1:40:36
Yeah, it's hard to know. But certainly  when we talk about destroying the Earth,   we're not going to destroy the Earth. We're  going to destroy our habitable environment  
1:40:45
on the Earth. Presumably other animals will come  out of the destruction and take over and prosper.
1:40:54
You mentioned that insomnia induces madness. Oh yeah. It induces a form of madness. I've been  insomniac since I was a child. I can remember so  
1:41:08
distinctly, we had these old clocks, they  were flip clocks, and the card would flip  
1:41:14
to the next number, you know, like 4 AM,  you see the three flip over like a card.  
Insomnia and Mathematical Madness
1:41:23
And I just remember watching that at some point,  like, I'm awake, you know, just being aware of  
1:41:30
being awake in the middle of the night. I don't  think I've slept through the night in decades.
1:41:35
Hmm. Okay. So you intimately relate. I intimately relate. Insomnia is not every  single night I'm up. My kids think I'm a  
1:41:42
ghost. They think I haunt the house. Any  hour that they might wake up, there I am. Yeah, yeah.
1:41:48
Like I literally haunt the house. But I've  really struggled with it. But I also have  
1:41:54
bad sleep hygiene. I do everything  wrong. I love watching TV at night.
1:42:00
What do you watch? Oh my God, anything. I'm very indiscriminate.  I've really enjoyed Severance, you know,  
1:42:08
all that stuff. Oh, Severance is great. Severance  in particular. I'm a huge Vince Gilligan fan. Oh,  
1:42:15
so clever. The moment that they realize  they're not looking at binary code, but that  
1:42:23
they're looking at like a biological code.  It was just totally, totally ingenious.  
1:42:29
So I love that kind of stuff. But also,  what was I watching recently? I can't  
1:42:34
even remember what I was watching. I literally  can't remember. I think I was watching Hacks.  
1:42:42
I was watching The Pit. So I do everything  wrong. I probably drink too much caffeine.
1:42:48
You know, there's a lot of — do you take any  sleeping medication? Has anything worked for you?
1:42:53
I have taken sleeping medication. I  guess it worries me. Or supplements.   I take tons of supplements. I take  magnesium, apigenin, yeah. Okay.
1:43:04
I definitely take supplements at night.  Magnesium, apigenin, all this kind of stuff.  
1:43:11
But I do think my sleep is better  if I do try to discipline myself  
1:43:17
and listen to something instead of watching  something in the final hours, you know, like  
1:43:23
taking the supplements and just generally  also not lying there. If I can't sleep,  
1:43:30
I'm just going to get up and do something.  All of that really does actually help. So I'm   getting better. I think I know what I could  do to cure my sleep problems. I just, yeah.
1:43:41
What is it? Less stress or what? Oh, no, just basically, you know —
1:43:46
The hygiene? Yeah, the sleeping hygiene. Reading books at  night. Not having the stimulants. Don't go out  
1:43:55
with your friends and have three martinis. You  know, all of it, I think, really would work.  
1:44:03
You know, do a couple of yoga poses that are the  right poses that get your nervous system down.
1:44:10
I think if I was really forced to  do all of those things properly,   it would be better. But I still don't think  it would be cured. I think that's just my  
1:44:17
sleep cycle. I think my sleep cycle  is like four hours on, then I'm up,  
1:44:23
and then maybe I can catch another hour  somewhere else. That's not unheard of. Interesting. Are you getting  any sleep? Are you getting...?
1:44:31
Yes, I'm getting some sleep.  Last night I had a couple hours,  
1:44:36
but it was spread across, so... Yeah. It wasn't much. And it's so horrible because  then I start to calculate how much time do I  
1:44:44
have left. And then I even emailed you  to push it 20 minutes because even at   that point 20 minutes seems like it's plenty  of extra time. It relieves my anxiety. Then  
1:44:53
I open my door because it's hot. So I have to  open the door and I'm on a high-rise building,   I'm on the top floor. There's no AC yet because  it's too early. So it gets super hot. No one  
1:45:02
else in the building cares because everyone,  if you're at the top floor, the majority are   at the lower floor. So it's not a problem for the  majority of the people. I can't even get a draft  
1:45:11
through here because if I get a draft my wife's  too cold. And then when I get up then it wakes her  
1:45:17
and then I can't turn on the TV. So I just lie  there and I think, and sometimes I take notes,  
1:45:23
I voice notes to myself, and it's just such  a... there's so much pressure, so much stress.
1:45:29
And then I can't accomplish as much the next day.  So then more builds the next time. And then it's  
1:45:36
like a bout. As soon as I have two nights of  no sleep, then I have 14 nights of no sleep.
1:45:42
Right. And do you feel it's a form of madness? I think there are two.
1:45:47
Or it induces. It definitely induces. And then I also think  that madness can also induce the lack of sleep.
1:45:54
Yeah, the mind is a terrible thing. Isn't that  the... Yes, the mind is quite relentless. The mind  
1:46:04
can be quite relentless. But you know, when I'm  calculating a lot, like one of these recent papers   we were talking about with the Klein bottle,  when I was really in it, and just every day I was  
1:46:13
calculating — like right now I'm kind of more in  an ideating phase, like what do I want to work on,   and what's next? But when I was like that, I  enjoyed waking up in the middle of the night.  
1:46:22
I was fine with it. I was like, ah! It's three  o'clock. I got from three to five. I bet I could   get something done. You know, I've got nothing  else to do. And it was a tremendously productive  
1:46:33
window. So I think also kind of accepting that  that is just the way it was, that I was just going  
1:46:38
to wake up and I might as well use the time in  some way that wasn't horrible. You don't want to  
1:46:46
use the time on something horrible and tedious,  but if you're using the time on, yeah, yeah.
1:46:53
If I'm lying down. So yes, if I get up, then I  can do some learning, some calculations, some   thinking, some writing. But if I'm lying down,  and especially as I'm trying to get to sleep,  
1:47:03
I have such fractionated, such odd ideas.  Like my knee needs to be up because the  
1:47:09
knight in chess moves in this direction.  It makes no sense, but it makes perfect   sense for a moment. And then I snap and I'm  like, what the heck was I just thinking?
1:47:18
Anyhow, speaking of lying down.  Speaking of lying, let's say. You said that a true scientist, or something  like that, or the best scientists, don't lie  
Scientific Mysticism and Honesty
1:47:28
to themselves that they understand  something. So my question to you is,   what are you currently lying  to yourself about right now?
1:47:36
Hmm. You know, I feel physics is one of those  topics where... We talked metaphorically about  
1:47:46
the infinite points between zero and one. I feel  that way about physics. I'm teaching electricity   and magnetism right now to first year students  who are just learning calculus. And there are  
1:47:58
not just multitudes in there. There's so much  in there. And of course, I've learned it. I  
1:48:03
thought I knew it. I thought I knew it so  well. But each time I approach the subject,   I try to ask myself, do I really understand  this? And I don't try to lie to myself about it.
1:48:19
So sometimes I'll ask my students questions that  I want them to think about. So I'll ask them,  
1:48:24
everyone's learned that the nucleus, let's  say, is the American Museum of Natural History,   and then in this analogy, the  electron would be Yankee Stadium,  
1:48:31
and the rest is empty space, right, in  New York City. And so you know this,   you've all nodded, yes, yes, atoms  are mostly empty space. So I ask them,  
1:48:39
why aren't you falling through your chair? They're  flummoxed. They've just never asked that question.
1:48:44
It's okay to say you don't really understand  something because then you're going to ask   about it more and more and more. Why don't you  fall through your chair? You don't fall through  
1:48:52
your chair because of electromagnetism, and that's  what we're going to talk about in this class. But   then I say, like, okay, what is mass? Everyone  thinks they know what mass is. And then I say,  
1:49:01
I just don't... I don't know what to tell you.  I don't know what it is. What is charge? I can  
1:49:07
tell you some things about it. I can tell you  electric charge is the quantum number in the  
1:49:15
electromagnetic interaction. I can say some  things about it. But if I keep leaning on it,  
1:49:20
do I really know what it is? Like, I kind of  don't. Outside of it just being a quantum number  
1:49:27
in an interaction, I don't really know what it is.  And so I think physics can always be like that.
1:49:34
I think that's what's exciting about  physics — you start to understand it,   you make all this progress. It might be  what we were talking about at the beginning,  
1:49:42
but somehow the harder you look, the  more it kind of fades away. Right,  
1:49:48
right. The more it kind of fades away. And that's  why I think some of the smartest people I know get  
1:49:53
kind of mystical. I mean, not spiritual, they're  atheists, I think, but they get kind of mystical  
1:49:59
about the whole thing. What does it mean that  there's a field permeating all of space? Well,  
1:50:08
maybe these are just structures that we lay  over in order to comprehend this correlation  
1:50:16
with an objective reality I do believe exists.  But maybe this is just the best that we can ever  
1:50:21
do. And that the more we look, the more  kind of mystical and diffuse it becomes.
1:50:29
Well, I think that's a great place  to end. Actually, I want to know,   where can the audience find out more about  you? I'm going to be placing your Substack  
1:50:37
and your books on screen and in the description  for people to visit. And there's so much more I  
1:50:42
could talk to you about. I hope we will again. I  think we should. I did do plenty of research and  
1:50:48
I even remember some quotes from your Substack.  So one of them that I wanted to get to, maybe we   can get to it and then you could talk about where  people could find you, was about finite. You said  
1:50:58
that there are an infinite amount of ways for the  universe to be finite, but only a finite amount   of ways for the universe to be infinite. And that  was a post in February, if I recall, of this year.
1:51:09
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. It is true. It is true. The  universe has fewer options for being infinite  
1:51:16
than it does for being finite. There's an  infinite number of ways it can wrap up in   a kind of origami, but only a few number  of ways it could be completely unfolded.
1:51:29
But, so it's interesting, because for a long time,  I've just kind of enjoyed being intensely focused  
1:51:35
on physics for a while. Maybe once, books are  rare and they're hard. I do this work out at a  
1:51:43
place called Pioneer Works, where I'm Director of  Sciences, and I helped start this cultural center  
1:51:48
founded by artist Dustin Yellin and the  founding artistic director Gabriel Florenz,   and I make a kind of triad  where we've built this place.
1:51:56
And so I do this, I do that, I write,  you know, and I just sort of felt like   I was a little all over the place. And then  with this idea, I wanted to, on Substack,  
1:52:06
make my own publication, really make it  like a publication where I could corral   everything together. I think of it as  a venue where science equals culture,  
1:52:14
which might be the alternative name that I end  up calling it. So for me, there's some, yeah,  
1:52:22
it's less than a year old. So I've really  only been doing this for a few months. You have quite a following.
1:52:28
Yeah, it's really nice. It's really nice. It's  just an interesting place because people are  
1:52:34
coming because they can see everything there. They  can see a little snippet of a novel. They can see   something I've written about one of the artists.  Sometimes we'll play the actual conversations  
1:52:44
that were live conversations out in Brooklyn,  and they'll be live streamed there. So for me,   it's a way of pulling everything together  under one venue. And under the one ambition,  
1:52:55
which to me makes sense. It makes the most  sense that science equals culture. And this   is how I like to understand the world.  I like to understand the world through  
1:53:01
scientific thinking. It's what gives me  a sense of meaning and connectedness. So  
1:53:08
sometimes it's really technical, trying to  understand higher dimensions and infinities,   and sometimes it's about why whales don't want  to go to Mars. But to me, those belong together.
1:53:18
Maybe this is a foolish question.  But why does connectedness matter?
1:53:24
Well, I think that's a good question. I think  it's just the animals that we are. I mean,  
1:53:29
we are primates. I have no illusions about us  being transcendent. We have these little orbs that  
Biological Morality and Advice
1:53:36
are tuned to the sun. We came from a long lineage  of evolution. This is just the one experiment  
1:53:44
that has gotten this far on Earth. And it's in our  evolutionary history that we're social creatures,  
1:53:51
and we needed this connectedness, presumably, for  survival. And we're searching for meaning. I mean,  
1:53:59
maybe the search for meaning that human  beings have always pursued since records  
1:54:04
of chaos. And when our cave paintings began, maybe  that's just in our DNA, so to speak. And that's  
1:54:12
just how we are. And that we shouldn't require it  if we were to bump into another species out there.
1:54:19
I guess, presumably, we have much  else that's inside our DNA that we   think we shouldn't pursue. Maybe rage,  maybe racism or tribalism or what have  
1:54:28
you. So there are some that we say, okay,  that's just in us and we should pursue it.  
1:54:34
And there's some we say we should not. So  connectedness is, I imagine, on the former. Yeah. These are all interesting questions.  Like the idea that we have ethics is probably  
1:54:43
biological and not absolute. You know, that  we choose. We declare this is bad. We want  
1:54:48
to weed this out. And this we think is good. But  protecting babies is... Why do we think it's good?
1:54:56
But it's in our DNA to respond to babies.  So then we have a moral code to protect  
1:55:02
babies. And it's so in our DNA we feel so  strongly about it. It's incomprehensible,  
1:55:08
like harming a baby. Do you know what I  mean? It's so in the way that we're woven.  
1:55:16
Some people are like, well, maybe that's an  external morality. And other people are like,   well, I think that's just our apes. That's the  kind of apes we are, because other mammals don't  
1:55:25
have that. They simply don't have that. So but  anyway, one thing that does, which you mentioned,  
1:55:32
which gives me hope, is that yes, we have some  bad instincts. And that we know are primal and  
1:55:39
we can trace where they were in our lineage. Rage  and tribalism and racism and mine, and, you know,  
1:55:46
all this stuff. Warring. But we have overcome  it in some ways. There are examples where we've  
1:55:53
decided to organize together and to not be like  that, and it's actually not as hard as we once  
1:56:02
imagined it might be. Like, humans have invented  government structures and cultural structures,  
1:56:08
treaties and agreements to transcend those  things, and they have had moments of success.
1:56:13
So that's one of the things that  gives me hope. Maybe we really will,   as a species, overcome all  of those things in time.
1:56:21
Now imagine you're speaking directly to students  who are watching. There are also artists who   watch and truck drivers who watch and just a  variety of other people. It skews technical,  
1:56:31
but still. What advice do you have for those  who are, let's just call them learning? I mean,  
1:56:39
researchers, learning, I  don't know what to call them. Yeah. I think there's all kinds of different  people that end up in the field. And that's  
1:56:45
one thing. Just believe that. Don't  think because you only see a type or  
1:56:51
a particular prevalence of a certain type that  there's no room for you or the way you think.  
1:56:58
There is a place for all different kinds of  minds and all different kinds of skills and  
1:57:04
all different kinds of approaches. And I think  to always try to have a big picture. Sometimes   I meet grad students and they say something  incredibly microscopic — a particular galaxy  
1:57:15
at a particular wavelength with a particular  instrument. And I say, you don't work on that.   You've got to constantly keep your eye on a bigger  picture. That's something you're doing right now.  
1:57:26
But you know. And so to keep the bigger picture.  And that's one of the reasons why I like novels  
1:57:32
and popularizations and different levels of  writing because it allows you to see the bigger   picture when none of us can be experts in all  the dimensions that exist out there in physics  
1:57:44
and astronomy. We just can't. None of  us are simultaneously experts in heavy  
1:57:50
ion physics and in quantum computing and in  H-alpha. We have to be learning from each other,  
1:57:57
and we have to have this graciousness about  what we're learning and this appetite for it.
1:58:05
Yeah. I wish I was a student again. Anyway. Do you?
1:58:10
Yeah. I sort of think I'm a big student most  of the time. When I'm happiest in my research,  
1:58:16
it's when I'm kind of bumbling into  a new area where I feel very new,   and I'm really learning a  lot. And I'm acquiring a lot.
1:58:26
For the past six years or five years  since this podcast has started,   every day I wake up and I'm so, so excited  to work. Just because my working is just  
1:58:36
learning. I just get to learn and speak  to people like you. And what a dream.
1:58:42
Yeah. Fabulous. I know. Thank you. Thank you. So nice to see you, Curt.
1:58:48
Hi there. Curt here. If you'd like more content from Theories  of Everything and the very best listening  
1:58:55
experience, then be sure to check out my  Substack at curtjaimungal.org. Some of  
1:59:01
the top perks are that every week  you get brand new episodes ahead  
1:59:06
of time. You also get bonus written  content exclusively for our members.  
1:59:12
That's C-U-R-T-J-A-I-M-U-N-G-A-L.org.  You can also just search my name.
1:59:19
I like to understand the word Substack on Google.  Since I started that Substack it somehow already  
1:59:24
became number two in the science category.  Now Substack, for those who are unfamiliar,  
1:59:30
is like a newsletter, one that's beautifully  formatted. There's zero spam. This is the best  
1:59:36
place to follow the content of this channel that  isn't anywhere else. It's not on YouTube. It's  
1:59:42
not on Patreon. It's exclusive to the Substack.  It's free. There are ways for you to support me  
1:59:48
on Substack if you want. And you get special  bonuses if you do. Several people ask me like,  
1:59:54
"Hey Curt, you've spoken to so many people  in the field of theoretical physics,  
1:59:59
of philosophy, of consciousness.  What are your thoughts, man?"   Well, while I remain impartial in  interviews, this Substack is a way  
2:00:08
to peer into my present deliberations on  these topics. And it's the perfect way to  
2:00:15
support me directly. curtjaimungal.org or  search Curt Jaimungal Substack on Google.
2:00:22
Oh, and I've received several messages,  emails, and comments from professors and  
2:00:28
researchers saying that they recommend Theories  of Everything to their students. That's fantastic.
2:00:34
If you're a professor or a lecturer or what have  you, and there's a particular standout episode  
2:00:39
that students can benefit from, or your friends,  please do share. And of course, a huge thank you  
2:00:45
to our advertising sponsor, The Economist. Visit  economist.com/TOE to get a massive discount on  
2:00:55
their annual subscription. I subscribe to  The Economist and you'll love it as well.   TOE is actually the only podcast that they  currently partner with. So it's a huge honor  
2:01:04
for me. And for you, you're getting an exclusive  discount. That's economist.com/TOE. T-O-E.
2:01:12
And finally, you should know this podcast is  on iTunes. It's on Spotify. It's on all the  
2:01:18
audio platforms. All you have to do is type  in Theories of Everything and you'll find it.  
2:01:23
I know my last name is complicated, so  maybe you don't want to type in Jaimungal,   but you can type in Theories of  Everything and you'll find it.
2:01:31
Personally, I gain from rewatching  lectures and podcasts. I also read   in the comments that TOE listeners also  gain from replaying. So how about instead  
2:01:39
you re-listen on one of those platforms  like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts,   whatever podcast catcher you use. I'm  there with you. Thank you for listening.

All

From Curt Jaimungal

Media theories

Podcasts

Related

For you

Recently uploaded

Watched


14:54

Ergativity: The Most Confusing Concept in Linguistics?
languagejones
118K views
•
3 months ago


1:37:45
Trump FURIOUS After New Book Reveals Shocking Corruption Details
Pod Save America
145K views
•
10 hours ago
New


2:31:21
The "Inverse Problem" Of Dark Matter Is Insane
Curt Jaimungal
69K views
•
2 months ago


52:07
I Went To The Strait of Hormuz - It Didn't Go Well (#238)
Sabbatical
749K views
•
5 days ago
New


35:53
The Tiny Donut That Proved We Still Don't Understand Magnetism
Veritasium
8.9M views
•
4 months ago


1:06:37
David Sedaris On What To Do About Your Trump-Supporting Family Members
Pod Save America
130K views
•
9 days ago


1:03:19
Alright... Let's listen to Abbey Road | Gen-Z Music Producer Reaction
Isaac Brown
271K views
•
10 days ago


28:33
My First Time Hearing "Lyin' Eyes" by The Eagles, And I'm Mystified!
The Charismatic Voice
296K views
•
3 months ago


9:10
Why does a table have a gender? (Grammatical gender explained)
languagejones
4.3K views
•
5 hours ago
New


1:00:59
Everybody DEMANDED I Watch FIGHT CLUB
Alex Hefner's TV & Movie Vault
284K views
•
11 days ago


21:16
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING ' Peter Frampton - Do You Feel Like We Do' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
235K views
•
1 year ago


52:11
string theory lied to us and now science communication is hard
Angela Collier
1.4M views
•
3 years ago


1:27:07
UFO Roundtable: Former CIA Scientist Proves Aliens Exist!
The Diary Of A CEO
 and The Age Of Disclosure
4M views
•
1 month ago


1:52:22
This Physicist May Have Just Solved Quantum Gravity
Curt Jaimungal
20K views
•
1 day ago
New


2:03:47
The Major Flaws in (Fundamental) Physics | Sabine Hossenfelder
Curt Jaimungal
184K views
•
1 year ago


1:45:37
Happy Happy Joy Joy - The Ren & Stimpy Story
Documentary • 2020
Free with ads
Unrated


1:04:58
Heather Cox Richardson: What History Predicts Happens Next
The Prof G Pod – Scott Galloway
 and Heather Cox Richardson
618K views
•
5 days ago
New


28:34
Timothy Snyder Explains What Everyone Is Missing About Ukraine | The Long Game
The Long Game Podcast and Timothy Snyder
35K views
•
1 day ago
New


33:35
18 Illusions That Will Break Your Brain.
Very Nearly Interesting
270K views
•
5 months ago


8:48
How to Tell Americans and Canadians Apart
Lost in the Pond
64K views
•
1 day ago
New


20:09
Jamaican vs Chinese: We Try Each Other's Oxtail
Cantomando
601K views
•
3 weeks ago


13:24
Rating Good and Terrible British Accents by American Actors
Lost in the Pond
478K views
•
4 months ago


23:44
Why Cannibalism Is Biologically Insane (Not Just Moral)
NomNomics
9.3K views
•
7 days ago


14:13
All 7 Dimensions Explained in Detail (From 0D to Infinity)
Ridddle
739K views
•
10 days ago


1:34:36
NEVER Judge a Book By Its Cover! BIGGEST Surprises They Didn't See Coming...
Top Talent
19M views
•
2 years ago


13:51
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Moody Blues - Nights In White Satin | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
380K views
•
1 year ago

13:40
Scientists Found a New Type of Life Hidden inside Our Bodies
Anton Petrov
153K views
•
3 weeks ago

34:42
German Reacts to Hogan’s Heroes! | Feli from Germany
Feli from Germany
558K views
•
7 months ago

25:39
How Did Ancient Humans Identify Fathers?
Explain In Paint and 2 more
18K views
•
1 day ago
New

40:15
I asked Prof. Brian Cox 100 Questions
100 Questions with Tom Simons
 and TommyInnit
1.9M views
•
1 month ago

17:16
What really happened to the last Neanderthals?
Stefan Milo
303K views
•
8 days ago

17:51
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Meatloaf - Bat Out Of Hell' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
223K views
•
1 year ago

23:21
You Must Agree, It's Criminal I Haven't Analyzed Fiona Apple Yet.
The Charismatic Voice
108K views
•
4 months ago

23:22
Why Don't Forensics Account For Gravity And Drag?
Veritasium
890K views
•
1 day ago
New

48:35
Blazing Saddles (1974) *First Time Watching* | Movie Reaction
MR. VIDEO CLIPS
210K views
•
4 days ago
New

34:10
Blows a ZERO, Passes FSTs, Gets Arrested Anyway - WINS in Court (part 1)
The Civil Rights Lawyer
4.5M views
•
1 month ago

1:56:33
This Physicist (Unexpectedly) Derived Gravity from Information
Curt Jaimungal
77K views
•
4 months ago

28:51
Gen-Z Music Producer listens to Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young for the first time...
Isaac Brown
233K views
•
1 month ago

18:13
Why Did Ancient Dogs Trust Humans More Than Any Other Animal?
Professor Primal
31K views
•
11 days ago

48:04
Princeton Cognitive Scientist Says AI Researchers Are Wrong
Dr Brian Keating
150K views
•
1 month ago

    
true


In this video



Chapters

Transcript
Search in video
Dark Matter Model Fallacy
0:00
I saw the equations and suddenly, this  is my gravitational lensing problem.  He just said, "Oh, finally, you got  it, 30 years after we found out." 
0:09
And it was quite astonishing how  disruptive you think something could be.
0:17
Dark matter. 85% of the universe's matter  is supposedly missing. But what's the  
0:24
technical truth behind the popular  science headlines? Dr. Jenny Wagner,   a scientist at the Institute of Astronomy  and Astrophysics and the Helsinki Institute  
0:32
of Physics, and winner of the Prize for  Courageous Science, disagrees about how   we got that number. This is because she  proved mathematically that most of what we  
0:42
call evidence for dark matter is driven by the  models we insert and not the data we collect.
0:48
On this channel, I, Curt Jaimungal, interview  researchers regarding their theories of reality  
0:53
with rigor and technical depth. Today's  episode is no different. Wagner found that   when you strip out the model's assumptions,  the only information that the data gives you  
1:02
is local. This means every grand dark matter  map you've ever seen is extrapolation. Now,  
1:09
it's not wild speculation. That's not what  she's saying at all. Specifically, she's   saying a profusion of models can all fit the same  data equally well. This is called lensing data.
1:19
By the end of this podcast, Wagner makes the  case that this is what Einstein predicted   over a century ago. The homogeneous, isotropic,  spherical cow model of the universe eventually  
1:30
needs to be replaced by the next level of detail.  Today, she shows us how we may finally be there.
1:39
What do we actually know about dark matter? Dark matter. Dark matter is something that  I wouldn't say it's something that we know  
1:47
about. But it's rather something, it's a term  that came up because we missed matter when we  
1:54
looked at our observations. And so dark matter  was the replacement or was the substitute for  
2:01
this missing mass in our explanations  of certain observations. For instance,  
2:07
in observations of the cosmic microwave  background in the very early universe,   but also in the late universe where we have  cosmic structures that seem to hold together  
2:19
in a gravitationally bound object. But then, if  this object is actually gravitationally bound,  
2:26
then we miss a lot of matter because the luminous  matter that we see, the baryonic matter, this is  
2:33
too little matter in order to keep this structure  together. So if we do not have dark matter,  
2:40
then these structures would dissolve over cosmic  time. Then we wouldn't see them as they are.
2:47
So what's the problem with dark matter? What's the   matter with matter? What's  the matter with dark matter? The matter with matter is that, I would say,  in modern cosmology, people started out with  
2:58
observations, with observing stars, observing  gas clouds, observing x-rays from the cosmos. And  
3:05
all of this seemed to be fine until we suddenly  realized if we take a look at all of these things  
3:12
and we want to explain them in the way that we  want to explain stuff on Earth, like to transfer  
3:19
the laws from Earth to the cosmos, we realize  that matter is missing. And first people thought,  
3:26
okay, we can just improve our telescopes in  order to get a better estimate of all of these  
3:32
missing masses. But on the other hand if we now  estimate forward how much mass are we actually  
3:38
missing, it's 85% of the entire matter content  of the universe that seems to be missing. And  
3:45
this is something that we cannot just make  up by the stuff, for instance small planets  
3:50
or very faint gas that we haven't detected. So  a lot of mass seems to be missing. And this is  
3:58
the puzzling thing, that we think we need dark  matter in order to explain all of the structures,  
4:04
how they behave, and all of the cosmic structure  evolution as well, how the galaxies formed.
4:11
So what does gravitational lensing have to do  with any of this? I know you have a wine glass,   so why don't you tell the audience, or  explain, or visually show the audience,  
4:19
what is gravitational lensing, and then what  the heck does it have to do with dark matter? So, if we take a look at all the  cosmic structures that we have,  
4:27
then we usually need a lot of assumptions to  find that missing matter. For instance, that some  
4:33
gas is in equilibrium or that a certain stage of  evolution has been reached, that the structures  
4:41
are not merging, something like this. And strong  gravitational lensing is a much more pure probe  
4:48
of the total matter content of such a structure,  because it purely relies on general relativity,  
4:54
that heavy masses curve spacetime, and so  the light will not go straight forward to us,  
5:02
but it will be bent along the so-called null  geodesics. And in that sense, the only assumption  
Gravitational Lensing Mechanics
5:09
we make to probe the entire mass of a structure is  general relativity and how masses bend spacetime.
5:16
And in order to visualize this, here you see  a background source, like a pattern on the  
5:22
wallpaper. And here is my Earth-like gravitational  lens. It's like an inhomogeneous, imperfect glass.  
5:31
And if I now slide as a foreground object, bending  space-time, if I now slide this gravitational  
5:39
lens in front of the background source, you  will see that the background source will not  
5:48
look the same to us as an observer, because  now the light goes through the gravitational  
5:53
lens. And this means now that we do not see the  source as it is, but we see a highly distorted,  
6:01
sometimes magnified and demagnified pattern  that is a distorted image of the source.
6:09
And strong gravitational lensing is even worse.  It doesn't only create a single distorted image,  
6:15
but it creates multiple distorted images of the  same background source. And so the good thing is  
6:22
if we have multiple images that are created by  exactly the same background source, we can then  
6:29
correlate all the information from all of these  objects together in order to infer properties  
6:36
of the source or properties of the lens. And I  say or because if we know the lens perfectly,  
6:45
so if we can describe our lens, then we can  reconstruct a source. On the other hand, if  
6:50
we know the source as it is naturally, without the  lensing effect, then we can reconstruct the lens.
6:57
But in cosmology, we neither know the source. It's  an object in the early universe far, far away from  
7:04
us. That's one point. And the other point is our  lens. If it really contains 85% of dark matter,  
7:12
we do not know where it is because it doesn't  interact with light. So how do we know anything  
7:17
about the lens, about the mass distribution  that curves spacetime, in order to reconstruct  
7:24
the source? So it's a chicken-egg problem. We  neither know the source, nor do we know the lens.
7:29
Okay, so speaking of wine, many people,  when they're younger, almost everyone,  
7:35
doesn't like wine. They say to their mom or to  their dad, can I taste? And then they taste it,   they're like, I don't like this. But then at  some point that changes. And then you wonder,  
7:44
do I taste wine the same as I did when I was a kid  and I just like it now? Or am I tasting something  
7:51
different? And had I tasted what I taste now as  a kid, it would have tasted good. So a similar  
7:57
problem is there with pain perception. So if  person A can feel the same amount of pain as  
8:03
person B and say I'm okay with it, but person  B, that person A just thinks person B is a wimp.
8:09
Well, you don't know. Is person A  just having high pain tolerance,   or do they actually experience the pain as less?  And Daniel Dennett also talked about this. We  
8:18
don't actually know which one it is. We know the  difference. So we know, say, A minus B equals 5,  
8:25
but we don't know what's the value of A,  what's the value of B. Is that similar? Yes, yes. It's pretty similar as in, I would  say, as in everything in this world. We can only  
8:36
measure or we can only experience changes, but we  cannot have an absolute reference frame. I mean,  
8:43
if I see that my dad likes wine, I have the  expectation because I like my dad, I may also like  
8:49
wine. So if you try the wine and then you have a  certain expectation and it's completely different,  
8:55
you may not like it at first because it  doesn't fit with your expectation because   you have nothing else to refer to. And only if you  have tasted a certain amount of different wines,  
9:07
maybe even different qualities, different  ages, and all of this, then you will realize,  
9:12
oh, I like this wine more than I like that  wine. Or you may find out, I've tried a lot  
9:18
of wines and I don't like any of them. But  at first, you only have your expectation.  
9:23
You have to extrapolate from what you know or  what you think other people know. That's your  
9:30
ground starting point. And then you gain  experience. And then you realize, okay,  
9:35
I have a certain amount of experience  and then I can relate one to the other.
9:40
And I think this is the same in cosmology.  The only thing we can measure is changes.   And at first, this was Newton's great, I would  say, great insight to transfer the expectation  
9:51
that laws in physics on Earth are exactly  the same on the Moon or even in farther out  
9:59
space. This was Newton's idea. Let's transfer  what we know from Earth, our expectations,  
10:04
into space. It could be different. I mean,  nobody says that this is true. It could be  
10:10
that this wine is not good. But on the other  hand, we found out in a lot of examples,  
10:16
with lots of experiences probing ourselves through  the local universe, going to the larger scales,  
10:21
that actually a lot of these physical laws seem  to be also plausible in farther out space. So it  
10:30
seems the same experiences that we make could  be made at other positions in the universe.
10:36
Okay, and now the problem is what? Like, okay,  sure, we don't know the mass distribution,  
10:42
but if we knew it, we could predict the  lensing. And if we knew the lensing,   then we could predict the mass  distribution. The problem is what?  
10:49
That we don't know either and  we have to infer both? Or what? Yes, the problem is when we know the source  perfectly, we can reconstruct the lens. And when  
10:58
we know the lens perfectly, we can reconstruct  the source. But the problem is in the universe,  
11:03
we are not sitting at the source position. So  we do not know what the source looks like. And  
11:09
we do not know what the lens looks like  either because the lens is also very far   away. And in both of these cases, we have the  problem that the source is only visible to us  
11:20
in a very distorted way. So we do not  even know what's the morphology of it.
11:25
And on the other side, the lens, this is something  that we have even less knowledge of. Because we  
11:30
see, let's for instance take a galaxy cluster. We  see a few galaxies in this cluster. But the rest,  
11:37
if we assume that dark matter exists, 85% of  this cluster is most likely dark. And then,  
11:43
how do we make sense out of this lens? What  is the distribution of the mass in this lens  
11:49
if I know less than 20% of this matter? I have  a lot of room to wiggle to distribute the mass  
11:55
of the dark matter, and as well a lot of room to  wiggle how the galaxies move that I actually see.
12:04
Okay so let's get to Jenny's large claim. What is  your big claim? And then we spend the rest of this  
12:09
episode, the next hour or so, dissecting it and  getting into the details. What's the punchline?
Local vs. Global Information
12:16
The punchline that I hope to put forward is  dare not to know. I would like to say if we  
12:24
take a look at the observables that we have, we  should clearly separate our model assumptions  
12:30
from the data. And this implies, in the end,  that we may not need as much dark matter as  
12:37
we currently think we need to describe the  cosmic structures. So, I don't want to fill  
12:42
the knowledge gaps in our mass reconstruction  with model assumptions. I would like to say,  
12:49
let's stick to the information that the  data gives us, and that's it. And the rest   is whatever. There might be something,  there might be nothing, we don't know.
12:58
Okay, so the amount of dark matter is  potentially drastically overestimated?
13:05
Yes, it could be. I mean, the calculations  that I do and my colleagues did, I mean,   I'm not alone in this, we're a team. And so  what we found out is that if we take a look  
13:15
at the multiple images in such a strong  gravitational lensing event, then we can  
13:22
infer local properties of the lensing structure.  And we can also infer how the source looks like  
13:32
up to an overall scaling constant. So we get the  morphology of the source, like the relative view  
13:39
of it, and we get the local information of the  light-bending object in space-time, but only the  
13:48
local properties of this lens, which means we know  the local distortion directions, like how is the  
13:54
lens distorting each multiple. And we also know  what is the relative size between these multiple  
14:02
images. So we know what's the relative power of  the lens between the different positions. And  
14:09
all of this is the maximum information that is  completely given by the data. So we do not make  
14:15
any additional assumptions how the dark matter  could be distributed in the entire structure.
14:21
So I'm sure a critic would just say,  look, we have so much converging   evidence from simulations, rotation  curves, the CMB, the bullet cluster,  
14:31
I'm sure it's always thrown out. How can  you say that this is just model-driven?
14:37
Because most of these, what you think is evidence,  is actually model-driven in exactly the same  
14:45
way. Because we only have a limited amount of  reasonable models, and we usually imply these  
14:52
because, on the one hand, if we start from  the early days of modern cosmology, people  
14:57
tried to understand everything analytically.  So the first models were spheres, ellipsoids,  
15:05
and maybe something a bit more complicated. And  then in the 1970s, 1980s, computers started to  
15:11
take over. And this was the time when people  said, hey, we can do this numerically. We can  
15:16
implement an entire universe in a computer.  For instance, Volker Springel, he has one of  
15:22
the biggest cosmological simulations on Earth  that he says, I can model an entire universe,  
15:28
including all galaxy clusters and everything,  in a computer. And this is then numerical.
15:34
But on the other hand, if you just take this  numerical simulation, you have the question,  
15:39
what did you put in? You put in a certain  amount of assumptions, like for instance,   that your cluster is subject to Newtonian  gravity, or that your cluster is taken  
15:51
together by Newtonian gravity and expanding  on a certain cosmological model. You implement  
15:58
a lot of assumptions, and so based on these  assumptions, you will see certain structures,   or you will not see certain structures. This is  why Volker has additional simulations to say,  
16:08
let's assume dark matter, for instance,  has different properties. So let's play   around. If dark matter is just a collisionless  fluid, and these particles do not interact,  
16:19
what happens then? How do my structures look  like? If I then let these particles collide,  
16:24
how would my structures look like then?  And he finds out it's vastly different.
16:30
So I'm not a dark matterist, I'm not a relativist,   I'm not a cosmologist or an astrophysicist. I'm  just a fool. A fool with some good looks maybe,  
16:41
let's say. But they're not fools. So  when you bring it up to other physicists,  
16:46
the model dependent argument, that must have  occurred to them. What's the reception like?
16:55
I would say it depends on whom you ask. I  mean, I would say the community is divided,  
17:00
that half of the community says, yeah, of course  we believe in dark matter because we can simulate  
17:06
it, we see that it's missing in all of these  different probes together. But on the other hand,  
17:11
if you take a look, all of them have a  very large overlap of the same assumptions,  
17:16
and everything is filling a lot of voids  where we do not have data with models.
17:24
This is the camp that I would say  is in favor of whatever I model  
17:29
should actually be there in reality.  And then there is the other camp,  
17:34
which I belong to, and these people, they  say, if we now take a look at our observables,  
17:41
what have we actually measured? And if  we now use a model to describe this,  
17:47
we know that this is not the reality. So we  know that we make a simplification to reality.
17:53
As George Ellis usually says, the cosmos is much  more difficult and much more complex than just a  
17:59
spherical cow, because our cosmological standard  model is a spherical cow. It's homogeneous,  
18:05
isotropic, so the same in every direction,  and the matter density is the same everywhere.  
18:10
So this is something that is very, very  simplistic. And if we use this model,  
18:15
we need to make sure that we know in how far  does it fit our data. And if we get better data,  
18:23
is the model still appropriate to describe the  degree of details that we have in the new data?
18:31
How did Mark Gorenstein react? Oh, he was... When I told him that I think that  it's the local information of gravitational lenses  
18:42
that is actually the information in the data, and  anything else is just model dependent, he just  
18:49
said, "Oh, finally, you got it. 30 years after we  found out that lensing is degenerate and lensing  
18:57
models can fit the data equally well." So this  was for us, this was a puzzle. And funny enough,  
19:05
he came from astrophysics and then he moved on  to biophysics and he looked also a lot into the  
19:13
optical analogy between strong gravitational  lensing and optical stuff. And I came from  
19:18
biophysics and I moved into astrophysics. So we  had some kind of overlap, which was quite funny.
19:25
So in the end, I think he could have  found it as well, but he didn't see that  
19:30
to get rid of the model. He thought, okay,  let's just probe a lot of models and then  
19:36
we will find out what is the underlying  principle. So forward modeling to insert  
19:41
different models and finding out are the  observables still the same, or does the   model predict different observables? He thought,  if we do this long enough, we will find it out.
19:51
But actually I came the other way around.  I said we need to get rid of the model. We   need to find what is the common thing that the  formalism itself tells us without inserting any  
20:02
model. And I found out the formalism is local.  Every equation that is there has an X there,  
20:09
meaning position of the multiple image. There's  always an X. It's the potential of X. It's the  
20:15
deflection angle depending on the position.  Everything is depending. So I thought, okay,   it can only be something local. It cannot  be something global. And then I found out  
20:25
if we leave out the model, the only thing  that remains is the local information.
20:31
This video is sponsored by Shortform. If you want  a free trial and an exclusive $50 off their annual  
20:37
plan, then go to the link in my description,  shortform.com/TOE. If you're like me, you've  
20:43
encountered books that are so dense, finishing  them is actually just the beginning. Shortform  
20:48
helps with that. Their book guides go far beyond  pastiche summaries. They critique, they add  
20:54
context, they include interactive exercises, and  connect ideas across authors. Take Gödel, Escher,   Bach, or The Master and His Emissary, two of the  most demanding reads in consciousness studies on  
21:04
the popular market. My method is I read the guide  first, then the book, then I read the guide again.  
21:10
So it's a triptych of engagement that cements  understanding, better understanding for me.   The GEB guide maps recursive structures in a way  that exhibits intellectual pleiotropy, where one  
21:19
insight branches into consciousness, computation,  and self-reference simultaneously. Shortform  
21:24
covers philosophy, science, and psychology, ipso  facto, the intellectual core of this channel.
21:30
They publish new guides weekly, and subscribers   vote on what books get covered next.  Their browser extension, Shortform AI,  
21:37
summarizes articles and YouTube videos with  a single click. Go to shortform.com/TOE for  
21:44
a free trial and an exclusive $50 off your  annual subscription. That's shortform.com/TOE.
21:52
Okay, so walk me through, what  does that mean physically?   What does local information physically mean?
Statistical Mechanics vs. Gravity
21:59
Local information physically means that usually  people want to determine the entire mass of a  
22:06
gravitational lens, like of a big object. And  so they are after making an assumption based  
22:13
on the multiple images that they see, what is the  total mass of this object? So they are inferring  
22:19
a huge global mass for one object based on  a few data points. But if you now say the  
22:27
local information is the maximum information,  not the information you have, it's obvious,   you cannot get the entire mass. All you can get  is some directions where the lens is distorting.  
22:38
You only know the properties of the lens at  these positions, and this doesn't give you   any information about the mass directly,  not even a mass at these image positions.
22:51
Wouldn't the critic just say, hey, we  always have incomplete data for everything,  
22:56
not just astrophysically, down on Earth we  have incomplete data, we have incomplete data  
23:02
abound. And so what you're articulating  is just fallibilism, we could be wrong,  
23:08
or some form of epistemic humility. But at some  point, one has to commit. Like every measurement,  
23:14
yeah, has model dependencies, but  at some point, you just say, okay,   well, this is the model and this model works, or  something like that. So tell me what you think.
23:23
Yes, yes, yes. I mean, in principle, when I  realized that it's only local information that   we have, then I had the problem, okay, this model  that we have, we insert it. So on the one hand,  
23:34
we cannot say much without a model, but then  how good of a quality are our models that we  
23:41
have? And there, if you go back to what's their  origin, it started as some idea that we have.
23:48
It's called the singular isothermal sphere,  meaning it's a gas in equilibrium that's  
23:53
spherically distributed, because this comes  out as a solution of an analytic problem. How  
23:59
would a gas cloud look like that is very  idealized? And that comes from like the  
24:06
first calculations that we did for astrophysics  when we said we want to know how stars form,   so we consider a gas cloud that is collapsing  under its own gravity and all of this. So we  
24:16
had these power laws which is like one  over r to the power of something. And   the singular isothermal sphere happened to be  one over r squared. This was one of the first,  
24:27
I would say, like structure descriptions  that people had. And then they said, hey,  
24:33
if we now have some structure that is not an ideal  gas cloud, let's just stick to these power laws,  
24:39
and let's just fit for whatever goes one to the  power of alpha. And then they found this still  
24:48
doesn't fit. And then they did a more elaborate  model based on simulations to fit for something  
24:55
that is in the end a heuristic mass density  profile that seems to come up in simulations.
25:02
So you can now ask, we have a model, and  we could say, okay, we validated it in some  
25:08
sense by simulations. But do I believe that these  simulations are actually mimicking reality? That's  
25:15
one point. And the second point is, a theoretical,  fundamental, physical explanation, unfortunately,  
25:22
is still missing. This is why I also started to  develop a derivation of such mass density profiles  
25:29
in order to reason why this power law is actually  missing, that is not necessarily reasonable,   and why we should use it, why we should trust  it. And this is very complicated, of course,  
25:38
because a lot of people suffer here that normally  we have statistical mechanics. That's what we've  
25:44
learned since 1900-something. But the problem is  that this statistical mechanics is not suitable  
25:50
for gravity. And I think Roger Penrose,  he would definitely agree to this. He also  
25:56
propagates this quite a lot of times, that he says  gravity is exactly the opposite of what we do.
26:02
We think statistical mechanics happens.  The entropy should always increase,  
26:07
and then you have like a uniform  distribution of everything. But what   does gravity do? Gravity takes exactly  the opposite direction. Everything that  
26:16
is distributed is just collapsed into  a single point. This is, I would say,   maximum order instead of maximum entropy in  that sense. So how do you use a statistical  
26:27
mechanics approach that is doing the opposite of  what gravity does in order to describe gravity?
26:34
And this was my problem when I started to set  out, okay, how can we describe a mass density   profile? How can we derive this? And I'm not  allowed to use statistical mechanics. And so  
26:46
I called it DEMON for Dark Emergent Meta-halo  Ontological Nexus... And that was my approach  
26:52
that I put forward. And I found out that it is  possible to reason why this power law is good,  
26:59
but not using statistical mechanics, to just  say, okay, we start with Newtonian gravity,  
27:07
and then we say Newtonian gravity is scale-free.  And this scale-freeness is obviously something  
27:14
that leads to power laws. This is what we also see  in nature on Earth. And then you can reason why a  
27:20
power law should be a good approach. And then  depending on how you coarse-grain your galaxy  
27:27
distribution into some density, you can then  argue why you're going to go to the next level, a   certain experiment is reasonable or not,  and in which limit you can get this.
27:38
So I'm more and more convinced that these  power laws are actually reasonable. But still,   I mean, we need to further understand from a  fundamental physical perspective which model  
27:47
is actually good. And this is what I would like  to see in the near future for astrophysicists.  
27:53
Don't use black boxes. I mean, simulations are  important, but don't use them as black boxes   and just heuristically fit. Try to understand, to  bridge the gap, so we can bridge the gap between  
28:02
theory and simulation in order to get a better  understanding of what we're actually doing.
28:08
Why don't you give us an intuition as to what  a power law is and then what scale-free means,  
28:14
and why it's reasonable to think  of Newtonian gravity as scale-free,   and how that may imply power laws? What  does this all have to do with one another?
28:24
I mean, power laws is an inverse proportionality  in that sense, but to a higher exponent. So you  
28:30
have 1 over r to the power of alpha. And this  means that if you have the curve, I guess you can  
28:37
show the graph of the curve, how this looks like  for one over r squared or something like this.   And then you see that the farther you go away from  your origin, the less important this becomes. But  
28:50
the point is, it is still there. It is not going  exactly to zero. It's not really being damped by  
28:57
quite a lot. So this is the power law that you  can, for instance, describe what is the richness  
29:03
of people, so what is the wealth of people, and  then this usually follows a power law that you  
29:09
have a lot of people who earn hardly anything, and  then you have like your middle class, and then you  
29:14
have the bunch of millionaires, but obviously  it's not zero. And you cannot say if you have  
29:20
10 millionaires who have a certain amount of money  that you now know exactly what's the total amount  
29:26
of wealth that a person can have. Because there's  always the surprising moment that somebody,  
29:32
like a billionaire, could step into the room  and say, here's my paycheck, I earn much more.
29:37
And this is, I would say, the perk of a  power law, that sometimes there could be,  
29:44
depending on the exponent, there is no mean,  there is no variance, and this means that the  
29:50
universe could keep on surprising us that it's  not something that we can fully grab by, okay,  
29:58
here's the mean and here's the variance, and now  anything else would be completely challenging  
30:04
everything. And the perks of these power laws  is there is always a chance of surprisal,  
30:10
that if we find a structure that is too  big to be true, in a power law statistics,   this can come up, this can happen. And it's  not unusual in the sense that it's completely  
30:19
challenging the world view immediately. This is  why I like this idea of power law statistics.
30:26
And Newtonian gravity is one example, because it  has a gravitational law. The force is one over  
30:33
R squared. So this means that the force only  depends on the distance between two objects.  
30:41
It doesn't depend on the time at which these  two objects come together. It doesn't depend   on any other property than just the masses,  which are in the numerator, and this R squared  
30:52
in the denominator. And this is the nice thing  of scale-free gravity, like this Newtonian law.
31:00
Now, I have the pleasure of  speaking with you before this call,   and so I have a quote from you I want to read out.
31:08
Yes, yes, sure. I hope I wrote it down correctly. It's roughly  correct. The entire community suffers from the  
31:13
problem that people like to model. Forward models  can be generated by every bachelor student in the  
31:19
first week. It's an entire machinery. But  if you want to solve the inverse problem,   then it's much harder. It requires much more  math. It's ugly. It may take months or years.
Inverse Problem Methodology
31:29
I hope I've roughly captured you correctly. Yes. I hope I didn't lens, I hope I didn't distort what  you said. So anyhow, please explain the difference  
31:37
between forward modeling and then inverse  modeling, because it's extremely important.
31:45
Yes, I think that forward modeling is something  that everybody intuitively does. It's also in  
31:52
everyday life. When you see something, you  immediately try to find a cause and a reason,  
31:57
and how everything happens, what happens from  the start to the point at which you observe  
32:02
something. And so forward modeling  is something that everybody does,   and it's something that we build up a  certain expectation, and the moment that  
32:12
we get a confirmation from our forward model,  that it was predicting something correctly,  
32:18
we are happy. So this is something that gives us  some endorphins, if you want to see it like this.
32:25
But on the other hand, the moment that we  forward model, which is quite easy to do,  
32:30
obviously, to just think from start  and then think, how do I get to the  
32:36
point that I observe myself in my scenario.  This is the point that when you say, okay,  
32:42
I get the prediction, but now if the prediction is  wrong, nature tells you, "Sorry, no, this is not  
32:49
the way that I work." Then you try a different  model. And then if you get another rejection,  
32:54
you get another rejection. And then another,  another, another. And this is where we stand   in cosmology right now. We ask, okay, we have  tensions in cosmology. We have a lot of things,  
33:04
a lot of stuff we don't understand. So is it this  direction? And nature tells us no. Then we ask,  
33:10
okay, can we wiggle around with this  other parameter? No. Or can we wiggle   around here? No. And if this is not solving the  tension, we don't get a direction where to go.
33:21
And I don't know why the community likes to do  this. I guess only it's because you think you're  
33:28
close to the solution and you want to guess it  right. Because it seems that from a philosophical  
33:34
point of view, having a forward model and then  predicting something and getting the approval of  
33:39
nature, yes, this is right, this is supported by  the experiment, this is something that everybody  
33:45
values as it's a good scientific theory, because  it made a prediction and it turned out to be true.
33:52
But on the other hand, if you do the inverse  problem, you see something, and then you say,  
33:58
based on what I see, how can I reason? How could  I have gotten there in all possible ways that is  
34:06
there? Or what is the necessary model that gets  me there? If a mug lies on the floor and is in a  
34:14
thousand pieces, it doesn't matter whether  it was the dog who put it over the table,  
34:19
or whether it was the kid, or whether it was  myself. It doesn't matter. It just matters. The  
34:25
necessary assumption is the mug is in a thousand  pieces on the floor. It must have fallen from the  
34:31
table. This is the necessary model that I have  there if I see the table and if I see the mug.
34:38
Okay. But this is all. This is all. And this is  the point that I say, if we have this necessary  
34:45
model, we know that this is something that is  required by the data. And if I now say, okay, I  
34:53
know the mug is broken, I know it must have fallen  from the table, or maybe it was pushed from the  
34:58
table. Then I look, could it have been the dog?  Could it have been my daughter? Could it have been  
35:03
my husband? Whoever. Then I start to look, who  could it be? Like looking for the culprit after I  
35:11
fixed the point, I can go to the next part of the  model in order to make my causal relation working.
35:18
And I think that this is a more positive way of  doing science, to start with the necessary thing,  
35:24
because if I see it must have fallen off  the table, I have a positive idea. Okay,  
35:30
the mug is broken, but I have a positive idea  of I have a model that must be true. The next  
35:38
step is now to find who pushed it, if it  was pushed at all. Maybe the window was   open and it fell by itself. But all of these  additional assumptions are for the first point  
35:48
not necessary. But for the next point of my causal  relation. But if I'm wrong that it wasn't my dog,  
35:54
then it doesn't, I don't fall back to  square zero. I just fall back to it  
36:00
must have fallen from the table, and then  I just look for the next possible reason. Okay so if I'm understanding this correctly,  you're explaining some of my psychology. So I  
36:09
very much like cop shows or true crime shows. And  I think that's because I'm so theoretical that I  
36:16
constantly do forward modeling. So I care about  what is the cause and then I try to produce what  
36:22
the effect would be. So I'm thinking, okay,  here's an equation, here's a cannonball. As a  
36:28
first student you think of balls that are thrown  into air and then you think what would happen   if you did this. But you're thinking about it  experimentally from a data analysis point of view.  
36:38
No, the universe doesn't work from our model and  then runs it forward. The universe gives us data,  
36:44
and we're trying to get the model that accurately  matches the data. So this is what cops do,  
36:49
this is what detectives do. They have the  effect, they have the then, and they're   trying to infer the if. Whereas theorists  start with the if, and then they do the then.
37:00
Yes, CSI cosmology, if you  want to see it like that. Right. Great, great. Okay, so explain  how that forward versus inverse,  
37:08
which every student does forward. The  inverse is the reason why it's messy,  
37:15
and it's not a one-to-one  map, it's a one-to-many map. Right. So, as you gave the example with the  shattered glass on the floor, you look at that,  
37:25
it could have come from multiple sources. There  are many coarse grainings that are consistent   with that shattering. So it could have been  your dog, could have been your daughter,  
37:34
could have been your husband, could have been  you, and when you're sleepwalking, blah, blah,   blah. So how does this now, this abstract  concept of forward versus inverse modeling,  
37:43
relate to dark matter? And some of  the problems that you think we have   with modeling dark matter, maybe we've  overestimated the amount of dark matter.
37:51
I mean, the biggest problem that I see  is we are not short of models. I mean,   since Zwicky had the idea that there could  be some missing mass in the Coma cluster,  
38:01
which is one of our neighboring clusters, and he  found out there seems to be missing mass. He was  
38:07
actually more convinced that it's just a missing  mass that we have from, I mean, that hasn't been  
38:13
discovered. It wasn't a big thing. But then when  people saw that there is something, some potential  
38:18
for something new, of course, the particle  physicists immediately jumped at this. They said,  
38:24
okay, if this is a new particle, if this is some  new substance, then we can go and look for it at  
38:31
CERN, we can go and look for it at Fermilab and  everywhere. So theoreticians in particle physics  
38:38
got excited about this. And then there are now, by  now, myriads of ideas which particles it could be.  
38:45
And of course, CERN, Fermilab, SLAC, they all went  and tried to find a particle. And then the string  
38:52
theoreticians, I mean, they got their hearts  up that it could be something like a minimally  
38:57
coupled thing from supersymmetry. They said, okay,  maybe this is finally our minimum stable particle  
39:03
in supersymmetry. They were happy about this.  But then, after all of the particle physicists  
39:08
brought their idea forward and went to measure,  there hasn't been any detection. So there are lots  
39:16
of models. People tried a lot of models. So far,  no clear evidence this is a dark matter particle.
39:25
And then people said, okay, maybe it's not a  particle. People like Mordehai Milgrom, or there  
39:32
are several other people who said, actually, maybe  we're just misguided that we're not missing mass,  
39:39
that we are actually having something  wrong in our gravity. Worst statement,  
39:44
Einstein was wrong. The best clickbait.  Einstein was wrong. It's not missing mass,   it's actually missing gravitational understanding.  And so this is why Mordehai Milgrom, he started  
39:56
with the modified Newtonian dynamics, because  you think that most of these cosmic structures  
MOND and Modified Gravity
40:03
in their own vicinity can still be described  more or less quasi, that you say I can say  
40:09
to a good approximation Newtonian physics  still works for them. And so Milgrom thought,   how about we modify Newtonian dynamics because  our best probe that we have of how gravity works  
40:21
is the Pioneer satellites. And then he said the  scale on which they have probed the universe,  
40:28
we can be sure that the gravitation works  as Newton said. But if we now go out,  
40:34
we don't know. It could be different. So let's  modify Newton's law based on a scale that is  
40:41
larger than what we have measured with our  satellites. It's a totally valid assumption.
40:47
And so he went on and he found there is  actually, there seems to be a law that   seems to work. And MOND has been there.  There was a conference, MOND at 40,  
40:57
meaning the 40th anniversary of MOND. And of  course it suffers from problems. It's Newtonian,  
41:03
it's not general relativistic. Then people  said, yeah, it suffers from certain problems.   You have one scale parameter in there. You  cannot argue where it comes from. You fix  
41:12
it by fitting galaxies, for instance, or you're  fitting some galaxies and then you get the scale   parameter based on the data you measure. There  are lots of issues, and people say, this is why  
41:23
we don't want to have this modified Newtonian  dynamics as an alternative to dark matter.
41:29
But on the other hand, MOND survived 40  years, and it was able to solve some of  
41:35
the problems to extend the theory. And  I would say if we compare the ideas,  
41:42
missing mass to use dark matter, whatever dark  matter model it may be, or modifying gravity,  
41:48
we're still missing mass, and it seems  both of them have their issues. And we   could say both of them are in some sense not  sufficient. There still is some question here.
41:58
But on the other hand, as long as we do not  know, it can't be a particle, but is it really  
42:04
some modification of gravity? Maybe not really.  We cannot know what is actually out there. And  
42:11
I think as long as we don't know for certainty,  both of these ideas, both of these explanations  
42:18
are still somehow compatible with the data within  their realms. I mean, both of them have problems,  
42:25
but on the other hand, I do not see that I could  now, I cannot definitely refute MOND on something   that I see, and I cannot definitely refute dark  matter on something that I see. So I'm happy.  
42:36
The data tell me both of them have problems,  but in some sense, both of them are compatible  
42:41
with most of the data that I have. So for me, I  don't see any problem. Why should I now go for  
42:47
dark matter or go for MOND or go for anything  else in favor and leave the other stuff aside?  
42:53
I cannot say this works better than that  one, purely based on the data that I see.
43:00
The Economist covers math, physics, philosophy,  and AI in a manner that shows how different  
43:05
countries perceive developments and how they  impact markets. They recently published a piece   on China's new neutrino detector. They cover  extending life via mitochondrial transplants,  
43:16
creating an entirely new field of medicine. But  it's also not just science. They analyze culture,  
43:21
they analyze finance, economics, business,  international affairs across every region. I'm particularly liking their new insider feature.  It was just launched this month. It gives you,  
43:31
it gives me, a front row access to The  Economist's internal editorial debates,   where senior editors argue through the  news with world leaders and policy makers  
43:41
in twice weekly long format shows. Basically  an extremely high quality podcast. Something  
43:47
else you should know about is that if you go to  their app, they not only have daily articles,   but they also have long form podcasts with  their editors and writers. It is also available  
43:57
online. Whether it's scientific innovation or  shifting global politics, The Economist provides  
44:02
comprehensive coverage beyond headlines. As  a TOE listener you get a special discount.  
44:08
Head over to economist.com/TOE to subscribe.  That's economist.com/TOE for your discount.
44:17
Okay, so to stick and get this point fully  across about forward versus inverse modeling,  
44:23
as it's super, super important. And one of  the reasons why I'm so excited to speak with   you is that you've developed these data  analysis techniques that not only will  
44:33
be useful for cosmology, but potentially,  we spoke about this before, but off-air,  
44:40
potentially for particle collider physics,  particle physics, and for interdisciplinary  
44:46
work. You have some... Biophysics. Yes.  Biophysics, biomedical, whatever. Yeah,   your background, you have a background in machine  learning and cancer of various sorts. And so it's  
44:55
super interesting, because it's a template that,  I don't know if you can also help solve crimes. But it's a template.
45:03
Yes, in principle, I would  say it's also valid for CSI. Okay, so I'm in Toronto, and there are condos all  about. And so let's just imagine, let me give some  
45:14
analogy and see if it's roughly on track. Suppose  I'm trying to model that building's foot traffic.  
45:21
And the way I can't, it's too difficult for  me to do so, it's intrusive, I don't want to,  
45:26
but I can at least measure doors opening and  closing. I'm going to use that as some proxy. Then   I have some model of what the residents do, their  work schedules, the concierge's work schedules,  
45:36
visitors, and so forth. Then imagine  that the doors open, I collect that data,  
45:42
more than my model predicts. I could postulate an  invisible occupant called dark tenants, which...
45:52
Mr. X. Mr. and Mrs. X. Yes, yes. You would get a lawsuit  if you refer to your tenants as dark tenants,   especially if they look like me. But  let's just say... So it could be that  
46:02
there's some unknown residents,  it also could just be delivery   drivers, it could be that there's  automatic doors opening and closing.
46:08
You could call them phantom people. Yes, great, great. So another one  is, I think I did this a while ago,  
46:16
I was trying to measure my own electricity  bill a decade ago, and then I said, okay,   my fridge takes up this much electricity,  and so on, so on. And then the bill was  
46:25
a bit higher than I thought. And so I  could have posited some dark electricity,   or it could just be that my model of the  fridge, that it's nonlinear in the compressor,  
46:33
or that there was some other source, or maybe  the electric bill is wrong. So is that what   you're saying? It's like, we need to be careful  about what entities we're positing to exist.
46:46
Yes, that's exactly the point. I mean, if you try  to model who goes in and out the next door condos,  
46:53
then first and foremost, the way you described  your model. Have a look. How many parameters did  
46:59
you put in there? I mean, you had to look, you  need to know the working schedule of the people,   you need to know how many people live there, you  need to know, do these people have family who  
47:08
visit quite often? I mean, all of this, this kind  of like, it makes your parameter space explode.  
47:14
You need to keep track of a lot of things. And  now imagine you just are wrong in one of these  
47:20
things by a factor of two or so. Then your model  would be completely off because you have to look  
47:26
at the same time, you have to look at all of the  families in this building, and then if you just   with one estimate you're a bit off, this adds up.  And this is, as you said, your nonlinear effect in  
47:37
the fridge electricity. And then you can see that  all of this forward modeling is really fragile.
47:44
And this is why I also think that having the  inverse model is easier. It's actually, okay,  
47:50
it's mathematically more challenging,  but it's easier in the sense of you   only have fewer amounts of parameters, and  reducing stuff to the necessary ingredient,  
48:01
it gives you a clearer understanding of what is  actually there. You do not need to know all of  
48:07
the family members of each condo. You do not need  to know what's the working schedule of them. You  
48:13
just need to know, is there a bug in the door  openers that when some bee flies by the door is  
48:20
open? Or is there something that the moment that  the automatic light goes on the door goes open?  
48:26
You just need to understand when does the door  open? Because this is what you're interested in.
48:31
So your inverse model would be,  instead of trying to assemble all  
48:36
information you can about all  the inhabitants in the condo,   you just need to understand how does this  door work? And this is a much, I would say,  
48:46
a much easier problem to solve if you have  figured out that this is what you actually want.
48:52
Now going on MOND versus dark matter, wouldn't  the dark matterist, the proponent of dark matter,  
48:58
say, well, look at the CMB. That has nothing to do  with lensing, nothing to do with galaxy models, or  
49:05
rotation curves. And there's plasma oscillations  from 400,000 years or so after the Big Bang,  
49:11
and that's independent physics. There's  one of those acoustic peak... Sorry, sorry,  
49:17
acoustic peak... Baryon acoustic oscillations.  Yes, yes, BAO, BAO, yes. BAO, yes. All this is,  
49:23
again, it's independent evidence. It's not just  we're looking at the galaxy and saying that it's  
49:29
spinning too fast, or not in the right places  or what have you. So what do you say to that?
49:35
Yes, I agree. I mean, the CMB is one of  the, I would say, the most complicated   things to analyze. And it's definitely  a complicated and complementary probe.  
49:45
So you have the very early universe where we think  it was more or less a rather homogeneous soup.  
49:52
And then we see these tiny wiggles on top of it,  these fluctuations on the CMB. So in that sense,  
49:58
we have an easy game to do with the CMB, to  describe this cosmic microwave background   with our cosmological standard model. So you  would say it's a really clear and clean probe  
50:09
that you have something that is more or  less homogeneous and isotropic. If you   now fit something homogeneous and isotropic plus  epsilon, you would get really good constraining  
50:19
power with the data. And we have an all-sky  survey with the highest resolution we could   get from the Planck satellite after years of  expertise from COBE, WMAP, and all of this.
50:30
So CMB is really something that we would  say, yes, that is really a high precision  
50:35
probe. But to see the CMB, we need to get  through all of the foregrounds. I mean,  
50:43
the CMB was the baby picture of the universe.  Until this light reaches us, it has to go  
50:49
through a lot of stuff. And this means, have  we corrected the foregrounds correctly? I mean,  
50:55
there is the band of the Milky Way.  And usually we see the CMB picture,   like the fluctuation picture. We usually see this  as an all-sky map, but this is actually not what  
51:05
we measure. What we measure is something that is  rather at the upper parts and the lower parts,  
51:11
and in the middle there is this band from the  Milky Way that is usually with a less high  
51:16
significance. The signal-to-noise ratio there is  lower. So what people do is they improve on this  
51:22
data by simulations and also by extrapolations and  by additional data. And all of this goes through  
51:30
the data. Then everybody says that's a very clean  probe. But I would say the thing itself, yes. But  
51:38
the data processing that you need to do in order  to actually get to this is much more intricate.
51:45
So in that sense you could say we are fitting  something clear, we get a high precision,   admittedly, but still, have we gotten all of  the foregrounds right? And concerning dark  
51:55
matter here, for instance, we could  say okay we have a parametric model,  
CMB Data Processing Biases
52:00
we fit this parametric model to our observables.  So we find that these peaks, that relative height  
52:08
between the second and the third peak, which is  supposed to give us the amount of dark matter that  
52:13
we know based on our models again. So this means  we fit a model to data and then we find if we fit  
52:22
this model we are missing so much mass. So now  the question is, and this is definitely a very,  
52:28
very hard task, can we explain the cosmic  microwave background without dark matter,  
52:34
or what would then be the replacement for dark  matter? This is something that maybe we missed  
52:42
an understanding there. This is possible,  but on the other hand, I say the CMB is the  
52:47
hardest thing to explain in terms of getting  rid of dark matter. This is definitely true.
52:54
But on the other hand, I would  say if we start from us on Earth,  
52:59
we haven't seen dark matter. And if we  then go further out in the local universe,   it doesn't seem that we need a lot of dark  matter there either. So how come that suddenly,  
53:09
the farther away we go from our own  position, where we have lots of data,  
53:15
how is it possible that suddenly, when we go  far away, that we need a lot of dark matter,  
53:23
or that we miss mass? Is it rather, I would say  it could also be, well, possible, that we are  
53:30
actually missing something in our models. That we  are not missing mass, but just that nature is more  
53:38
complicated than we think, and the models that  we have are not complex enough to capture that.
53:44
I mean, you mentioned the bullet cluster.  The bullet cluster is one of the famous   examples where people said, this  is the evidence for dark matter.
53:54
The smoking gun. The smoking gun, in the literal sense, this is  why it's called the bullet cluster. Because you  
53:59
see that you have two big clumps of matter  that have been merging, have been colliding,  
54:07
and then they fly away. So they flew through  each other, and now they fly away at a certain  
54:12
distance. And then you see that you have in the  x-ray signal, you have the baryonic hot plasma  
54:21
that also interacted in the collision. And then  because there is a lot of physics going on there,  
54:27
like the plasma interactions and all of them, this  merger is then delayed for this x-ray signal. And  
54:35
then you see two bullets, one of them is really  clearly like a bullet, flying out again after  
54:41
this collision. And then people say, if we now  take a look at the position of this x-ray cloud,  
54:48
or the two x-ray clouds, and the position of  the galaxies involved in this merger, we see  
54:55
that there is an offset between the optical image  and the image that we have. And of course also the  
55:02
dark matter part that has been reconstructed  from lensing again around these optically  
55:08
detected galaxies. This is one part, and this is  offset to the x-ray signal that is the bullets,  
55:17
the bullets in the gas cloud. And this offset then  was taken as an evidence that here dark matter  
55:25
does not follow the luminous matter, the baryons,  because we have this offset. So the total mass is  
55:31
not where the mass of the visible things are,  mostly. This was propagated from 2004 onwards.
55:41
And a recent study just last year in 2025, there  was a big NASA press release from Sangjun Cha et  
55:49
al. Pardon my bad Korean. And these persons,  they had a look at the intracluster light,  
55:58
meaning all of the stars that are not bound into  the individual galaxies of the cluster. So because  
56:05
if you have a violent merger then of course not  only hot gas is emitted but there are also like  
56:14
galaxies that lose their stars. And these stars  they go into a collective cloud of stars which is  
56:21
called the intracluster light in the intracluster  medium. And with James Webb it became possible  
56:27
to track this intracluster medium because the  infrared wavelength at the center of the cloud   which James Webb observes, makes it now possible  to look at this. And so they took a map of this  
56:39
gas cloud of the stellar cloud, and they found  that this merger is much more complicated than  
56:46
just two clumps colliding and moving apart again.  They said it could have been that the biggest  
56:52
clump actually underwent an earlier merger, and  then they saw that there was an elongated arm  
56:59
going in the direction of the merger. And so it  wasn't just two spherical clumps colliding. There  
57:06
was no offset in that sense between the luminous  mass and the dark matter mass, because all of the  
57:13
stars in this intracluster light were actually  nicely following this merging structure. And so  
57:20
they said this cannot be a clear hint that dark  matter is offset to luminous matter. And again,  
57:27
refuting MOND. And so they said, if we now take  a closer look with new data that's actually  
57:33
possible now for the first time, we see we can  reconcile everything we know with the new data  
57:41
here. So there is nothing spectacular that the  dark matter would be completely detached here.
57:50
Interesting. I didn't know about that paper.  So I'll place that paper on screen and the   link will be in the description. And for those  who are driving and just listening to this,  
57:58
maybe running or what have you, but you  didn't see it and you were thinking, oh,   I wish I could see it, you can. That will just  rewind. We'll place the visuals of that on screen.
58:09
Okay, so what's the reception to that paper  been like then? I'm sure as with anything,  
58:14
philosophy, math, physics, everywhere, there's  usually counters to, not usually in math,   sorry, in physics or philosophy. But there's  
58:22
usually counters to when someone puts up  a position. So what's the counter there? I haven't heard much about objections or so.  I would rather think that it's, I would say  
58:31
it's a clear evidence that this cluster is much  more complicated. And this comes actually in a  
58:38
row of several other findings that have now become  possible with better technologies and better data.  
58:45
That people say, okay, first, back in the 90s, and  I mean the first gravitational lens was found in  
58:52
1979. And so we do not have that much experience  in lensing when we go to 1990, so everything was  
58:59
pretty coarse-grained and preliminary. But  now, today, after all of these years, we have  
59:06
a lot of data and we have a lot of experience with  different galaxy clusters. So if we now go back to  
59:12
the findings of the earlier times, and we re-look  at all of these galaxies or galaxy clusters,  
59:20
we find much more detail. And this detail  is then the thing that resolves the puzzle.
59:26
Like, for instance, here in the bullet cluster,  we have this intracluster stars, which now  
59:34
we solve the discrepancy between dark matter  and luminous matter. And the same happened   for a galaxy cluster that my team and I, we  were investigating. It was Abell 3827. This is  
59:46
another very beautiful galaxy cluster. And in the  center, you have four luminous galaxies. They're  
59:52
almost equally bright. And from this very unusual  configuration, it's pretty obvious that this is a  
Bullet Cluster Re-evaluation
59:59
dynamically very active cluster. Normally people  like to look at galaxy clusters that are relaxed,  
1:00:06
as we say, meaning we have one brightest  cluster galaxy and the rest is then just nicely,  
1:00:12
hopefully isotropically distributed. So the  ideal case would be a spherical galaxy cluster  
1:00:18
with one very bright galaxy in the center.  But this one here is exactly the opposite.  
1:00:24
Four luminous galaxies in the center and  then we have strong gravitational lensing  
1:00:32
around these four galaxies. And this lensing  almost forms a complete ring. This was why it  
1:00:38
was such a really beautiful, huge gravitational  lensing event around these four galaxies.
1:00:44
So people had a look at this, and then it  was pretty obvious at the start when you  
1:00:50
do forward modeling, you need to impose a lot  of dark matter. And when you reconstruct your  
1:00:56
total mass distribution with such a model,  you find again that the dark matter seems  
1:01:03
to be at different places than these  four luminous galaxies. And there,  
1:01:08
it was exactly the same process. People first  thought this is an evidence that dark matter and  
1:01:15
luminous matter can be decoupled from each other.  So what physicists call light does not trace mass,  
1:01:22
meaning you can have the luminous stuff  at a different position. And then people   first thought this was yet another bullet  cluster. But with more and more observations,  
1:01:33
you could see how this discrepancy was shrinking,  even in modeling. And then my colleagues and I, we  
1:01:41
analyzed this cluster with our model-independent  approach. And there we could definitely prove that  
1:01:48
this offset between the luminous part and the dark  matter part was completely driven by the models.
1:01:54
And this is the perk of our approach that  we can say we have a look at the local lens  
1:02:00
properties, and we can track how fast these  properties change over our multiple images.  
1:02:08
So we had huge, huge multiple images in this  case. It's a very beautiful example. And in each  
1:02:16
multiple image we found star-forming regions. And  so we could use these star-forming regions to chop  
1:02:22
up the multiple image, each multiple image, into  several parts. And then we mapped only these parts  
1:02:29
onto each other in all of these multiple images to  get the local lens properties. And so we saw that  
1:02:37
over the area of the entire multiple images, the  properties were changing. And this for us meant,  
1:02:48
okay, our approach relies on the fact that over a  certain area that we look at, that the properties  
1:02:55
do not change. So we assume that we have  constant properties in the area where we look at.
1:03:01
And if we now have patches across a multiple  image and we see each patch has a different  
1:03:07
property for this local lens property, sorry,  that each patch gives us a different value  
1:03:14
for a certain local lens property,  then we know, okay, for instance,   the mass density needs to change, or the  distortion strength needs to change over  
1:03:23
the multiple image. And this means the  lens is quite turbulent. It's changing.
1:03:31
So if we now assume we have a huge dark matter  halo that is smooth and hardly changing,  
1:03:37
then we can see that this is not fitting  the actual reality that is given by the  
1:03:44
data. And so we could say, if the mass density  already changes over a single multiple image,  
1:03:52
how can we extrapolate these lensing  properties into a region that is  
1:04:00
much more than just a single image? We have  more data, and it's much farther away from these   multiple images than just an epsilon, than just  the individual patches that we aligned together.
1:04:09
Can you explain to me, in an elementary fashion,  how is it that your approach can be called a  
1:04:15
model-independent approach? How can you do  science if you're not using models? What does  
1:04:22
that look like? The only truly model-independent  thing that I can think of is just you say,  
1:04:28
here's the data. And you just list the data with  conjunctions. You just say this and this and this.
1:04:34
Right, right. You always have to specify which  model it is independent of. And in this sense,  
1:04:39
I would say it's independent of a lens  model. So our formalism is independent of  
1:04:46
an assumption how the global mass distribution  of such an object, such a gravitational lens,  
1:04:52
looks like. So we just want to have  a look at the pure lensing formalism,  
1:04:58
which still makes assumptions. I mean, which  still describes how this light is curved around  
1:05:04
an object. But what we do is, in this  lensing formalism, we track the light  
1:05:09
bundles that are emitted from the source.  And then these light bundles are more or   less shot through the gravitational lens,  and then the observables that we get, this  
1:05:19
is what the lensing formalism tells us, it's these  observables depending on the individual positions.
1:05:26
And people who want to use a lens model, they  now use the formalism. And in this formalism,  
1:05:31
we have, for instance, that we need to specify  a gravitational potential. And then they say,   my gravitational potential is of this and  that form. So at position X, it has this form,  
1:05:41
at position Y it has this form and that value. And  so this is how this lens model is inserted into  
1:05:47
the formalism. And I just work on the basis of  the formalism. So for me, I have a gravitational  
1:05:54
potential at a position X. And what I do then  is to say, how does it change to a position Y?  
1:06:01
Or what are the changes that can be directly  tracked in the observables? While other people  
1:06:07
say, I want to make it more complicated, I use a  model. And then this model gives me what is the  
1:06:13
potential at position X, and what is the potential  at position Y? And then, of course, if you have a  
1:06:19
model, you know how it changes from X to Y,  but then this is a prediction of your model.
1:06:26
Why don't you sum this up into a core  thesis that holds this all together? So what's occurring to me is something like data  constrains local information. Everything else,  
1:06:36
every dark matter map that people  have seen, it's model-driven   extrapolation. It doesn't mean it's speculation  or just unconstrained surmising and conjecturing.
1:06:48
It is exactly that. It is exactly that. You got  it 100% right. You got it 100% right. That's  
1:06:55
exactly how you describe it. So the summary is  that the local properties that we extract from  
1:07:02
these gravitational lensing data sets, that  they are the maximum information we can gain  
1:07:08
about this gravitational lensing object, about,  for instance, a galaxy cluster or a galaxy. And  
1:07:15
what we know is that these local information  only encode the local shearing strength. So how  
1:07:24
much does a lens distort objects? And the relative  power, how much can a lens enlarge the image at a  
1:07:32
certain position with respect to another position?  This is the information we can get from the data.
1:07:38
And now the point is, the farther away we  go from the data, of course, the more any  
1:07:46
model assumption will take over. Like a real-time  model assumption will take over. In mathematics,   when you say I have a certain regularization  function that I say if I go far away from the  
1:07:57
data I want to have a flat, for instance if  you say what the gravitational potential in  
1:08:04
the vicinity of these images, if you say if I go  just far away from these multiple images I don't  
1:08:10
want to have any potential, let's assume I just  set it to zero or I set it to some constant. Then  
1:08:17
this is a regularization that you make. And  of course the farther away you go from these   images the more all of these assumptions will  take over to describe your global lens or your  
1:08:30
global mass density profile. Where you have data  you have information. Where you do not have data  
1:08:37
you have extrapolation, speculation, prediction,  whatever you want to call it. But in principle,  
1:08:44
this is the point. Local evidence and I would  say global extrapolation. Because the moment  
1:08:52
you use a model, you want to have this based  on fundamental principles. So you thought about  
1:08:57
what makes sense to combine all of these data  points into some overall model. So in that sense,  
1:09:03
I would say you make an extrapolation.  Physically informed extrapolation, if you want.
1:09:09
Is it like this? Yes, sure. Is  that the same as curve fitting?  
1:09:14
So you have discrete data points and then you  have a curve that you can place through it? Yes, yes, that's exactly it.
1:09:21
So would the analogy be, the data is the local  part, and then the curve fitting, the model that  
1:09:27
you suppose produces that data, of course in  the discrete amounts, but that is the global?
1:09:33
Yes, yes. I mean, you're a mathematician. You  can understand if I have a sample of data points,  
1:09:39
and I want to know what is the curve going through  all of these data points? Then you can assume,  
1:09:46
if I have sampled at a certain frequency, then  I can reconstruct my signal, my smooth signal,  
1:09:53
or my curve, if you want. But if you do not have  enough data points, then you have ambiguities.  
1:10:00
So what could be the actual signal? It's  the Nyquist-Shannon theorem. That you say,   if I have sampled at twice the frequency,  and I have a signal of finite bandwidth,  
1:10:10
then I can exactly reconstruct my signal.  If I lack data points, if I don't have the  
1:10:17
equidistant sampling, or if I do not have  finite bandwidth, I immediately get ambiguities,  
1:10:24
but I can resolve them if I have an idea, if  I have prior assumptions how my signal looked  
1:10:30
like. So then, using additional assumptions, I may  still uniquely fix my signal. I still can uniquely  
1:10:40
reconstruct it. If I do not want to use these  assumptions, that's the inverse problem method,  
1:10:45
I don't want to use any assumption, then I have  to live with the ambiguities. As good as it gets,  
1:10:51
I have different curves that fit the same  data equally well. If I have more idea  
1:10:57
what my curve actually was, then I can use  the assumptions to uniquely fix the curve.
1:11:04
So the universe doesn't give  you these equidistant samples? Yes, unfortunately not.
1:11:09
And you don't know the bandwidth? You don't know   what spatial frequencies  the mass distribution has?
1:11:15
No. I mean, can we observe the entire universe?  We can't. I mean, usually you need to see the  
1:11:22
entire signal to know that it has a finite  bandwidth. And the only thing we can do,  
1:11:27
and this is why I'm an observational cosmologist,  I say I have limited bandwidth physically by my  
1:11:35
particle horizon. Everything that I have ever  observed, or that we can theoretically ever  
1:11:41
observe, because the speed of light is finite.  So we have a light cone that we can observe,  
1:11:47
and all of this in our past that we can have  observed. That's our finite bandwidth in that  
1:11:53
sense. But we do not know what's beyond that. So  in that sense, we could do it, but we don't know  
1:11:59
the rest. There's always the philosophical  boundary of what comes behind the horizon.
1:12:05
Now your breakthrough, if I recall correctly,   came from reading someone else's  thesis in a completely different field.  
1:12:13
I believe it was quantum chemistry or  electrodynamics or something like that. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah, okay.
1:12:19
And it had to do with the Laplace operator and  Green's functions. Tell me about that please.
1:12:24
Yes. I mean, in principle I did my master's at  CERN in particle physics. Then I moved on to  
1:12:31
cancer research and machine learning because  astrophysicists didn't want to take on machine   learning at that time. And afterwards I moved to  astrophysics. But in principle all I've ever done  
Functional Analysis Breakthrough
1:12:42
was analyzing data under mathematical principles.  And then a friend of mine, he graduated in quantum  
1:12:48
chemistry, and so he asked me to have a look at  his thesis, which was more or less the mathematics  
1:12:55
of how to form molecules. And all of them, all  of the prescriptions, how we can understand which  
1:13:03
molecules can form based on all of the principles  that we know. And if I then had a look at it,  
1:13:10
I realized, gravity and electrodynamics have a  lot of things in common. Most importantly, the  
1:13:18
mathematics. And I saw the equations and suddenly,  I mean, he also described everything as local  
1:13:24
positions of electrons, and then you had the, how  do you call this, the ions in the molecules where  
1:13:31
you have the positive ions, and then you have the  electron cloud around this. And when I saw all  
1:13:39
of this, I thought, this is my gravitational  lensing problem. I saw the Laplace operator,  
1:13:45
I saw all of the functions and how to solve it,  and suddenly it was pretty obvious how to solve  
1:13:53
my problem to describe all of the degeneracies  in this lensing formalism. So how can I wiggle  
1:14:00
around the potential to keep all my observables  invariant? And then I saw in this thesis that  
1:14:06
the mathematics is exactly the same. So  I went back to my math book that I still  
1:14:12
have on the bookshelf here. And I found exactly  the theorems in functional analysis to describe  
1:14:19
my lensing degeneracies. So all I had to  do was copy the theorems from mathematics  
1:14:25
and translate them into the language  of this gravitational lensing problem.
1:14:32
So why didn't others see what you saw? I think it  was 30 years between when you made an application  
1:14:39
to an adjacent field. It's not even that far,  it's adjacent. I mean, it's not directly, but  
1:14:45
it was 30 years or so. So what did you see that  others missed? And what allowed you to see it?
1:14:51
I think, I mean, most astrophysicists that I have  met, they are more phenomenologists. They look at  
1:15:01
something and they have an intuition. If I have  twice the mass, I have like that many lens power.  
1:15:07
Or if I have twice the mass, these things should  run double fast or something like this. And for  
1:15:12
me, I cannot say much until I have written down  the equations. So for me, it's the mathematical  
1:15:18
framework that, in the end, gives me the reasons  to interpret physical things. So I think that this  
1:15:26
is why I found this degeneracy, because I saw the  mathematical formalism and I saw I can one-to-one  
1:15:34
translate this here. And only afterwards I found  out that this actually makes sense in physics.
1:15:40
So I first solved the equations and I knew this is  the solution. This must be right. But then I said,  
1:15:48
okay, I have the equations, but now they need to  get some physical meaning. Because most people,  
1:15:54
they either live in the world of mathematics  and then they have like variables, parameters,  
1:15:59
but then these parameters are usually  called in a certain name. And then they say,   but this is lambda. Like, for instance, the  cosmological constant, it has this lambda name.  
1:16:08
And then people say, yeah, but this is lambda.  This is a mathematical term. I want to know   what the physical realism behind all of this is.  What's the physical interpretation in this model?
1:16:18
And after I had the equations I then went on  to understand what do all of my parameters and  
1:16:25
variables mean in my equation. Carlo Rovelli said  you should not write down a single thing that you  
1:16:31
cannot attribute a clear physical meaning.  And this is something that I really took to   my heart. And I found out that the mathematical  formalism completely shows you the degeneracies  
1:16:43
because it's obvious. If I have a parameter  that is called the reduced shear, I mean,  
1:16:48
it's a small g. This is what's in the equation.  And then I thought, what does it mean? And it  
1:16:55
means that I can only constrain the local shearing  power. So what is the local shearing power? But  
1:17:03
this shearing power is independent of the mass  that it takes to shear this. It's just, okay,  
1:17:09
this is the amplitude of the shear and this is  the direction. But how much mass physically it  
1:17:14
takes to create that shear is irrelevant. And so I  saw that this is something that makes total sense  
1:17:22
physically because I do not know the total mass.  That was obvious. So I cannot constrain anything  
1:17:29
that is related to the mass. But I can constrain  properties that are more or less something with  
1:17:38
respect to a certain mass. You always see ratios  in these equations. And you can ask why. Well,  
1:17:44
it's always something divided by the mass. So  this is the getting rid of the degeneracies  
1:17:50
that we cannot constrain. So this was the, I would  say, the nice and beautiful part when I realized  
1:17:56
mathematics works out, and then I can learn  something about the physics from these equations.
1:18:04
Can you tell me who else inspires you,  or has inspired you? So for instance,  
1:18:09
you mentioned Carlo Rovelli, with the gist of  it being that don't write down anything that   doesn't have a clear physical motivation,  something like that. Who else? What else?
1:18:19
Well, my mathematics professor in my  first few semesters, he was really great,  
1:18:24
Professor Yeager, Professor Willi Yeager. And he  had several honorary doctorates. And in lesson  
1:18:31
number three, you immediately knew why. He was a  mathematician doing calculus, functional analysis,  
1:18:38
and in this direction, so more the, I would say  the numerical part of and the practical part of  
1:18:45
applied mathematics. And he taught me calculus,  functional analysis, and also a little bit of  
1:18:52
finite element theory. And whenever he did  something, like proof, theorem, whatever he did,  
1:18:58
he first explained what is it good for. And we  had a lecture with a lot of people from biology,  
1:19:05
chemistry, physics, everybody was sitting there,  also mathematicians. But he always made sure that  
1:19:11
we knew the practical applications and what is  it good for. What is the problem in the proof  
1:19:16
where we have to really take care that reality  and the proof still matches? And this was really  
1:19:23
inspiring for me. And this is, I think, what  went through all of my data analysis that I  
1:19:29
always remembered that you need to make sense  out of this and your mathematics should not,  
1:19:35
I mean, it should not be somewhere in  an abstract space. You need to be sure  
1:19:40
that all the requirements of your proof are  actually fulfilled in your physical problem.
1:19:47
This is from the mathematical side. And  another very inspiring person is George   Ellis from Cape Town. He is the one who  brought forward, based on, he did his PhD  
1:19:57
in Cambridge with Dennis Sciama. And I think  Dennis Sciama was one of the first persons  
1:20:02
in modern cosmology who tried to ask this inverse  problem question. And George Ellis and all of the  
1:20:09
collaborators from the inhomogeneous cosmology  community that I very much like and appreciate,  
1:20:14
they have brought forward that this inverse  problem approach should be pursued further.  
1:20:19
And I find this very inspiring, and this is  half of the camp of the cosmologists who say,   let's have a look what's in the  data and not model too much.
1:20:29
You said something that stuck with me. You said  that you can place infinitely many black holes,  
1:20:37
you can stack them in a null  set. What are you talking about? Yes. Yes, this is something that completely  struck me. When I tried to derive the lensing  
1:20:47
degeneracies mathematically, this all  lives in the very abstract notion of a  
1:20:53
Sobolev space in mathematics. And when I was  studying Sobolev spaces and all of these,  
1:20:59
what does a function require  to be integrated or what does a   function require to be differentiated? As a  student I thought, who the hell needs this?  
1:21:10
Why on earth should I care? And as a physicist  in third, fourth term, you do not encounter  
1:21:17
these issues because you're not as deep in  the research that you would actually care.
1:21:23
But then, when I had this formalism to solve, and  I suddenly realized it makes a difference if my  
1:21:30
function is smooth. It's just differentiable  twice. Is it even continuous? I mean, what do  
1:21:37
I know about this lensing potential?  I have no clue. So I wanted to have  
1:21:42
a function for my lensing potential that is the  most agnostic in terms of what do I have to put  
1:21:49
in the lensing potential. And suddenly I realized,  oh, it makes suddenly sense to say my function,  
1:21:54
my potential, should just be integrable  or maybe I want it to be smooth. Let's  
1:22:00
assume it's smooth. What can I say then? Or then  let's just be completely agnostic. What happens  
1:22:06
if this function is not even continuous  or so? And then I discovered suddenly,  
1:22:13
if I say the function should just  have the minimum requirements so   that it's integrable in my formalism, I  suddenly end up in these Sobolev spaces.
1:22:23
And in this Sobolev space, if a function  is integrable, you can still say that if  
1:22:28
you change the contents under the integral,  meaning your function, by a so-called null  
1:22:35
set, then you wouldn't change the integral. And  since all you care for in this formalism is the  
1:22:41
final result of the integral, you are allowed  to change your potential by this null set.  
1:22:47
And what is a null set? A null set could be in  physics. Now you go from mathematics to physics,  
1:22:53
what does it mean in physics? It could  be a countable set of black holes,   a countable set of point masses. And if you now  think in a physical sense, a potential that is  
1:23:04
really very nice and smooth, that's something  completely different than a potential that  
1:23:11
can have a lot of point masses everywhere and  is actually humpy bumpy full of black holes.
1:23:18
And this is something that quite struck me back  then when I thought, suddenly this makes sense  
1:23:23
because this was this one sentence in one of  the books on strong gravitational lensing. "Oh,  
1:23:29
and we can also put some black holes in this  potential. It doesn't matter." And I thought,  
1:23:34
where's this coming from? I don't know. And  for me, this sounded disruptive. I couldn't   imagine this. But the moment that I worked  through the mathematics, it was obvious why I  
1:23:45
could do this. But this came from a much more, I  would say, fundamental sound mathematical theory  
1:23:52
that I suddenly understood where it's coming  from. But physically, I would say, does this  
1:23:59
make sense? Could it really be that I have an  infinite amount, as long as it's countable,   an infinite amount of black holes in my  potential? So I would say mathematically,  
1:24:09
it's clear you can have it, you have this freedom.  But physically, you could ask, is this reasonable?
1:24:17
The formalism gives it to you, so your choice. So let's zoom out. You and Subir  Sarkar, who I spoke to on this channel,  
1:24:28
I'll place the link on screen, you both go  against the standard model of cosmology,  
1:24:34
but in different respects. So, where do  you agree with him and where do you differ?
Challenging the Cosmological Principle
1:24:40
Well, I mean, I've also talked to Subir quite  a lot, and he's a great discussion partner,  
1:24:45
and he's very knowledgeable. And this is why I  think that the stuff that he has put forward makes  
1:24:51
a lot of sense. And I would definitely trust the  results. So whatever he found is there. We cannot  
1:24:58
discuss it away. And he comes from particle  physics. So he says anything below this five  
1:25:03
sigma that he also mentioned in your interview is  nothing because it could go away as just a side  
1:25:10
effect or just some fluke. But everything  above this five sigma, whatever it means,   however you redefine your statistics, as he also  said, is something that has to be taken seriously.
1:25:21
And in several works he has shown that  he has an issue to reconcile the early  
1:25:27
universe with the late universe in terms of  a fundamental reference frame. That he says,  
1:25:34
if I'm now on Earth and I look into the cosmic  microwave background, of course we do not see   the nice pictures we've already spoke about. We do  not see this nice homogeneous isotropic picture.  
1:25:45
But we have to boost ourselves into this reference  frame, meaning we are moving with respect to this  
1:25:52
reference frame. And now, if Subir comes and says,  if this reference frame is fundamental, I should  
1:25:58
also see it in a later part of the universe. So  if I take a look at far away quasars, they live  
1:26:04
in a bit later universe, then I could say I should  do exactly the same boost and I should still see  
1:26:12
a homogeneous and isotropic distribution  of these quasars in this reference frame.
1:26:18
And so far I'm with him, but now the question is,  how do you now make sure that you are actually  
1:26:26
boosting yourself in the right reference  frame? I mean, how do you make sure that   you found all the quasars at the right  redshift? That it's really exactly that,  
1:26:36
in this shell of our cosmic time? Because  normally, like 10 years ago or 15 years ago,  
1:26:44
it was quite expensive to make these estimates  of how far these galaxies are away, like at which  
1:26:51
redshift are they. And he also had a study to  show that there was some contamination of low  
1:26:58
redshift quasars in his high redshift samples, so  he had to get rid of them. And on the other hand,  
1:27:04
it's also a question, how do you make sure that  you have actually sampled homogeneously or that  
1:27:11
you really got all the quasars in order to say,  I boost myself into this reference frame and  
1:27:18
I'm sure that I have enough quasars at the right  places. I mean, he also argues that he needed more  
1:27:26
than a million quasars in order to get his probe  to be significant. But the question is still,  
1:27:33
have we found all of them? Have we really found  all of the quasars and not something else?  
1:27:38
Because there could also be contamination from  other similarly looking sources, for instance.
1:27:44
And here I would be a bit more cautious to say  he found an effect that is definitely something  
1:27:49
there. But the question is the statistics that  we now apply to say this was really a five sigma  
1:27:57
detection, or is it really something that is just  as he analyzed it? Because there are also people  
1:28:06
who say it could be that these quasars change  over time. And if these quasars change over time,  
1:28:13
that could also create this effect. I mean, for  me I would say it is something that is definitely  
1:28:20
to be taken seriously and to be investigated.  But I also see the other camp saying, yeah,  
1:28:25
but what about this? What about the change  in the quasars? What about this? What about  
1:28:32
that? You will always have the, I would  say, the underdetermination that you can   say I see this as a hint for an inhomogeneous  cosmology or for some breakdown of Lambda CDM.
1:28:45
I would say the breakdown of Lambda CDM is not as  bad as breaking down the cosmological principle.  
1:28:52
This is even the better point and the stronger  probe, I would say. That most people just try to  
1:28:58
say something is rotten in Lambda CDM. Meaning we  have our standard cosmological model and this has  
1:29:05
a certain set of parameters for one specific class  of models, which is homogeneous and isotropic. And  
1:29:14
now Subir even says, it's not that something  is rotten in Lambda CDM. It's that something  
1:29:19
is rotten in the entire class of these models.  So it's not just that we have a problem that,  
1:29:26
for instance, a certain parameter has  this value and somebody else says no,   it has a lower value or a higher value. It's the  entire class of these models, this very simple  
1:29:36
assumption that the universe is homogeneous  and isotropic, that this is actually at stake.
1:29:44
So, if his effect is actually true, we  may not only have to abandon Lambda CDM,  
1:29:50
we will also have to abandon the entire class  of these spherical cow models. So this is,  
1:29:56
I would say, the more groundbreaking thing.  But on the other hand, the inhomogeneous   cosmology community, like George Ellis always  says, the universe is more complex than that,  
1:30:07
actually is waiting for this because, I mean, I  would say Einstein, 1917, already knew that this  
1:30:14
assumption that he made in his first cosmology  paper, to say, let's assume that the universe  
1:30:20
is homogeneous and isotropic, or statistically  even homogeneous and isotropic, that's what he   wrote. He wrote clearly, "I assume this. But I do  not think that this is true. Because even with my  
1:30:34
limited knowledge of stars and a little bit of a  galaxy, I see that there are stars and there is  
1:30:40
nothing. So I know that I make a simplified  assumption, and I hope that with more data  
1:30:46
we will overcome this simplified assumption  and we will get to the next level of detail."
1:30:52
So this is the interesting part. So an  opponent can always say to Subir, hey,  
1:31:01
your quasars are more variable than you think.  You haven't completed your sky coverage. There  
1:31:08
may be other prior assumptions. Yes. So do  you think that his model has more wiggle room,  
1:31:13
then Lambda CDM? And is that the core  here? That if a theory is flexible and   it's difficult to kill, then that's not  such a great theory. I think Lakatos,  
1:31:23
I don't know if you know who the philosopher of  science Lakatos was, but he said a degenerating  
1:31:28
research program is one that can absorb away  these issues because you don't want your science,  
1:31:34
your theories to bend so much and accommodate  everything or potentially accommodate.
1:31:39
Yes, yes. I mean, Subir is not making any, well,  he's just saying if I interpret everything in  
1:31:46
Lambda CDM within this framework, I run into  an inconsistency. So in principle he is,  
1:31:52
or not only Lambda CDM, he's even saying I use  the cosmological principle that the universe is  
1:31:59
the same around every point in the universe,  homogeneous and isotropic. And then he says,  
1:32:05
okay, if this is true, then I can do the  boost in the same way in the early and in  
1:32:11
the late universe. I end up at the same  homogeneous and isotropic distribution.  
1:32:16
And now he says I don't find this. So  in that sense he doesn't have a more  
1:32:22
complex model or so. He just shows that our  current model has an inconsistency. So he's  
1:32:29
just proving our model wrong if all of his  assumptions are true. That's his statement.
1:32:39
Didn't you give a talk about Lambda  CDM where you played both sides? Like,  
1:32:45
forward and then played devil's  advocate? That's a rare quality   to be able to do it, and then also to  do it publicly. So tell me about that.
1:32:53
Yes, yes. I mean, the point is, I mean, I'm also,  I mean, I started at CERN as a particle physicist,  
1:32:59
so I also think anything below 5 sigma is  maybe worth looking at, but it's not worth  
1:33:05
something that we say, okay, now we take  this seriously. So my colleagues and I,   we wrote a paper, we decided to write a paper  to collect all of the issues that we have,  
1:33:17
not only for the Lambda CDM tensions, but also for  the entire tensions of the cosmological principle,  
1:33:25
like one of the probes is Subir's matter  dipole. So to say, let's have a look,  
1:33:31
what do the data tell us about the cosmological  principle? Like about this homogeneous and  
1:33:38
isotropic universe that Einstein assumed in  1917? I mean, we wrote this paper in 2023,  
1:33:44
so more than 100 years later. And Einstein  back then said, "We have to overcome this.  
1:33:49
There must be the next level of detail." And we  wanted to ask, have we reached that level yet?
1:33:55
And so we teamed up with 22 or 23 scientists  and we collected in a review paper all of the  
1:34:02
hints that seemed to violate the cosmological  principle. And Subir's probe was one of them.  
1:34:08
And this was one of the few that actually reached  the five sigma for the statistics. Another one,  
1:34:18
which is also at the same time in  the other way that I think is the   bulk flow of Kostas Migkas. So Kostas Migkas,  he analyzed galaxy clusters and he wanted to  
1:34:29
know in how far these galaxy clusters on  the sky, how they are moving as an entire  
1:34:37
entity. Do they have some so-called bulk flow?  Do they move together in a certain direction? Or  
1:34:43
does every cluster move in a certain direction  and statistically the motion is averaging out?
1:34:49
This started as a PhD thesis and he thought, okay,  I now prove that nothing happens here and then I  
1:34:55
can move on to my actual project. No. He didn't  set out to find this, but he found a certain bulk  
1:35:02
flow on the sky that he said there is something  that is moving in a certain direction. It doesn't  
1:35:08
average out. And he turned out, after hundreds of  pages of papers that he wrote and his PhD thesis  
1:35:16
and a lot of different data sets that he analyzed,  this effect was also at a five sigma significance.  
1:35:24
And so in our paper we found, we had Kostas as  a co-author, of course. So we found that there  
1:35:30
are actually many effects that hint at a violation  of this cosmological principle. So Subir's is one  
1:35:38
of the most prominent with five sigma. Kostas  Migkas' bulk flows is also one at five sigma.  
1:35:44
And then we had several other effects as well that  were not at five sigma, but maybe at 3 or 4 sigma.
1:35:52
For instance, Alexia Lopez and Roger Clowes,  they found what was called back then the giant  
1:35:57
arc on the sky. A really very big structure on the  sky that seemed to be like clustering, but in a  
1:36:06
larger scale. And by now, they even found a  giant ring. So the whole structure is growing  
1:36:12
and growing. It's getting larger and larger.  And this means now, if we have a finite time  
1:36:18
from the Big Bang till now, how can we assemble  such a huge structure? The counter argument is,  
1:36:25
this is a chance alignment. This can happen.  And you just have one of these structures.   Or maybe like, let's say we have three of  these structures. On a statistical basis,  
1:36:34
this doesn't challenge our universe.  That's one of the arguments. But on the other hand, if you take this in  context, that we have the cosmic matter dipole,  
1:36:44
that we have these galaxy clusters that  are flowing in a certain direction,   that we have two large structures that seem to  be challenging our standard model, that we have  
1:36:55
additional bulk flows of other things, not only  galaxy clusters, that seem to challenge our model.  
1:37:01
And we have a lot of these probes. The CMB, I  mean, you think it's a clear probe. We talked  
1:37:06
to CMB scientists and we found out there are  also axes of evil in the CMB. And there are also  
1:37:14
anisotropies or even like asymmetries in the CMB.  And all of these things together, I mean, this was  
1:37:22
for me one of the key moments to say, either our  universe is more complex than a spherical cow. Or  
1:37:30
all of these probes are missing something. And  it's not even the same thing. Because they all  
1:37:35
seem to miss something different. Like, do we get  all of these calibrations wrong? In each probe,  
1:37:42
do we have different calibrations? And all of them  do not seem to be right? This was something for me   that I found most convincing to say we are at  the stage that Einstein said, now we see the  
1:37:54
next level of detail. Now we should look at what  is the next level of detail for our cosmology.
1:37:59
And I would see it positively. I mean, I  wouldn't say it's cosmology in crisis. It's,  
1:38:06
we have, after a hundred years of research, we  have reached a stage where we can say we are  
1:38:12
now ready to move on. After a hundred years  of this first standard model that we have,  
1:38:17
we are now ready to see the next level of  detail. I mean, homogeneous and isotropic,  
1:38:23
that's the second most boring thing you can  do. And as long as your data is bad enough,  
1:38:31
you will not see the next level of  detail. But if you increase your data,   if you increase your quality, you will see more  details than homogeneous and isotropic things. You  
1:38:41
will start to see dipoles. You will start to see  directions that are preferred. It seems that we  
1:38:47
are at this point. I would say it's rather a very  positive thing to think of than a negative thing.
1:38:55
Now, those rings that you mentioned.  Roger Penrose claims that those CMB   rings are echoes from a previous universe.  One that was not a part of the Big Bang. A  
1:39:05
prior Big Bang. And then prior Big Bang ad  infinitum, his conformal cyclic cosmology.  
1:39:12
You work with that kind of data. You just  referenced it. Is he onto something? You  
1:39:17
sound like a typical forward modeling  speculator. Do we have something here?
1:39:22
And that's, I think, that's the fun with forward  modeling that you can kind of like speculate and   gamble. Is he onto something? And here, this is a  brilliant example again of forward modeling. What  
1:39:33
do you want to believe? I mean, Roger's idea  goes far beyond anything that goes currently  
1:39:38
to our observational points. The first picture  that we have is the cosmic microwave background.  
1:39:44
And he now claims we have space and time  before the Big Bang. This is revolutionary.  
1:39:50
And then you could say, but how  do you test this with our data? Here, which I find is really great, is that he  makes predictions that can actually be tested  
1:39:59
in our own data that we have at the moment. And  he says that in this cosmic microwave background  
1:40:06
there should be these remnants of the black hole  mergers, the so-called circles of low variance.  
1:40:11
And he and another person, they also teamed up  in order to measure these, to find these rings.  
1:40:19
And in the WMAP data after seven years of data  taking, they claimed that they found four of these  
1:40:28
concentric rings. But now again the question is,  the other camp says, and there is another paper  
1:40:35
says, yeah, he claims that he has significant  evidence. They do not state how many sigma,  
1:40:41
if I'm not mistaken. But the other camp says,  yeah, but what about the foregrounds to the CMB?  
1:40:47
You need to take this into account as well. And  then the significance changes. And on the other  
1:40:52
hand, they claim, if you now try to say it's a  significant detection, with respect to what? And  
1:40:59
then Roger Penrose and his colleague, they used  a certain kind of statistics that they said,   this is significant. But the other team  says, we used a different ground truth,  
1:41:10
a different simulation in order to see, is this  actually significant? And if you add everything  
1:41:15
up, they say, at the moment in this data that we  have, we don't find significant evidence for this.
1:41:23
So it doesn't mean that Roger is wrong.  It doesn't mean that Roger's theory is   supported. It means the jury is still  out on this, and we need more data,  
1:41:31
better data from the cosmic microwave background  in order to now see, is this theory supported or  
1:41:37
not? But the problem here is, this theory just  stands now at the moment as is. There is neither  
1:41:43
evidence against it nor evidence supporting it.  So it's another theory that we can gamble on.
1:41:50
Does this mean that you found an  alternate way to test Roger's theory? No, I mean, I didn't work on this at all. I'm  more of a late universe person. But in principle,  
1:42:00
the question is always, if you try  to find the statistical significance,  
1:42:06
you need to compare to simulated universes  that you think are in accordance or consistent,  
1:42:12
as Neil Turok would say, with the data that  we have and all the knowledge and our theory   that we currently have. And here, this is the  difference between these two camps. That they say,  
1:42:24
we do not have different data. We just have  a different way of interpreting the data.
1:42:30
Speaking of Neil Turok, he's also been on this  channel and you referenced him before as well.  
1:42:35
He pushes back, much like yourself, against  exotic dark matter. He thinks that it may just  
1:42:41
be neutrinos. You're both minimalists in this  sense. Do you find your work converging with  
Minimalist Neutrino Solutions
1:42:46
his? Or do you see yourself as coming  from completely different directions? Oh yeah. Neil is a great guy. We even met at a  conference and we talked to each other. I very  
1:42:57
much support his view that if we do not  see more particles coming from detectors,  
1:43:02
we should stick to the contents that we have. And  then we should make a self-consistent picture of  
1:43:08
the universe with the stuff we have without going  to look for mysterious things. And in that sense,  
1:43:14
I think the idea he's proposing with the  right-handed neutrinos is pretty cool. Because  
1:43:19
we have already seen neutrinos, just left-handed.  But it looks reasonable to make a small extension  
1:43:26
in our sector to say we allow for the right-handed  ones as well. So in that sense, we're definitely   converging. And I also agree that we should try to  find a theory that does not use any exotic stuff.
1:43:40
But where I see myself a little bit diverging  from him is his idea how to solve the cosmological  
1:43:48
constant problem. So at the moment, he says,  we have explanations for two of his five  
1:43:54
parameters. But for three, he still needs to have  phenomenological fitting functions. And for dark  
1:44:00
matter, this is still one fitting function, but he  puts forward half of an explanation that he says,   we still need to make more sense out of this,  but the right-handed neutrinos might do the job.  
1:44:09
That's good. But for the cosmological constant,  he says he might have an explanation of why this  
1:44:16
constant is so low. And on the other hand, why  it comes from the vacuum energy of quantum field  
1:44:22
theory. And here Subir Sarkar brought forward  this explanation has a lot of problems. And  
1:44:28
if Neil finds a solution, that's great. But in  my opinion, lambda is coming from a classical  
1:44:35
theory. It came into the world based on some  classical invariants. So I think we should find  
1:44:41
an explanation of lambda which is first based  on classical mechanics or classical theories.  
1:44:48
And only then say, okay, there might also be an  attempt to unify, and we can identify gravity   and quantum afterwards to say there is also  an explanation for lambda in quantum theory.
1:44:59
Ah, okay. So you think that the vacuum  catastrophe is somehow misplaced or  
1:45:05
misconceived or ill-conceived because you're  trying to come up with an explanation for this   lambda which stems from general  relativity, a classical theory.
1:45:14
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. And you're trying  to find its roots in a quantum theory. Yes. Yes. Now, of course, the  counter would just be, well,  
1:45:20
anything that's classical emerges from the  quantum. So that's a natural predilection.
1:45:25
Yes, yes. I mean, that's a thing that would be  nice to have, to say we can argue from quantum  
1:45:31
fields to the classical regime. But on the other  hand, it seems that there is a problem there. I'm  
1:45:38
not sure how it can be resolved. I mean, it's  not my field of expertise. But Subir says that  
1:45:43
it seems pretty hard to solve it from the quantum  point of view. So I would say maybe to go a step  
1:45:49
backward and to say it came in classically. Let's  try to solve it classically, that might be the  
1:45:55
more reasonable first approach, in my opinion. I  mean, people like Thomas Buchert or Subir Sarkar,   we all try to make sense out of this also from the  classical point of view. To see, is the data maybe  
1:46:06
splittable or partitionable in a different way  so that lambda is a phenomenological parameter  
1:46:13
that is actually standing for some inhomogeneous  spacetime curvature or something else that can  
1:46:19
come from some classical explanation. And not  immediately, at least some quantum explanation.
1:46:24
Hi, everyone. Hope you're enjoying  today's episode. If you're hungry for   deeper dives into physics, AI, consciousness,  philosophy, along with my personal reflections,  
1:46:33
you'll find it all on my Substack. Subscribers get  first access to new episodes, new posts as well,  
1:46:39
behind-the-scenes insights, and the chance  to be a part of a thriving community of   like-minded pilgrimers. By joining, you'll  directly be supporting my work and helping  
1:46:49
keep these conversations at the cutting  edge. So click the link on screen. Hit  
1:46:54
subscribe and let's keep pushing the boundaries  of knowledge together. Thank you and enjoy the   show. Just so you know, if you're listening, it's  C-U-R-T-J-A-I-M-U-N-G-A-L.org. CURTJAIMUNGAL.org.
1:47:07
Yes, see, many people, when challenging something  as widely held as Lambda CDM, which is not just  
1:47:14
held because scientists are obstinate or  recalcitrant and they're fools and they're   just unwilling to move on. That's foolish. That's  not why that's held. There's great reasons for it.  
1:47:24
There's great evidence for it and so forth. But  when someone comes along like a Subir or a you  
1:47:31
and puts cracks in it, sometimes it's thought that  that is a dismal view of science. But actually,  
1:47:39
you're saying, no, no, no. It's a hopeful  view. We're on the precipice of something. Yes, yes. I mean, I always see, I don't know  why this is the case. I mean, Subir always  
1:47:49
says particle physicists try to weird down their  models. They try to find something new. They want  
1:47:56
to be proven wrong. And in astrophysics,  it seems to be the other way around. I   wouldn't say that. But I think that people  get used to things. I mean, humans are like,  
1:48:07
they want to have like traditions. They want to  have stuff that is predictable. And if we now say,  
1:48:13
wait a moment, our universe is surprising.  It may give us something that is unexpected  
1:48:18
all the time. And we cannot control  this. Maybe it's a reason to panic. On the other hand, after 40 years of  getting used to dark matter, I mean,  
1:48:28
there are people alive who fought for dark matter  to be in the picture. And who were the first ones  
1:48:34
to do these simulations to show dark matter  actually makes sense? They fought for it to be  
1:48:39
there. And then do they want to see it die again  after like 40 years of research and all of this?
1:48:45
And it's always the question, did we do all  of this in vain? What's super interesting is  
1:48:51
you're more radical for being conservative.  So for instance, you're more radical for   being conservative in a way to do it. For  instance, when we were speaking before,  
1:48:57
you were talking to me about a colleague of yours  who invented or proposed some crazy form of dark  
1:49:02
matter. And that the more that the data was  collected, the less there was speculation and   then the less of that sort of dark matter was  permitted. And you're actually sobering them.  
1:49:12
But this sobering process, if people have been  used to being intoxicated, can feel like, well,  
1:49:20
I want to stay where I was before. But you're the  more conservative one, at least in this respect.
1:49:25
Yes, yes. I mean, I have, because I have a  problem of trying to chase something. I mean,  
1:49:32
I'm willing for crazy ideas. I mean, I  also investigated naked singularities   and how we could detect them. I mean, I  also tried to write a paper on that. It's  
1:49:40
not that I don't like crazy ideas.  I have a video about that, actually. Oh, really?
1:49:47
Yeah, it's a crazy thing. So a whole podcast  with JB Manchak about naked singularities and  
1:49:53
then pathological spacetime. Because many people  will say the word that a closed timelike curve  
1:49:58
spacetime or one that doesn't have a, one that's  not globally hyperbolic is pathological. Well,  
1:50:05
we have rotating black holes and so forth.  And they're not globally hyperbolic. But   it's also somewhat of a sociological word to say  pathological. Einstein thought black holes were  
1:50:15
pathological in and of themselves and potentially  the Big Bang. I think people even doubted their   existence until we got this first picture of  a black hole from the Event Horizon Telescope,  
1:50:26
that people said, okay, finally, we have a  proof that there is something experimental  
1:50:32
that we can attribute to these spacetime  singularities, whatever you want to call this.
1:50:40
And I mean, when I saw, it was just a conference  during the pandemic. And then there was a guy who  
1:50:45
said, okay, I think I can explain dark energy  with primordial black holes. And then he went  
1:50:52
on and he thought, to repel each other with  a certain charge, then I could explain the  
1:50:58
spacetime expansion. He tried to understand dark  energy in terms of repelling black holes. So,  
Naked Singularity Detection
1:51:10
and repelling black holes, then he tried to  calculate the charges, and it turned out they were  
1:51:15
naked singularities. And so I thought, because  everybody was skeptical, and so I thought, hey,  
1:51:22
it's winter break, I have nothing to do. How about  I just prove this wrong in like 14 days? So I sat  
1:51:29
on my desk and I took his work. I took the charges  and the masses that he predicted. And I went on to  
1:51:37
conservatively think, if I had such black holes  in my universe, what would be the consequences  
1:51:44
for this? Like, for what modeling? I do this.  And I found out I cannot kill this theory.
1:51:51
Because you think of naked singularities, I'm  thinking, yeah, naked singularities are disruptive  
1:51:56
things in spacetime. It turns out, if you have  a naked singularity and you send a light ray  
1:52:05
through a plasma cloud, and you think, okay, what  happens to this plasma, sorry, if you have a naked  
1:52:12
singularity and this is a charged singularity  and you have a plasma cloud in this vicinity,  
1:52:18
what happens to the charges in the plasma cloud?  I thought this would just be disruptive. You would   even have like proton decay. Or I mean, I was  thinking about the worst things. It turns out,  
1:52:28
even naked singularities, you need to take  this plasma cloud very close to it in order  
1:52:33
to actually dissolve it. And for normal settings,  or for when you say this is likely to be observed,  
1:52:41
you wouldn't find this thing. Because it's a  singularity. It's really a point-like thing.   You need a very perfect alignment between us, a  plasma cloud, and something to observe an effect.
1:52:52
And the other thing is, I mean, I'm  a gravitational lensing person. So,   normally you have a point mass. And a point  mass is a very easy model to describe the  
1:53:01
lensing signals. And then you would say, I have  a mass and the Einstein ring is proportional to  
1:53:08
the square root of the mass. So if I have a  star that sends light over this point mass,  
1:53:14
I would see an Einstein ring around this  point mass. And it's square root of mass.   So if I have an exorbitantly large mass, I  should have a huge Einstein ring. And then  
1:53:23
I looked at the equations and I found out, no,  actually, because it's a naked singularity and  
1:53:29
it also carries a charge, this huge Einstein  ring doesn't occur because the equations tell  
1:53:34
me that the Einstein rings are actually  much smaller and I couldn't observe them. And it was quite astonishing how disruptive  you think something could be, and it's so  
1:53:44
hard to disprove that theory. And in the end,  I talked to an observer from the Westerbork  
1:53:52
radio telescope, and he said, "Yeah, I've  seen many of these really exorbitantly crazy  
1:53:58
ideas and models that couldn't be proven  wrong. You cannot prove something wrong.   That's really difficult." And he also  said, "Yeah, I definitely believe you  
1:54:06
that you tried your best, but it's really  hard to challenge something like this." And with dark matter, it's even more intricate,  as you said. I mean, you have a theory. Dark  
1:54:16
matter is just a word. So what do you call dark  matter now? Is it just the missing mass in terms  
1:54:24
of clouds that you can't observe? Or do you want  to have a new particle? And then, depending on  
1:54:30
what kind of dark matter, you can always wiggle  yourself around. If there is a new observation,  
1:54:36
you could say, "Ah, sorry, dark matter wasn't  collisionless. I see an offset. So it has to be  
1:54:42
collisional." So then we need to constrain the  offsets. So you can always amend your theory.
1:54:50
You know, I was going to say that I've seen a  pattern that the more restrained the theory,  
1:54:57
unexpectedly, you get more critiqued. Because  you would think that it would be more,   the more speculative you are, the  more crazy you are, as you mentioned,  
1:55:04
the crazy dark matter, that that would be  less accepted. But someone like yourself,  
1:55:09
someone like Subir, someone like Jacob Barandes  and Tim Maudlin on the quantum mechanics side,  
1:55:14
who are more restrained, actually, or they have  realist interpretations of quantum mechanics,  
1:55:21
they get critiqued. But then I also realized,  everyone gets critiqued. There was this comedian   who was saying that people think everyone hates  America. If when you're in America you feel  
1:55:31
like every other country hates you. And then he  said, yeah, but every country hates every other   country. And you always hate your neighbor  more than you hate America. Just everyone,  
1:55:40
everyone critiques everyone. And everyone  always feels like they're the ones that's   on the defense and they're the underdogs.  So I think it's just par for the course.
1:55:50
But I think that's exactly the point. I mean,  I grew up, I thought, okay, math and physics,   that's something that has something absolute.  There is some truth in it. Some absolute truth.  
1:55:59
You can say one plus one is two. There is math  that you cannot be wrong in that. No, one plus  
1:56:05
one is not two. It depends on the system you are  in. One plus one can be something else. I mean,  
1:56:11
if it's in the binary system, you would add up  differently. So it depends on your reference   frame. And in physics, you have more room to  wiggle. It's not math even. It's even less,  
1:56:21
I would say, with rigor. But on the other hand, I  usually feel like a lawyer. I have a certain case,  
1:56:29
then I need to take some sides. What do I think  is the most reasonable thing? Then I defend this.  
1:56:35
I try to find arguments in favor of this way to  see the world. I mean, this is how I see physics.  
1:56:44
It's not absolute anymore for me. It's more, I'm  a lawyer in that sense, to say I have now chosen a  
1:56:51
certain camp, the camp of wanting the least amount  of magic in my universe, and the most amount  
1:56:57
of things that I can actually experience and I  can see, like empiricism. Yes. And then to say,  
1:57:04
how can I keep this worldview, or how can I live  in this worldview, given the input from outside?
1:57:13
Let's get into applications. Yes. So, particle  physics has a similar issue where there's a huge  
1:57:20
amount of data, huge amounts of model dependence,  and triggering and reconstructing events and  
1:57:27
background and subtracting away the background.  So can your methods transfer to collider physics?
1:57:36
In principle, yes. I mean, there's lots of  data. So in principle, you would actually  
1:57:41
have the luxury to say, for the inverse  problem, we just try to find what are all   the possibilities that we have tracked here. So  in that sense, that's even better. Because this  
1:57:52
is what I think that cosmology lacks. Cosmology  is merely observational science. So we cannot  
1:57:57
make experiments. So we cannot interact with the  things that we think are there. We set up models  
1:58:03
and then we can only watch. But we cannot say,  we believe that this mechanism is happening,  
1:58:09
and now I go into the lab and I show, if I apply  all of the requirements, I can create something.
1:58:15
And I think maybe this is the reason, now  that I think of it, this is why forward   modeling is so popular. Because usually we have  a chance of being the agent of producing it,  
1:58:27
given these prerequisites. So on  Earth, being a particle physicist,   it makes sense to forward model, to say,  if I do this and that, if I collide this  
1:58:37
particle with that particle, I will see this  collision, then there will be this particle   and that particle going out. I will have some  hadron jets. And in the end, I will see here,  
1:58:46
there's my Higgs. And this is why forward modeling  makes sense, because I can prove myself wrong  
1:58:52
or right by exactly performing my experiment.  And then I know this formalism leads to this.
1:59:00
But in cosmology, we have a different setting.  We cannot just go into the lab and say,  
1:59:07
here I have my forward model,  and let me rerun the universe. Let me, yes, exactly. So, now I  want to have modified Newtonian  
1:59:15
dynamics for sure. So let me rerun the universe. And the simulations, they try to replace this.  But obviously, simulations are different in the  
1:59:26
sense that we face, it's on a computer. We  have numerical instabilities. It's not the  
1:59:31
real thing. It's just a surrogate of a real  thing. So in that sense, you can always say  
1:59:36
simulations are as good as it gets, but it's still  not 100% like an experiment. And so in that sense,  
1:59:43
I would say maybe particle physics does not  need that much of inverse problem solving,  
1:59:49
because they have lots of data and they have  this agency that they can just create particles   as they want, or do the collisions and not  find a particle, which has also happened.
2:00:01
In that sense, maybe particle physics is not  the best target. But I would say I'm coming  
2:00:07
from cancer research and biophysics, and there  I saw exactly the same problem. For instance,  
2:00:14
for cancer, there are more than 100 types  of cancer, and you think, again, like in  
2:00:22
a forward modeling approach, you have certain  processes that you say, if I have for instance  
2:00:28
a certain DNA that is replicated, or so, if I  then translate this in the wrong way, proteins,  
2:00:35
then cancer can grow. And this is the signaling  pathway approach. You start from different models,  
2:00:42
cancer can evolve through different pathways, on  the different enzymes, on the different stages of  
2:00:51
all of your cells, on the different stages which  your cells are in, and then it can happen that  
2:00:59
you have a certain signaling pathway where you  say, okay, this type of cancer is growing in  
2:01:05
this way. But suddenly you have a patient where  you say, nothing of this fits, and the medication   we apply doesn't work. Why? Oh, there is a second  signaling pathway in which this cancer can also  
2:01:16
grow. And then you suddenly start to realize that  you have different options to end up in what you  
2:01:22
think is the same state. And of course, then you  could also apply the inverse modeling to ask,  
2:01:29
what is the necessary ingredient in order  to get to this stage, or hopefully in order  
2:01:35
to prevent this cancer? In that sense, I would  say there is a lot of potential there as well.
2:01:41
So what happens next? Where  is this research leading? I mean, for me, I would say I've realized that  after almost 10 years in lensing, I've realized  
2:01:53
lensing isn't good for anything unless you couple  it to other data. And this is why in the last two  
2:01:58
years I've started to look into kinematics,  because if I have a structure that is a lens,  
2:02:06
then I would like to know, can I constrain the  structure from the inside a bit better? Because  
2:02:11
now I know how to shoot light rays around it.  But inside, for instance, in a galaxy cluster,   I have galaxies and these galaxies move, and I can  measure part of the movement. So now I'm trying  
2:02:22
to get a more holistic approach to say I have  local information from lenses, and funny enough,  
2:02:29
math is your friend. I found a way that actually  I can transfer my local lensing approach to the  
2:02:36
kinematics, to the description of the kinematics.  And so I hope in the future I can also get local  
2:02:42
kinematics information about such a structure.  And then to patchwork all of this, as we said,  
2:02:49
I want the positive way of science, meaning I  know from the lensing the local stuff. I hopefully  
2:02:55
then know from the kinematics, and I have a  lot of stuff. So I will more or less reveal,  
2:03:00
shed more light into the structure by all of  these individual information pieces that I will  
2:03:06
puzzle together. But I know that I can only fall  back to the local information as my ground truth,  
2:03:12
as the stuff that I have already validated by my  approaches. So that's the next step for this one.
2:03:21
But on the other hand, it also needs  funding. And I think that our community,  
2:03:28
I would really like to see some light at the  end of the tunnel, that some more funding flows  
2:03:33
in our direction. Because I get rejections  with words like, nobody has done progress in  
2:03:39
30 years on this project, or in this research  direction. Why should you? And then I think,  
2:03:47
yeah, give me a chance to do it. Or at least  give me a chance to move a little bit forward.  
2:03:53
Maybe I'm not reaching the final goal, but  it's a direction that needs more attention.
2:03:59
Because if I take a look, people say, for  instance, I don't like artificial intelligence,   or I'm against artificial intelligence.  I'm not. But I see that in cosmology we  
2:04:09
have a hard time to actually succeed with  artificial intelligence. Demis Hassabis,  
2:04:15
he won the Nobel Prize for AlphaFold, for this  protein folding. And when he gave his Nobel   lecture, he had three criteria, what makes  a successful AI application. Number one is  
AI Limits in Cosmology
2:04:27
your feature space, and it should be really  large. Like a human cannot understand it,   you really need a huge computing form to resolve  all of the parameters you have in your problem.  
2:04:38
And the parameter space is huge. You cannot  do everything. And the second is your goal  
2:04:45
function. What is my function I want to optimize  for? With AlphaFold it was pretty obvious. You  
2:04:52
have the free energy should be minimized. And  then you know how the protein is folding. And   the third part is you need lots of data in  order to train your artificial intelligence.
2:05:02
And if you now look at cosmology, what do  we have? None of the three. Do we know our  
2:05:08
feature space? No. Because we don't have like  23 amino acids that we can combine to proteins  
2:05:17
if we just assemble them long enough. We do  not know what dark matter is. So what are we   looking for? What's our feature space? Is  it a particle? Is it a fluid? What is it?
2:05:26
Wait, what is a feature space?  What does a feature space mean? A feature space is the space of the ingredients  that you have. Like, for instance, I would say,  
2:05:35
if I have a galaxy cluster, I would say,  okay, what do I need? I need galaxies. I  
2:05:42
need the positions of the galaxies. I need the  velocity of the galaxies in order to describe   such a gravitationally bound structure. But  I also need the dark matter in this galaxy  
2:05:51
and the positions and the velocities. So, if  I want to understand how a galaxy cluster is  
2:05:56
taken together by artificial intelligence,  I would need the position and the velocity   of dark matter. If I do not know what it is, I  cannot reserve part of this feature space for it.
2:06:09
Then the second part is the goal function. What  is the goal? I mean, do we really understand  
2:06:15
gravity to a degree that we say we can write  down this optimization function? I mean,  
2:06:22
Demis Hassabis used the free energy for  the proteins. What is energy in general  
2:06:28
relativity? Masses have to be defined,  and the definition may not be unique. So,  
2:06:34
there we struggle from the other side to say,  from the GR point of view, from Einstein's  
2:06:40
general relativity, how can we write down such  a goal function to describe, for instance,  
2:06:47
a galaxy cluster? Like I said, also statistical  mechanics to describe it is not going to cut it.
2:06:54
And then third, data. We can use  simulations. We have lots of simulations,  
2:07:00
and in simulations we have, I would say, enough  data to train. But this is very costly to store  
2:07:07
on the one hand, very costly to produce from  the starting point. And the big question is,  
2:07:12
is it actually realistic? Are we training  on something that makes sense? For instance,   for strong gravitational lensing, there was  an AI approach. And this AI approach trained  
2:07:22
on simulations because we do not have enough data  from strong lensing from the observational point  
2:07:27
of view to train such a machine. So they used  simulated data, and they found out that when  
2:07:33
they tried to recover the simulations, great  rates, 100%, I mean, not 100%, but 95% recovery  
2:07:42
rate of the data and correct descriptions. But  then they went to the observations. And then the  
2:07:48
rates went pretty much down. Because there was  something missing in the simulations that was  
2:07:53
in the data. And so the training process was not  realistic enough, and you can't see it enough so  
2:07:58
that the machine could actually find all  of the lensing events that were there,   or that we actually know they were there.  So, there is something missing here.
2:08:07
And last but not least, if you take the  observations, like, for instance, DESI has now  
2:08:12
found 11 million galaxies in our local universe,  like 11 million galaxies. That's not half of the  
2:08:22
population of Ghana. So, just to put in a context,  and you have to take a certain redshift in a huge  
2:08:31
cosmological volume. And now compare this to what  we know on Earth. I mean, the population of Ghana,  
2:08:37
if I'm not mistaken, is 37 million people.  So, in a very small country in Africa. So,  
2:08:43
if we now compare this to the 11 million galaxies  in this cosmic volume, you know how the sampling  
2:08:50
is. I mean, we have a lot of data. We have a high  degree of detail. But I don't think that it's  
2:08:58
enough to train artificial intelligence. Leave  aside the, we don't know what's actually in your  
2:09:04
observations due to dark matter, dark energy,  and the unknown ingredients of the universe.
2:09:10
And this is why I think we first need to  understand ourselves. What are we talking   about? What is dark matter? What is dark  energy? And when we have these questions,  
2:09:19
I think we can use artificial intelligence.  But so far for the exploration process,  
2:09:26
we may get some hints where to go or not. But we  cannot expect, for instance, an AI to understand  
2:09:32
the global mass distribution in a strong lensing  event when I've already shown that only local  
2:09:38
information is the one we get from the data. So,  in that sense, the AI would just speculate better,  
2:09:44
or give us a more sophisticated model, but  we still don't know why this model, okay,  
2:09:51
it fits the data, but as do all other models, as  I've shown. So, what is the gain using artificial  
2:09:58
intelligence, for instance, in this problem,  if all we get back is a more complex model,  
2:10:06
and even maybe a less transparent model that  we cannot understand. I mean, if we get a more  
2:10:12
complex model and not just a power law, how do we  now argue that this is reasonable physically? The  
2:10:19
machine may give us something that fits the  data, but it's just one option of many. This  
2:10:24
is what we know. But then, how do we argue that  this is the true model? This is the truth that's  
2:10:30
actually out there. When we already know from the  data, the inverse problem, we cannot know this.
2:10:36
Now, I know you said you will be talking about  this issue and your colleague may push back and   you say, just give me a chance. Maybe I can't  take the ball all the way to the end of the  
2:10:46
football field, but I could take it a few feet  further. So, allow me to ask, what changes if  
2:10:55
you get to the end of the football field? Paint  that picture for me. What changes in cosmology?  
2:11:01
What changes in cancer research? What does the  future look like if your method of prioritizing   inverse problems over forward problems, and your  solutions via these inverse problems, takes off?
Scientific Method Evolution
2:11:13
Well, I mean, inverse problem solving is, I would  say, a typical thing that you use when you solve  
2:11:19
criminal cases. So now let's assume that we  use it also more in biomedical, in astro,  
2:11:26
in cosmology, wherever we have, like, complicated  problems with maybe non-unique answers. So,  
2:11:32
if we do this, I would say we have to  rethink our scientific method completely.  
2:11:38
If we replace this forward modeling with  this inverse problem-solving approach,   it would mean that we change the way we  think about science. And in my opinion,  
2:11:48
this would be a better world because we would  have a more positive way of knowledge gaining.
2:11:54
And I would like to show you how I mean  this. I mean, imagine you now have this   inverse problem-solving method and you build  a tree of necessary models from the trunk to  
2:12:04
the branches to the leaves. And every higher  level is based on the assumptions the lower  
2:12:11
levels. So in that sense you now think, I want to  solve a problem, I have already built the trunk,  
2:12:18
now from one branch I want to go to a smaller  twig. So to extend my model a little bit further.  
2:12:24
If I guess a little bit wrong, I can only fall  back to the level beneath this one. But I will  
2:12:32
not fall down the entire tree to the ground.  This is what forward modeling sometimes does,  
2:12:37
you end up at square zero, you do  not know how to climb up again. And  
2:12:42
this way here we avoid this problem. And  so I hope this would be more positive,  
2:12:48
encourage more people to care about science, if  they have already built their trunk of knowledge,  
2:12:54
a certain part, they only need to extend their  knowledge a little bit. So that's more positive.
2:13:00
And on the other hand, this is even more  important, if we now take a look at how science  
2:13:05
is done, it's usually investing a lot of money  into a high-risk, high-gain science research.  
2:13:13
If we now say we already have a solid trunk and we  just need to extend it a little bit, it takes out  
2:13:18
the high risk of all of this. And another point  that comes with it, if you now climb up the tree,  
2:13:26
the further you climb, the less choices you  should get. It's like in a criminal case,  
2:13:32
the more evidence is presented, the more people  you should be able to kick off your suspect list.  
2:13:38
So, in the end, you narrow down the choices.  And then this means you need fewer and fewer  
2:13:45
resources the higher you climb up. So, this idea  is highly efficient. It's resource saving. And  
2:13:53
in that sense, I think you could even fund more  projects than before, at a lower risk, of course.
2:13:59
And so, well, I think if you build up all of this,   it sounds more positive for me than gambling  on certain forward models. And in the end,  
2:14:08
you may not even be able to find counter  evidence or evidence in favor of something.
2:14:14
This is super interesting because theoretical  physics is, in large part, model generation. So,  
2:14:22
on the arXiv, almost every day is a new model.  Here's how the universe works. Here's how,   even on this channel, theories of everything.  New model. Well, here's how quantum theory works.  
2:14:31
Here's how it doesn't work. Here's how blah, blah,  blah, blah, blah. Here's how GR works. Here's how   you combine them. Here's what spacetime is. Here's  what spacetime isn't. And then the question is,  
2:14:39
well, look, in absence of data, it's always  caveated like that. In absence of new data,  
2:14:44
we don't have anything that's beyond the  standard model. In absence of new data,   what else are we to do as theoretical physicists?  All we know how to do is just generate models,  
2:14:53
and we don't exactly have data to go by.  So, in your analogy, it sounds like what   you're saying is that would be the equivalent of  just adding more suspects to your criminal list.
2:15:05
Yes. Yes. Yes. And that's the opposite of what   should be done. You should  be narrowing suspects down.
2:15:11
Yes. Yes. But, okay, I'm sure you've  spoken to theoreticians about this,   and this goes against the whole ethos. And  again, like I mentioned, it's caveated with,  
2:15:20
in absence of evidence. So, what do you  say to this, throwing models to the wall   and seeing what sticks? It seems  like that's all that can be done.
2:15:28
Yeah, but on the other hand, I mean,  there are people like Neil Turok who say,   we have a lot of data, so let's use it in a  different way. Let's try to be minimalistic.  
2:15:39
And in that sense, to clean up. I mean,  Bjørn Hein also said, for particle physics,  
2:15:44
that when they found all the new particles,  and they always inserted yet another field,   yet another particle and so on, so their model  just grew. And he said that the discovery was  
2:15:54
so quick. They just added and added and  it somehow worked out. But he said we were   always hoping that a few years in the future  somebody would come and clean up that mess. So,  
2:16:05
they were obviously putting together a model  with a really hot needle because they had so  
2:16:11
many discoveries. But they thought, in the  end, hopefully somebody will look from top   down in order to make sense out of this from a  higher viewpoint and then to clean up the mess.
2:16:21
And I think it's the same with all of these models  that we have in cosmology or astrophysics. We're   not short of models. But to pair them with  each other, find what do they have in common,  
2:16:32
where do they differ, why do they differ, all  these things are the important things to do. It's  
2:16:38
not coming up with another model. It's trying to  embed the model that we now have, we want to put  
2:16:44
forward the landscape of all the other models. And  in addition to relate them to the other models,  
2:16:51
say here is where I differ, here is where I agree  with the others. And this is what I did with my  
2:16:57
approach, to say the maximum information is where  all models agree. And then it's pretty obvious  
2:17:03
where the models will differ from each other and  will differ from the information in the data.
2:17:12
What question keeps you up at night? What question has been keeping me  up at night since I was 16? I mean,  
2:17:20
I would really like to understand what is  gravity. That's the thing. I do not know why,  
2:17:26
but this is something that completely struck me  the first time I heard it. When I first heard   about Einstein's general relativity, I thought,  what is this? This is really bizarre. And then  
2:17:37
I realized, gravity, this is a force, but on  the other hand, it seems to be spacetime. So,  
2:17:43
what is it now? What is real? What is not  real? And how can I understand this really?  
2:17:49
This is something that's, it's not just like  electromagnetism that lives on a background.   It seems to be the background. And this is  something that is still keeping me going. I  
2:18:00
mean, academia is not the easiest way to  earn money. Actually, it's the hardest,  
2:18:05
and it's the most stressful one. But this is the  only reason why I'm doing this. I want an answer.
2:18:12
What's some concept? So, maybe it's this  one. But what I was going to ask is,   there must be some concept, whether it's  mathematical or physical, that you couldn't  
2:18:21
understand. Maybe you tried for months, even  years to understand it. Then all of a sudden   it made sense. And so what was that concept or  idea, or what have you, and what made it click?
2:18:33
I think the best, there were several, of course.  I mean, when you study, you learn a lot of things   and you always ask yourself, why? Why do I need  to know that? And then there is a certain point  
2:18:44
when you're suddenly confronted in your research  project with something, you think, wait a second,   I've heard about this during my lectures,  and back then I wondered what is it good  
2:18:53
for. Now I know it. And one of the key moments  in that direction for me was the Sobolev space.
2:19:01
Because when I studied functional analysis, I  mean, I had the best professor in the world to do  
2:19:07
this. He was really trying to make it applicable  and to show all of the things that he knew from  
2:19:14
his applications. But it was always something  that I never connected much to because he was  
2:19:19
more of engineering problems and all of that.  And suddenly when I saw in my lensing formalism,  
2:19:25
Sobolev spaces physically mean you can  have an infinite amount of black holes   in your spacetime. And math doesn't care  about this. This was something that I found  
2:19:36
completely intriguing, but on the other  hand also bothersome. And I thought, okay,  
2:19:42
finally I understand why this concept  was invented, or discovered or needed,  
2:19:48
in mathematics in order to tackle cases  like this. That was super interesting.
2:19:56
Now, where can people find out more about you?  Potentially some funders who are listening,  
2:20:01
who are watching, who want to help this sort of   research. And then also maybe some  other researchers who would like  
2:20:08
to collaborate with you. Where should  people go to find out more about you? Oh, first and foremost, I'm really happy to  collaborate with anybody on the entire planet.  
2:20:18
So the sun never sets over my projects.  I really love this internationality. And  
2:20:25
during the pandemic, I really liked this,  the review that we wrote on the cosmological   principles. For example, it was written from  researchers all over the world. And everybody  
2:20:35
has met everybody on this project. It was just  collaboration. So if you want to find out,  
2:20:42
at my webpage. And I also have a Wikipedia  page. But all of them contain my email   address. So drop me an email. I'm always happy  to answer. I'm always happy to go on podcasts,  
2:20:53
talk about all of these things. Because I  think that the more people know about this  
2:20:58
and the more people know a little bit more of  the details, people might be more convinced.
2:21:06
And lastly, what's a life lesson that you  wish you could impart to your younger self?
2:21:13
Well, there are many. But I would say the most  important one is don't listen to others. Like,  
2:21:23
make your own judgment. Because I would say,  based on the experiences that I've made,  
2:21:29
and I draw a lot on the philosophers of  cosmology that I have been collaborating with,  
2:21:35
they taught me that in principle, there are  many possible ways of living a self-consistent  
2:21:41
and fully reasonable life. To say, I  have a theory, I have a way of living,   I have a way of interpreting things that I see,  to make sense out of everything. But not everybody  
2:21:52
would agree on the interpretations and how to do  this. And I think I grew up a little bit in the  
2:21:59
wrong bubble. And it took me a hard time to get  out of this bubble and to meet with the people.
2:22:07
For instance, last year I met Thomas Buchert from  Lyon. He is the guy who says that if we take GR  
2:22:15
seriously, then we always need to intertwine  the cosmological background with the matter  
2:22:22
on top of it. And as Einstein said, both of them  are one. There is an equal sign in the equation.  
2:22:29
So this means I cannot decouple my cosmology from  the evolution of the masses. And he says that  
2:22:36
matter has a back reaction on the spacetime. And  we need to take this into account. And when I met  
2:22:42
him, he said, "Yeah, I'm also skeptical of dark  matter and of dark energy, because in the end,  
2:22:48
it's all the underdetermination problem, that  you chop up your entire signal into parts.  
2:22:54
Part of it is, let's say, like the baryonic  physics. Part of it is dark matter. Part of  
2:23:01
it is dark energy. But the question is, if you  have several unknowns that are hard to capture,  
2:23:07
you can redistribute your entire  signal, because it's hard to say,   under which assumptions you assume this is a dark  matter property, this is a dark energy property."
2:23:18
And then he also told me, "Yeah, it's really  hard to kill dark matter or to kill dark energy,  
2:23:25
because there are always the two camps  in this underdetermination to say,   this is definitely a sign against dark energy,  and we don't have to take a certain amount of dark  
2:23:32
matter against the cosmological principle.  Others say, no, it's an evolution in time. Or,  
2:23:37
no, it's actually a special property  of dark matter that we have missed." And I would say, you have to make up your  own way. You have to find your own way  
2:23:46
that you say, this is something that I find  reasonable. And not just take on what other  
2:23:52
people say just because you think, yeah,  I accept them as authorities or think that  
2:23:57
they know more than I do. I would say being  critical, also in what happens on Earth,  
2:24:04
it's the same. Being critical and making your own  judgment, I think, is the most important thing.
2:24:10
Thank you. Thank you for spending  so long with me and the audience. Yeah. Could I ask a question? I saw that you  have, like, always mostly 30,000 to 100,000  
2:24:24
viewers or so. This is, I mean, it's  highly impressive. And you have like   half a million subscribers. So, who's your  target audience? I mean, can you see, like,  
2:24:35
from which countries or so, what  people are mostly watching your blog?
2:24:41
Yeah, well, those are two different questions. So,  the target audience, we always aim this podcast  
2:24:47
to skew toward the research direction. So, we aim  it toward researchers. We aim it to be technical,  
2:24:53
as if this was behind the closed doors  of academia. And it's just professors   speaking. I'm not a professor, but you get the  idea. So that's the target. And the audience  
2:25:03
skews technical. But the majority of people are  actually, well, they're artists. They're people  
2:25:11
who are computer scientists, philosophers. It's  a mix. And these people are interested in deep  
2:25:17
questions. In fundamental questions. And what is  this place? What is time? What is reality? What is  
2:25:24
consciousness? So, it's people who are probing and  they want something more than the mysticism that  
2:25:31
they've heard before from many popularizers of  science, like the particles in two places at once.  
2:25:37
The cat's dead and alive at the same time. Isn't  it cool? Isn't it cool? Isn't it cool? That's the   same hundred times that I tell you over and over.  And they're like, okay, but what's, what else is  
2:25:46
there? What's the actual math behind that? What  does the math say? Does the math validate that?   Does the physics validate it? People want to  know. Can the cat really be dead and alive at  
2:25:55
the same time? Because this doesn't, physically,  this doesn't make sense. So what does it mean?
2:26:01
Yeah. And is that exactly  what a superposition says? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, in principle,  no, that's interesting. So,  
2:26:08
you really capture the entire scope of  people. It's not just the engineers,   which are usually the ones who go into  that direction. So it's really more great.
2:26:19
Yeah. I aim toward researchers and academics. I  aim that. And I think we have a large proportion  
2:26:27
toward that, more so than the average, because  we're technical. If it limits the audience,  
2:26:33
and it does limit the audience, but the  bulk of the audience, yeah, I imagine,  
2:26:38
are scientists and logicians and  sorts. And just lay people. Truck  
2:26:45
drivers, not like their developers, nurses.  That's cool. That's cool. That's cool. I mean, if you could get a chance, I mean, it  might be interesting to get George Ellis for  
2:26:54
the podcast, because he does cosmology, he does  philosophy of science, and recently he abandoned  
2:27:01
all of this, because I think he understood  cosmology really to the fullest, and he said,   "Now it's boring, gravity is the same everywhere,  I don't care." And then he said, "Now I'm doing  
2:27:11
neuroscience, because now I want actually to see  where is consciousness coming from?" And he's  
2:27:16
also, like, driven by mathematics. And he says the  mathematics is the same everywhere. And he won the  
2:27:21
Templeton Prize. This very famous prize. It gets  more than a Nobel Prize. For applying mathematics  
2:27:30
of cosmology to the real estate market in South  Africa in order to improve the conditions for  
2:27:37
the underprivileged people there. And he won the  Templeton Prize in principle for doing good in his  
2:27:43
own country, for the people. But in principle, I  mean, he says the math is the same. And this is  
2:27:51
why he could actually apply the same equations  to one and that one in order to help people on  
2:27:58
Earth with what he learned from the cosmos.  So he's also interdisciplinary in that sense.
2:28:04
Yeah, I would like to speak to him. Anyhow, I  want to thank you once more, and the audience,  
2:28:10
you as well. Thank you for having me. It  was a really lovely chat, highly inspiring.
2:28:18
Hi there, Curt here. If you like  content from Theories of Everything,  
2:28:24
the very best thing you can do is to check  out my Substack at CurtJaimungal.org. Some  
2:28:32
of the top perks are that every week you get  brand new episodes ahead of time. You also  
2:28:38
get bonus written content exclusively for our  members. That's C-U-R-T-J-A-I-M-U-N-G-A-L.org.  
2:28:49
You can also just search my name and the word  Substack on Google. Since I started that Substack,  
2:28:54
it's somehow already became number two in the  science category. Now, Substack, for those who  
2:29:00
are unfamiliar, is like a newsletter, one that's  beautifully formatted. There's zero spam. This  
2:29:06
is the best place to follow the content  of this channel that isn't anywhere else.   It's not on YouTube. It's not on Patreon. It's  exclusive to the Substack. It's free. There are  
2:29:18
ways for you to support me on Substack if you  want. And you'll get special bonuses if you do.
2:29:23
Several people ask me, like, you've spoken to so  many people in the fields of theoretical physics,  
2:29:30
of philosophy, of consciousness. What are your  thoughts, man? Well, I remain in interviews as  
2:29:39
a way to peer into my deliberations on these  topics. And the perfect way to support me is  
2:29:48
CURTJAIMUNGAL.org. Or search on Google. Oh, and  I've received messages, emails, and comments  
2:29:58
from researchers that they recommend Theories of  Everything to their students. That's incredible.  
2:30:05
If you're a professor or a lecturer or what have  you, and there's a particular standout episode  
2:30:10
that students can benefit from, or your friends,  please do share. And of course, a huge thank you  
2:30:16
to our advertising sponsor, The Economist. Visit  economist.com/TOE to get a massive discount on  
2:30:25
their annual subscription. I subscribe to  The Economist and you'll love it as well.   TOE is actually the only podcast that they  currently partner with. So, it's a huge honor  
2:30:35
for me and for you, you're getting an exclusive  discount. That's economist.com/TOE. T-O-E.
2:30:43
And finally, you should know this podcast is  on iTunes. It's on Spotify. It's on all the  
2:30:49
audio platforms. All you have to do is type  in Theories of Everything and you'll find it.  
2:30:54
I know my last name is complicated, so maybe  you don't want to type in Jaimungal, but you   can type in Theories of Everything and you'll  find it. Personally, I gain from re-watching  
2:31:03
lectures and podcasts. I also read in the comments  that TOE listeners also gain from replaying. So,  
2:31:09
how about instead you re-listen on one of those  platforms like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts,  
2:31:15
whatever podcast catcher you use. I'm  there with you. Thank you for listening.

All

From Curt Jaimungal

Media theories

Learning

Related

For you

Recently uploaded


2:11:10
Professor Jiang: World War 3 Is About To Begin, Let Me Explain!
The Diary Of A CEO
 and Predictive History
14M views
•
1 month ago


1:52:22
This Physicist May Have Just Solved Quantum Gravity
Curt Jaimungal
20K views
•
1 day ago
New


43:07
Where do first names come from?
Words Unravelled and RobWords
321K views
•
7 months ago


2:53:43
Biggest Mysteries in Physics: Antimatter, Dark Energy & ToE - Don Lincoln | Lex Fridman Podcast #497
Lex Fridman
543K views
•
3 weeks ago


13:24
Rating Good and Terrible British Accents by American Actors
Lost in the Pond
478K views
•
4 months ago


1:03:19
Alright... Let's listen to Abbey Road | Gen-Z Music Producer Reaction
Isaac Brown
271K views
•
10 days ago


1:34:36
NEVER Judge a Book By Its Cover! BIGGEST Surprises They Didn't See Coming...
Top Talent
19M views
•
2 years ago


52:07
I Went To The Strait of Hormuz - It Didn't Go Well (#238)
Sabbatical
749K views
•
5 days ago
New


1:58:18
The Man Behind AI Safety Thinks AI Is Conscious
Curt Jaimungal
 and The Roman Forum with Roman Yampolskiy
70K views
•
3 weeks ago


13:51
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Moody Blues - Nights In White Satin | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
380K views
•
1 year ago


1:45:37
Happy Happy Joy Joy - The Ren & Stimpy Story
Documentary • 2020
Free with ads
Unrated


21:16
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING ' Peter Frampton - Do You Feel Like We Do' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
235K views
•
1 year ago


9:10
Why does a table have a gender? (Grammatical gender explained)
languagejones
4.3K views
•
5 hours ago
New


8:48
How to Tell Americans and Canadians Apart
Lost in the Pond
64K views
•
1 day ago
New


2:29:38
Contact
Science fiction • 1997
Free with ads
PG


2:21:30
The Physicist Who Uncovered "Negative" Time
Curt Jaimungal
466K views
•
2 months ago


1:27:07
UFO Roundtable: Former CIA Scientist Proves Aliens Exist!
The Diary Of A CEO
 and The Age Of Disclosure
4M views
•
1 month ago


33:35
18 Illusions That Will Break Your Brain.
Very Nearly Interesting
270K views
•
5 months ago


1:56:40
Archaeology Warning: They May Have Secretly Found Antarctica  300 Years Before Us! - Graham Hancock
The Diary Of A CEO
 and Graham Hancock Official Channel
7.7M views
•
12 days ago


40:15
I asked Prof. Brian Cox 100 Questions
100 Questions with Tom Simons
 and TommyInnit
1.9M views
•
1 month ago


14:54
Ergativity: The Most Confusing Concept in Linguistics?
languagejones
118K views
•
3 months ago


23:22
Why Don't Forensics Account For Gravity And Drag?
Veritasium
890K views
•
1 day ago
New


1:04:58
Heather Cox Richardson: What History Predicts Happens Next
The Prof G Pod – Scott Galloway
 and Heather Cox Richardson
618K views
•
5 days ago
New


31:12
Does MSG actually make food taste better?
Ethan Chlebowski
454K views
•
3 weeks ago


21:00
What does the $ actually stand for?
RobWords
1.2M views
•
2 months ago


54:06
Tim Miller Can't Stop Talking About Giorgia Meloni (w/ Bill Kristol) | Bulwark Podcast
The Bulwark
185K views
•
1 day ago
New

4:44
France and Germany's Fighter Jet Program (FCAS) Is Dead || Peter Zeihan
Zeihan on Geopolitics
60K views
•
13 hours ago
New

17:51
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Meatloaf - Bat Out Of Hell' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
223K views
•
1 year ago

16:57
European Reacts to Foreigners Didn’t Expect America’s World Cup to Be Like THIS!
European Reacts
4K views
•
1 hour ago
New

17:16
What really happened to the last Neanderthals?
Stefan Milo
303K views
•
8 days ago

17:38
Eagles - Lyin' Eyes | BEST STORYTELLING WE'VE HEARD IN A WHILE! | First Time Reaction
Cliff Beats Classics
69K views
•
4 days ago
New

28:51
Gen-Z Music Producer listens to Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young for the first time...
Isaac Brown
233K views
•
1 month ago

30:06
My First Red Hot Chili Peppers Experience! Vocal ANALYSIS of "Under The Bridge"
The Charismatic Voice
577K views
•
1 year ago

8:19
FIRST TIME HEARING 'Aerosmith - I Don't Wanna Miss A Thing | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
7.8K views
•
2 years ago

1:31:01
The More You Study Consciousness, the Weirder It Gets | The Ezra Klein Show
The Ezra Klein Show
 and 2 more
643K views
•
2 months ago

18:13
Why Did Ancient Dogs Trust Humans More Than Any Other Animal?
Professor Primal
31K views
•
11 days ago

1:41:29
The Breakthrough in Physics We’ve Been Waiting For
Curt Jaimungal
515K views
•
1 year ago

1:42:38
The Time Machine (1960)
Action & adventure • 1960
Free with ads
G

1:18:56
The "All At Once" Universe Shatters Our View of Time
Curt Jaimungal
302K views
•
1 year ago



7:11
Nobel Prize under fire: is dark energy real?
Sabine Hossenfelder
60K views
•
8 hours ago
New

    
true

Intro
0:00
When Galileo invented the telescope, people  didn't want to look through it, and that also  
0:05
makes me think about a lot of the stuff happening  in science where people refuse to look at certain  
0:12
theories. For decades, reconciling quantum  theory with gravity has been the holy grail of  
0:20
theoretical physics. But what if the path forward  isn't through ever more convoluted mathematics,  
0:26
but rather through ingenious experiments we could  perform right now? Professor Ivette Fuentes, the  
0:34
close collaborator of Roger Penrose, is proposing  just that—groundbreaking tests using ultra-cold  			
0:41
atoms and quantum technologies that could probe  the ostensibly quantum nature of space-time. Yet,  
0:49
despite its potential, many researchers in the  field are hesitant to pursue these ideas. Is it  
0:55
the allure of purely theoretical work, the inertia  of established research programs, or simply  
1:01
the challenge of breaking away from fashionable  thinking? In this episode, we'll explore Professor  
1:07
Fuentes' inventive approaches to testing quantum  gravity and why they're being overlooked by much  
1:14
of the physics community. Professor Ivette  Fuentes, it's a long time coming. I'm super  
Unification in Physics
1:24
excited to have you on here. The audience, it's  going to be a treat for them. They don't realize   it right now, maybe, but the audience is in for a  great treat. So thank you and the floor is yours.  
1:35
Thank you very much. I was just telling you just  now that I love your podcast and I listen to it,  
1:44
see it very often, let's say. So it was very nice  meeting you just now because I felt that I've met  
1:50
you forever. So this feeling of after seeing you  often in the evenings and then it's like, oh,  
1:58
wow, that's you there. So that was really very  nice. And I was also telling you just now that  
2:04
I saw some of the podcasts that you were talking  about string theory. Physics is like whack-a-mole.  
2:13
Einstein said, I have this idea, acceleration and  gravity are the same. Problem, how do I make this  
2:20
work with a scalar field? It's like a little mole  that comes up. He whacks it down. He says, okay,  
2:25
maybe it was a mistake to unite space and time,  but then problem crops up. You have to introduce a  
2:30
variable speed of light. So then he's like, okay,  let me knock that down. Forget about scalars. Let  
2:36
me introduce tensors, a different mathematical  object. You knock that down. In order for string   theory to work, it needs to be 26 dimensional.  And they only had bosons at this point in the  
2:45
story. Okay, why don't we add something called  supersymmetry? So we knock it down. Okay,   cool. Problem. There are so many types of  string theory. And now there's 10 dimensional,  
2:54
not four dimensional, but it's some progress.  Okay, solution. You combine some heterotic   strings. Okay, problem. We still have five and we  have gauge anomalies. And how when one works in  
3:05
foundations of physics and in unification, there's  like that, I think you mentioned that people say  
3:13
it's like the only game in town and how there is  this sort of social pressure to work in the field.  
3:21
So I am working at the moment in the unification  of quantum mechanics and general relativity. This  
3:29
is kind of really focusing on that problem. It's  a more recent thing. I still don't have actually  
3:36
my results available, but they're coming up. Of  course, not the full thing, but I think a nice,  
3:43
interesting step. I think we managed to achieve,  but I come from a very different sort of a place.  
3:52
And I thought that maybe the story of that could  be interesting in the light of the things you've  
3:58
been discussing. Yes. And I've been looking at  your research in the evenings as well. And so  
4:04
this is a wonderful experience for myself. And I  would love for the audience to get familiar with   you. So please go over your recent results.  Great. Yes. So I became interested in the  
Ivette’s Background
4:19
foundations of physics as a student at university.  I had a teacher, Luis de la Peña, who I enjoyed.  
4:27
He was teaching me quantum mechanics. And I  particularly liked his class because he talked  
4:33
a lot about interpretations of quantum mechanics.  So I was really fascinated with that. He was very  
4:42
generous because at some point I approached  him and I said, you know, I want to work with   you on this topic. And he said, you know what?  It's been very difficult for me. It's been a  
4:53
really difficult path and I don't want that for  you. So I would suggest work on something more  
4:59
sort of mainstream. And if you're still interested  when you're grown up, let's say, you can come  
5:05
back. And I think that is somehow related to what  you're saying, that he took a different path and  
5:12
he found it extremely difficult and he wanted to  spare me of that. I think he could have just said,  
5:18
yes, great, you know, a good student, come and  work with me. And instead of that, I think he was  
5:24
very generous by saying that. So I approached  him also because I wanted to go to Fermilab.  
5:34
There was like the possibility, a competition  to go and spend the summer there. And I asked  
5:41
him for a reference letter and he said, why would  I give you a reference letter? And I said, well,  
5:46
because you know, I got like A's in all your  classes. He said, well, many students do that.   And then from there we just went on talking. And  what I told him was that I was finishing my degree  
6:01
and starting to see what I wanted to do. And I  mentioned to him that all of my classmates that  
6:10
were interested in theory were actually going into  string theory. And that I actually, when I learned  
6:17
about string theory, like all of my classmates,  I was absolutely fascinated with it. Now this,  
6:24
I think this is a beautiful idea that we treat  particles like point, point like systems. And  
6:31
then the idea that there is another dimension  or more dimensions, there are strings and how  
6:36
you could unify the notion of different particles  in this way is beautiful and I loved it. But then  
6:42
once I got more into it and, you know, sort of  issues started to pop out, especially the many  
6:50
dimensions, then I thought, this reminds  me of the epicycles. And let me explain,  
6:57
you know, what I meant. So I'm sure that most of  people in the audience are familiar with this,  
7:03
but back in the time, people wanted to describe  the trajectories of planets. But back then people  
7:14
used to think that they had to follow, nature had  to follow circles because circles is the perfect  
7:21
figure. It's a shape. It's really interesting  how we get into these ideas and we get so stuck  
7:27
in them, right? And those are the ones that don't  let us make progress. So we can come back to that  
7:35
maybe later because we've been trying to unify  quantum mechanics and general relativity for  
7:41
more than a hundred years. And we're probably  stuck with something equivalent to the perfect  
7:47
figure and we're unwilling to let go of that. And  maybe we can talk later about that because there's  
7:55
like some ideas. Actually, I think that maybe even  consciousness could be sort of something missing  
8:05
in the equation, let's say. LRW Oh, yeah. HG So  if you try to describe the trajectory of a planet  
8:12
using circles, well, first one was not possible. I  remember I also heard you talk about how you get a  
8:20
problem and boom, you bang it and you fix it and  then another one comes out and you bang it, no?  
8:26
LRW Right, right, the whack-a-mole. HG Exactly.  Yeah, so you do that with the circles and okay,  
8:33
you add another circle and that doesn't work  that well, so you add another one. And well,  
8:39
back then people used to need something like 600  circles to more or less describe the trajectory of  
8:46
a planet. And then came Kepler and says, they're  not circles, they're ellipses. And boom, no more  
8:56
necessary to hit things with a hammer anymore, it  just falls in everything beautifully, right? So  
9:04
when I looked into string theory with a bit more  detail, not much, I very soon felt this reminds  
9:11
me of the epicycles, it can't be right. And I  told that to my teacher, to Luis de la Peña, and  
9:20
he smiled and he said, I'm going to give you the  reference letter where you want to go. HG That's  
9:26
interesting. What was it specifically about what  you said that changed his mind? LRW Well, I think  
9:31
he liked that I was so in a way critical of string  theory and that I was not going where everybody  
9:39
else was going, because I just had a feeling  this is not right. HG Now, didn't he mean to go  
9:45
into string theory when he said that you should go  into physics in a more mainstream manner? LRW No,  
9:51
then let me tell you what that is, because that  was another important point. When I was finishing  
9:56
my degree, I think also like many students, I  was also sort of in love with astronomy. Now  
10:03
that's always like many students go also in that  direction, because it's just so attractive. And I   did an undergraduate thesis on Seyfert galaxies,  and I enjoyed that very much. But after my work,  
10:16
and even my first paper is on Seyfert galaxies, I  thought, well, I could spend the rest of my life  
10:23
studying these beautiful objects, but something  is missing. I didn't have it sort of very,  
10:29
I was so aware of it like I'm now, but what was  missing for me was that studying these beautiful  
10:36
objects, I felt were not really bringing me to the  point of asking questions like, what is the fabric  
10:42
of reality? HG Ah, okay, okay. So something was  missing, not with the galactic data, but with what  
10:50
even the most ideal answer to any astronomical  question could provide to the foundational  
10:56
aspects of the questions at your heart. Okay.  HG Yes, yes. Somehow I felt like studying,  
11:02
I could spend my whole life studying Seyfert  galaxies, and that would probably be a lot of fun,   and I would get some, you know, I already had  like a really good paper, it was a letter and  
11:12
everything. But I felt like I'm not going to be  able, if I go in that direction, to really focus  
11:18
on the questions that I'm really interested in.  And I guess, you know, like I was more interested  
11:27
in understanding sort of more foundational  questions like deeper, what is reality about?  
11:35
So I was in the cafeteria at the university, and  suddenly a colleague of mine, I'm still working  
11:42
with him, Pablo Barberis, ran into the cafeteria  when I was doing my homework, and he said,  
11:49
they demonstrated quantum teleportation. And I was  like, what? That was Anton Zeilinger's experiment.  
11:56
But then it would play a role in my life as  well, because I ended up being a professor,  
12:01
a visiting professor in Vienna within that group  for three years. But well, back then it was like,  
12:08
oh, some people in Europe demonstrated quantum  teleportation. And Pablo also told me, you know  
12:14
what, they also managed to trap single particles,  single atoms, in an ion trap and in a cavity. And  
12:23
I remember my teacher, Luis de la Peña, used to  say, quantum mechanics is a theory that doesn't  
12:30
apply to single particles. In experiments, we're  always doing experiments with an ensemble and many  
12:36
particles and stuff like that. So then when I  heard that, I said, okay, that area is going to  
12:42
get super interesting, because if now they can do  experiments with single atoms, we will be able to  
12:49
address some of these fundamental questions. And  that's where I thought, okay, that's the right   thing to do. So I had already a little bit talked  to Luis about that. And when I told him, what  
13:03
about quantum optics? He said, that's excellent.  So I went to Imperial College to work in the group  
13:11
of Peter Knight, with the idea of doing quantum  optics. And when I arrived there, everybody was  
13:19
working on quantum information and entanglement  measures and so on. So I ended up doing a PhD in,  
13:26
let's say, in the interface of quantum optics  and quantum information. That went really well.  
13:32
I did very well. And then from there, I went to  do a postdoc at the Perimeter Institute. Yes,  
13:39
my neighbor. Yes, exactly. You're in Toronto,  right? When I arrived there, it was really  
13:45
exciting, because I think I was the first or the  second postdoc to arrive there to work in quantum  
13:50
information. The Institute wasn't established as  it is now yet. The building was like the old post  
13:59
office in Waterloo. It was so cool. We had sofas  and a bar and a blackboard, and we sit at home. It  
14:11
was really a fantastic experience. But when I got  there, there was one group in quantum information,  
14:18
very small one. And then there was string  theory and quantum gravity and foundations  
14:24
of physics. So we were such a small group. I  started to attend the seminars in gravity and  
14:36
quantum field theory and curved space. I got very  jealous. I felt very jealous. I thought, oh gosh,  
14:43
I'm missing out on something. Because you were in  the quantum information section? Yeah, and people  
14:49
in quantum information were talking about quantum  cryptography. The idea of quantum cryptography is   beautiful, but if you work on that, then it's  again like, oh, how do you make a hack and how  
15:00
do you fix it? And again, you get lost in those  things. And I was thinking, no, no, no, this is  
15:06
really not for me. So I thought maybe I change and  I work on general relativity. But I had already  
15:13
made a few jumps. No, I went from astrophysics, a  paper there, to quantum optics, and then I have a  
15:21
paper on quantum computing. What am I going to do?  And I thought, well, maybe it's not a very good   idea. And I started, without knowing this was kind  of a new thing, I started like the, in a sense, as  
15:34
a young researcher, I started to mix them. So I  wrote a paper that's called Alice Falls into a  
15:41
Black Hole, Entanglement in Non-Inertial Frames.  Okay. That really, that's been, it's my most  
15:47
cited paper. Wow. And it really sort of opened a  door for me, let's say, in the scientific world,  
15:55
because you were also talking about how difficult  it is and how competitive it is to get you know,  
16:01
a name and known and a position and so on. So  what I did is that I applied what I had learned  
16:09
in Imperial College about measures of entanglement  to quantum field theory in curved spacetime and to  
16:18
eternal black holes and so on. And it was a very  new thing to do. Now there's like a field more or  
16:27
less established in that direction that people  call it relativistic quantum information. So  
16:33
I was having a great time working on that. But  it was all very academic, you know, it's like,  
16:39
oh, entanglement in black holes and things like  that. I still felt that I'm now getting lost in  
16:48
maths and getting lost in maths. When you say  it was too academic, you mean too theoretical,  
16:53
removed from experimental underpinning? Yes,  exactly. Yes. And then I got into this idea that,  
16:59
you know what, I want to like, bring this stuff  to a point where I can do an experiment. I mean,  
17:07
of course, not me, I'm a theoretician, but propose  an experiment. So I hired a postdoc. His name is  
17:13
Carlos Sabin, who was someone doing theory, but  very close for experiments. And he was working  
17:19
with superconducting circuits and stuff like that.  And it was really funny, because I just thought   I didn't even have a clear idea of how we would  get there. I just said, this is where I want to  
17:29
go. And we together started to work with quantum  metrology, applying it to quantum field theory in  
17:36
curved spacetime. So now that's going to go into  my slides. Sorry for the super long introduction.  
17:42
But I thought it was relevant to what you were  talking about recently. And I actually managed  
17:51
to start proposing experiments. Some of them,  at least partially, have already been tested,  
17:57
you know, and the experiments have been done.  And that became sort of my path, studying  
18:05
quantum and relativity, but really proposing  experiments. I was not working in unification,  
18:12
because I was working with quantum field theory  in curved spacetime. So I'm going to tell you a   little bit more about that in a moment. And then  by doing that, that finally brought me to an idea  
18:25
that is my own, inspired by the work of Roger  Penrose, who I talk to him very often. And then  
18:33
I managed to kind of come up with a theory that  can be tested in the experiment, and we're going  
18:41
to do that very soon. So that's kind of the story  of why my talk, which is also about unification,  
18:53
comes from a very different perspective. It comes  from someone whose background is in quantum optics  
18:59
and quantum information, and looking at  experiments and sort of trying to see  
19:06
what we can learn from these theories and their  interplay, and try to make theories informed by  
19:16
the experiment. Wonderful. Thank you for that  introduction. I have two quick questions. Maybe  
19:21
they're addressed in the talk itself. So you  were in, firstly, astrophysics, then you went   to quantum information, then you saw some talks on  general relativity, and you thought maybe you want  
19:31
to go into that field. But you said it would be  too much of a jump, of you jumping back and forth.  
19:37
But would it be? Because astrophysics, does it not  already use general relativity? So how much of a  
19:43
jump would that be? It would be like jumping  backward rather than jumping to the side, no?   Well, it could have been a bit like jumping back,  but the work that I was doing in astrophysics  
19:53
was not really related to general relativity  directly. I was doing statistical studies on  
20:04
how companions of sefer galaxies could trigger the  material of the galaxy to go into the black hole,  
20:13
and so on. So yeah, I guess because of the type  of analysis that I was doing, it would have been  
20:20
like another jump. Okay, okay, cool. And then now  you also mentioned that you work on quantum field  
20:26
theory and curved spacetime. Now some people would  see that as unification because general relativity  
20:33
has something to do with curved spacetime.  So can you please delineate those two? Yes,   actually I'm going to do that in my slides. Great.  But very quickly, that's the beauty. The beauty of  
20:43
quantum field theory and curved spacetime  is that it allows you to study some,   let's say quantum effects and relativistic reflex  theory interplay in some scales, but it's not  
20:53
the full theory. It doesn't resolve actually  what I think is the most interesting question.  
20:59
So yeah, let me get started and I'm going to get  there very, very soon. Wonderful. Take it away.  
Fundamental Questions Unanswered
21:05
The floor is yours. Okay, thanks. So yeah, there  are many fundamental questions that are unanswered  
21:15
and very interesting ones. And I wrote in this  slide just a few that I find fascinating and maybe  
21:22
some of them I work on as well. So for example,  what is the nature of dark matter? That is a big  
21:29
one. So yeah, well questions like, is dark energy  driving the accelerated expansion of the universe?  
21:37
What's the physics of the very early times and  cosmology? Does the equivalence principle hold for  
21:44
quantum systems? And so on. There's many, many  interesting questions and fundamental physics  
21:50
that don't have answers. And underpinning our  difficulties to find answers to these questions is  
21:57
our difficulty actually to unify quantum mechanics  and general relativity. I went to a conference a  
22:03
few years ago and it was all about how can we use  quantum experiments for fundamental physics and  
22:10
many of these fundamental questions came up. And  then someone in the audience, a colleague of mine,  
22:17
got up and said, well, but nobody is addressing  kind of the elephant in the room. What's the  
22:24
elephant in the room? So that, you know, we for  more than a hundred years have tried to unify  
22:31
quantum physics and general relativity and they're  incompatible. So how does that affect all these  
22:39
other interesting questions? And then that's where  I think I felt, yes, that is a real interesting  
22:46
question to answer. So this is like the very  typical cube that one sees in theoretical physics,  
22:53
but I just, you know, a bit designed in  a different way where you have relativity  
22:59
on one axis. So that would be C, the velocity of  light, then gravitation on another dimension that  
23:09
would be the gravitational constant G and then  quantum physics would be H bar. So this cube here,  
23:15
I'm trying to show that, well, we have some pieces  of the puzzle. So there are parts of the theories  
23:22
that kind of answer some of the questions or work  well in some scales. And we have a lot of work  
23:31
done in the last years in different pieces of this  puzzle, but we don't have the whole picture yet.  
23:41
So quantum field theory and curved spacetime  I would say is like one of these big pieces   of a puzzle, but it doesn't do the whole thing  yet. So I'll go into why not in a moment. Okay,  
Quantum Theory and Relativity
23:55
so this actually title of this slide, should we  quantize gravity or gravitize quantum theory comes  
24:03
from Roger Penrose. And what he means by that is,  should we keep the principles of quantum theory  
24:12
and modify general relativity? That's what we  understand more by quantum gravity. Or should  
24:20
we do the contrary, keep the principles of general  relativity and modify quantum theory? So I guess,  
24:29
you know, like most people working on unification,  maybe follow the first line of quantizing gravity.  
24:38
But Roger thinks differently, thinks that  quantum theory has a problem anyways, which  
24:45
is the measurement problem. So he supports more,  let's say, the root of keeping the principles of  
24:54
general relativity, and then trying to modify  quantum theory to bring them together. Now we  
25:01
both agree that it's more likely you have to  modify both of them. But let's say Roger would  
25:08
always give more priority to general relativity in  that sense. So I was writing here in this slide,  
25:14
like a few things about both theories. So let's go  first to quantum theory, like same as in classical  
25:24
physics, time is absolute in quantum theory. So  clocks tick at the same rate for any observer  
25:32
independent of its state of motion. And this  comes from the theory of being invariant under  
25:40
Galilean transformations. So the underpinning  transformations are Galilean transformations, just  
25:46
as in classical physics. So in the same, know that  inherits that space and time are very different  
25:53
notions. The Schrodinger equation treats space and  time completely different. It has one derivative  
26:00
in time and two in x. It treats time like a  parameter, and then positions can be quantized,  
26:07
and you use operators which are completely  different mathematical structures. So then already  
26:15
from there, they would be incompatible with the  relativity. And just for some clarification,  
26:21
quantum theory means quantum mechanics and not  quantum field theory. Yes, yes. I guess because  
26:26
of my background, I use that more when I say  I like to use actually more quantum physics,  
26:34
but that I'm just talking about Schrodinger  equation, fields is like a step more, you know,  
26:46
yes. Well, then in quantum theory, we have the  superposition principle. So particles can be in a  
26:56
superposition of two distinguishable locations at  a time. And then, well, this is what Roger calls,  
27:03
well, many people call the measurement problem,  but in quantum theory, the outcome of measurements  
27:09
is probabilistic, fundamentally probabilistic.  And then when we want to measure, let's say,  
27:17
space or time, we have an uncertainty principle  that tells us that if you measure positions very  
27:23
precisely, then you cannot simultaneously measure  momentum and so on. Also, it's kind of a bit of a  
27:30
summary of some of these, let's say, fundamental  principles of physics. Then on the other hand,  
27:39
in which way they're different and why are  they incompatible? Well, in relativity,  
27:46
time and length are not absolute, are observer  dependent. So the underlying transformations in  
27:55
relativity are Lorentz transformations. And if  you look at that, they mix space and time. So  
28:01
let's say the more radical thing I think that we  learned from Einstein is that space and time are  
28:07
not different in the way that we understand them  in classical physics and also in our experience,  
28:14
right? If you tell anyone space and time are a  bit of the same thing, people would be shocked  
28:20
with that. But that's what Einstein showed us,  that they actually belong together in a higher  
28:28
dimensional object, which is space-time. And  they're both dependent on the state of the  
28:36
observer. And then you have in relativity, if you  have gravity, for example, it curves space-time.  
28:46
And then if you look at two different points in  space, you can see that time flows at different  
28:53
rates at different points. So already there  you can see that in relativity, you have to  
29:01
treat space and time on an equal footing. So let's  say equations, if you have that, you're having a  
29:07
second derivative in space, you should also have  a second derivative in time. So you can already  
29:15
see how that is already incompatible with quantum  theory. And so, a little bit also the question of  
29:25
time is at the heart of our difficulties to unify  the theory. And then you could think about things,  
29:35
how would you see if a mass is in a superposition  of two different locations, and then time flowing  
29:43
at different rates? I mean, the Schrodinger  equation has only one derivative in time, it's   one time. You cannot think about such questions  yet with the theories that we have currently,  
29:55
no? Another thing, well, just to finish with  the slides, in relativity, we don't have this  
30:02
thing about the outcome of measurements being  probabilistic, but it's a deterministic theory  
30:09
in that sense, and we can measure space and time  as precise as we want. But well, in my opinion,  
Superpositions
30:20
the most interesting question that we have  to answer is what happens when we have a  
30:28
massive superposition, where the mass is in a  superposition of two different locations in space.  
30:36
And this is something that you cannot answer  with quantum field theory in curved spacetime,  
30:44
because, well, I'm going to go more into that  later, but the theory assumes that you have a  
30:51
fixed background, so a fixed spacetime metric,  which is a solution of Einstein's equations,  
30:58
but the fields themselves, or the mass itself,  doesn't curve it. So you couldn't answer this  
31:05
question. I think this is really an interesting  and important question, because we know,  
31:10
for example, from the experiments, that you can  have the electromagnetic field in a superposition.  
31:19
So you can take an electron and put the electron  in a superposition, and then you can see that  
31:25
the quantum fields generated are in quantum  states. So we were talking about quantum optics,  
31:34
and quantum optics has been a theory that has  been tested in many, many experiments. And we  
31:41
know that the electromagnetic field can be in  quantum states. And now the big question is,  
31:47
can gravity also be in a quantum state in this  sense? And well, if the mass is very small,  
31:58
well, yes, because the moment that we have,  let's say, an atom in a superposition, in a way,  
32:05
the gravitational field produced by the atom  is also in a superposition. But I think the big   question is more if that's a stable situation or  not. And that's where Roger, and I'm going to go  
32:17
more into detail of that, comes in and says, well,  you can, but that is a very unstable situation,  
32:24
and gravity collapses the wave function, which  would then resolve the measurement problem.  
32:31
And that would explain more like the transition  between the classical world and the quantum world,  
32:36
that would explain why we don't see, let's say,  this cup in a superposition of here and there,  
32:45
and so on. I'm going to talk more about that in a  moment. But I guess my point here is that I think  
32:53
this is the most interesting question to answer.  And there are good reasons to believe that gravity  
33:01
could act different to the other forces. And  that is because gravity is the only one that  
33:09
has an equivalence principle. So there is not an  equivalence principle for the others. So in the  
33:15
equivalence principle, if you're in a lift and you  don't have any way to look at what's happening,  
33:22
so in a box outside, you could not distinguish  when you feel an acceleration if that is because  
33:28
you're in the presence of a gravitational field  or just because the box is being accelerated.  
33:34
And that is something that is specific from  gravity, and that could distinguish gravity   from the other forces. So that is something also  that Roger argues that might hint at gravity  
33:47
being fundamentally different. Okay, so I mean,  obviously the question is very important per se,  
Using Technology to Develop New Theories
33:56
but also, as I said, it underpins other very  interesting fundamental questions in physics. I  
34:04
found this picture, the one with the stars and so  on, online. It's a very famous one. Actually, you  
34:12
know, one of the things I lost, because I lost my  talk just a few moments ago, were all the credits  
34:17
to the images. So I'm sorry I had done that  detail and so on. But when I saw this picture,  
34:25
I liked it very much. And it made me think about  how was it when we were trying to make sense of,  
34:33
let's say if you want cosmology, of where are we?  What's this, let's say, world that we're seeing?  
34:40
What are those points in the sky that appear at  night? In a way, what's the universe? And so on,  
34:46
without instruments, you know? So I can imagine,  I like to have a romantic image of that, of, you  
34:55
know, people sitting around the fireplace looking  at the sky and trying to make sense of where are  
35:02
we. Without the telescope, you can imagine how  hard that would be and what sort of theories  
35:09
humanity came up with when the only possibility  was to use our own instrument, that are our eyes,  
35:16
and look at the sky. Then Galileo invented the  telescope. It's very interesting that as well,  
35:23
that when Galileo invented the telescope,  many people didn't want to look through it.  
35:28
And that also makes me think about a lot of the  stuff happening in science where people sort of  
35:33
refuse to look at certain theories. That reminds  me, I also heard you talk about that, and you were  
35:41
talking about, well, I mean, if you're working  in string theory or in quantum gravity, don't you  
35:47
have sort of the moral responsibility of looking  at what other options are there? Yes. Right? And  
35:56
that, I think it's like refusing to pay attention  to competitive theories or other ideas. I think  
36:03
it's a little bit equivalent, like refusing to  look through the telescope. Interesting. Now,  
36:08
somebody else comes with a new invention and  says, look, look at what's happening. You say,   no, I don't want to even look. But that  happened. Now, since then, telescopes have  
36:20
developed incredibly. We have amazing, like the  latest pictures that you see are just like amazing  
36:28
what they can do. But well, now with very good  instruments, we could look at the sky. We can  
36:33
look really into the past of our universe and then  see that, oh, wow, it looks like the universe is  
36:40
in expansion and so on. And we can come up with  more meaningful theories, with better theories,  
36:47
thanks to those observations. Same if you think  about the microscopic world. So the Greek came  
36:54
with the idea of the atoms. But again, it's not  until you build a microscope and you can look  
37:02
into the microscopic world that you can do better  atomic physics. So I'm trying to make the point  
37:09
here about how important have instruments been in  us making better theories and understanding things  
37:16
better. Right? So when it comes to these scales  where quantum mechanics and general relativity  
37:25
interplay, we're blind. We don't even have  our instrument. We don't even have our eyes.  
37:32
We don't have anything. So how do you go about,  right, when you do that? So I think I understand  
37:41
string theory and loop quantum gravity and many of  these very mathematical approaches in that sense  
37:49
is that you do what you can when what you have at  hand. And what we're able to do is super powerful  
37:58
studies with mathematics because our mathematics  is very developed. And you were also talking about  
38:05
that, how actually string theory has allowed  mathematics to develop so much. And so much  
38:14
we've learned about mathematics thanks to those  theories. But when you come up with theories and  
38:23
mathematics, well, there's many possibilities.  You can make many theories, almost as many as  
38:29
you can think about. But which one is the right  one? You know, I can make a theory, but then I  
38:36
need to see if actually nature behaves like my  theory predicts. Right. And then I can have a  
38:42
competing theory, a different one. And which one  is the right? Maybe even contradicting the two  
38:48
theories in principle and their predictions. How  do you know which one is the right one? You need   to go to the experiment. You need to go to those  instruments. And we, well, I'm going to argue that  
38:58
we sort of have them already. And we need to  start looking through them for resolving these  
39:05
questions of unification. All right. What I think  we want to do is to get into this cycle in which,  
Exploring Large and Small Scales
39:14
let's say, you come up with an idea. So this would  be philosophy and creativity. So going back to the  
39:21
example of the atoms, right? So the Greek came  up with using philosophy and creativity and so  
39:30
on with the idea that there must be something in  matter that you cannot keep dividing. So there  
39:36
must be this unit and the idea of it cannot be  divided anymore. So the idea of an atom. Then,  
39:45
well, if you want to observe an atom,  well, that's like a really long way around,  
39:52
right? But you have to do some theory about what  is an atom. So, well, a very, very long time after  
40:02
people started to develop better theories of  the atom, or for example, I don't know, the  
40:07
pancake theory where you had some electrons, like  raisins in a pancake, or even better, Bohr's model  
40:15
where you have the nuclei and the electrons going  around like if they were planets around the sun,  
40:22
right? So you need to create some theory so that  you can build an apparatus and then observe this  
40:32
idea that you had that there's atoms. Because you  cannot build a machine or propose an experiment or  
40:39
develop a new sensor without some sort of theory.  Your theory might be wrong, but at least it gives  
40:48
you a starting point to say, okay, now I'm going  to build this machine. Then you build, let's say,  
40:57
the microscope, and you look through it, and then  you get some sort of signals, and at some point,  
41:05
like detectors click or something like  that, and you say, oh, there's my atom,  
41:11
right? And then you might then find out that your  theory was actually not very good, but then you  
41:19
can improve it and modify your apparatus, and then  you get into this really good cycle where you can  
41:28
start making better theories all the time and  verify them into the experiment. So this is what  
41:33
happened with quantum optics. It seems like this  is what happens with the general theory. So if I'm  
41:39
understanding you correctly, it sounds like what  you're saying is you're initially on your couch   or in your shower, an idea comes to you, it's  an intuition, you then formulate it with words,  
41:47
natural language, you then have to formulate it  into mathematical language, and then you have to   check that against quote-unquote reality with an  experiment. Yes. So you propose an experiment,  
41:57
and the experimental proposal, that's what  I work a lot on in experimental proposals,   is also mathematical, right? I have to write down  my theoretical proposal. This is your Hamiltonian,  
42:11
and these are your measurements, and this is the  precision, and I claim that you should be able  
42:17
to build this device, and I'm going to show you  one of my works in that talk about, of course,  
42:24
of my proposals to do that, and then you need to  build it and then check. Okay. And you were giving  
42:30
a specific example in quantum optics? Please  continue. Well, with quantum optics, there's this  
42:36
very healthy cycle, and I think that's why there's  been so much progress in quantum technologies,   is because this happens all the time. People  come up with an idea for a sensor, and they  
42:46
write papers about it, they make a proposal,  then an experimental group gets a hold of it,  
42:52
they work together, and boom, they show that, and  there comes again the cycle, and it's a wonderful  
42:59
field. And I think I was used to that, so when I  started to work on Alice falls into a black hole  
43:06
and entanglement in black holes, I was like, oh,  gosh, I can't check if what I propose is correct,  
43:13
because there is no way to make a measurement in  a black hole. And that's how I started to say,  
43:18
no, no, I want to do theory that it can actually  still work at the interplay of quantum mechanics  
43:23
and general relativity, but that I can test in the  lab. So that's my group, and most of the last, I  
43:33
don't know, maybe 15 years, that's what I've been  working on, on trying to propose experiments or  
43:40
develop new sensors that will reach these scales  where quantum mechanics and general relativity  
43:46
interplay, so that we can then get into this  cycle. And what is FP? GR, quantum theory, oh,  
43:57
I forgot, what did I put here for, it's an old  slide, so quantum theory for sure, GR, and oh,  
44:04
fundamental physics, it's fundamental physics,  yeah, maybe that's a really funny figure. Okay,  
44:12
so when I was at university, and I learned about  quantum mechanics and general relativity back in  
44:18
the day, well, for example, Luiz de la Peña  would say, quantum mechanics only applies to  
44:27
a few particles at very small scales, so where  electrons and atoms live. And general relativity  
44:37
applies to the large scales, starting with  actually, from GPS, to get the precisions we have,  
44:42
we need to make corrections to general relativity,  so the proper time on Earth is different from the  
44:50
proper time in a satellite, and you need to  make corrections to have the precisions that   we have in GPS. So it would start, let's say,  from those kind of scales onwards, I mean, we  
45:01
know that general relativity doesn't really apply  to all these scales, because the rotating curves  
45:09
of galaxies, the observations there contradict the  predictions of general relativity, and from there,  
45:17
the whole idea of dark matter comes about, so it  doesn't really apply. But let's say, generally,  
45:24
you're a student, and you're told quantum physics  applies to the very small, and general relativity   to the very big. Now, because of this circle that  I was telling you about, now, the experiments in  
45:37
quantum technologies, they developed amazingly,  and now it completely challenged this picture,  
45:44
and I want to tell you a lot about that. So  I'm going to talk about three things. One is  
45:50
long-range quantum entanglement, so what are  the longest distances at which we can prepare  
45:58
superposition states, or entangled states, and  so on, and how can we study such situations,  
46:06
and what can we learn about the interplay  of quantum mechanics and general relativity   through long-range quantum experiments. Then  high sensitivity, actually, when I started  
46:18
to work on using quantum theory, I wanted to  measure some relativistic effects. Some of my  
46:27
colleagues in general relativity were laughing  at me, because they were saying, well, you know,   at small scales, forget it, space-time is a bit  flat. It's completely flat, sorry. You won't see  
46:38
anything. I'll show you that that's not true. And  these are already experiments that have reached  
46:46
relativistic effects, we're just not looking  through the telescope right yet, because, well,  
46:53
I'll tell you more when I get there. The one that  hasn't gotten to scales where gravity kicks in,  
47:01
in an important manner, is large mass quantum  experiments. So I also want to tell you about  
47:06
the progress in that direction, and how far  we are from being able to see, for example,  
47:13
if gravity indeed collapses quantum superpositions  and so on. I have a quick question, if you don't  
47:20
mind. So with GPSs, they're using an atomic clock,  I presume, which is something that's a quantum  
47:27
phenomenon, and then they have to correct because  of general relativity. So do people see that as an  
47:33
interplay between general relativity and QFT, or  quantum mechanics there? I don't want to actually  
47:39
go into the details of the question that you just  asked me, I have a slide on that, so it's like a   really question right to the point. But the short  answer now is that people brush the questions,  
47:53
in a way, out. They find solutions, which I don't  think are solutions, but they're like, let's say,  
48:04
well, they maybe approximately work, but actually  are not the right thing to do if you want to be,  
48:13
let's say, rigorous with what you're doing. And  actually, that gives you the opportunity to answer  
48:19
the these questions. So I'll go, I have a slide  on that, exactly, the question that you're asking  
48:24
me. AG Great, we think alike. HL. Yes, I noticed  that before you from the podcast, in many ways,  
Long Range Experiments / Quantum Teleportation
48:32
actually. AG Cool. HL. Okay, so let's talk about  the long-range experiments. When I was a student,  
48:41
you know, when Pablo came, my colleague, into  the cafeteria and told me they demonstrated  
48:47
quantum teleportation in the lab that  was in Vienna, that was Anton Zeilinger,  
48:52
it was in a tabletop experiment. So you have like  a table that could fit in in this room, let's say,  
48:59
with mirrors and lasers and so on. And that's how  experiments look like in those times. Then Anton,  
49:07
some years later, wanted to see how big can the  distances, can the experiment grow such that you  
49:14
still have entanglement. So this is entanglement  between photons. Okay. And he was able to  
49:22
demonstrate entanglement across two different  buildings in Vienna. So well, that was very  
49:29
promising. So he said, well, let's keep going. And  then in 2011, he was already doing the experiment  
49:37
across 144 kilometers in the Canary Islands. AG  Oh, so they're not physically connected tubes  
49:48
that connected the two buildings, nor in this  1,000 kilometer case? HL. Well, there are many   experiments that are connected by a waveguide.  People do experiments like that. But no, these  
49:59
are like free space experiments. AG Interesting.  HL. Yeah, they're beautiful. They're very, very  
50:05
interesting. So Anton had a student from China  who then moved back to China. And then, you know,  
50:15
he's made a lot of progress there. And together,  they launched a satellite, which is called Micius,  
50:22
which is completely purposed to study quantum  entanglement and teleportation and cryptography  
50:30
and so on. So this was, they launched it in  2016. And then they've demonstrated entanglement  
50:39
across thousands of kilometers. So that's very  interesting, no? Because this whole notion of  
50:46
quantum mechanics applies to very small scales.  Now we see that that's not the case. Well, of   course, photons are, you know, they're not massive  systems or anything like that. But already,  
50:58
I think this starts showing that this division  of what are the scales where quantum applies and  
51:04
where it's different, maybe in some senses, as we  first thought it would be, no? But well, I mean,  
51:12
what's very interesting is like, as I mentioned  before, at the scales where satellites operate,  
51:18
relativity kicks in. Again, the proper time of  clocks measured on Earth is different to the  
51:26
clocks that you set that are in a satellite.  So you have to take into account at least a  
51:34
gravitational redshift. So this is like a special  relativistic effect, but more than that. So that  
51:42
is something that I've been very interested in.  I have a whole series of papers that use quantum  
51:50
field theory in curved space-time to describe  the space-time of the Earth using, for example,  
51:58
the Schwarzschild metric, which can be applied to  this case. And then you describe the photons and  
52:04
the quantum states that travel from Earth to a  satellite or between links and between different  
52:10
satellites. As using quantum field theory in  curved space-time, you can solve the equations  
52:18
and then construct wave packets and study how the,  let's say, if you send a wave packet from Earth  
52:26
to a satellite, how would this be modified due to  the curvature of the space-time on their light?  
52:35
So this is no longer just special relativity using  gravitational redshift. That was what people were  
52:42
using. We showed that if you use quantum field  theory in curved space-time, you could actually  
52:48
go beyond that and really see how the curvature  of space-time affects the, for example, we wrote  
52:55
some of these papers and we said, this is what  the curvature, how would it affect, for example,  
53:01
quantum teleportation or quantum cryptography.  And then you could turn things around and use the  
53:09
fact that these states are modified to actually  estimate the space-time parameters of the Earth  
53:16
using quantum metrology. LWR Okay, cool. HL. So  that's an area of interest, and I've written a  
53:23
series of papers in that direction, more or less,  trying to answer these sort of questions. But you  
53:28
see, these are experiments that already are  taking place. And actually, there was a group  
53:37
working in Germany that once the whole group came  to visit mine, because they had some results they  
53:44
were not understanding, and they, using just  the gravitational redshift, and they wanted to  
53:49
see if there was more to be understood from our  work. So this is, yes, an instance where you do  
53:59
see that some interplay between quantum states  and the space-time of the Earth, the experiments  
54:07
reach those scales, but there's very little apart  from our work. I don't see that there's many more  
54:15
things, or the experiments actually, they take  into account the gravitational redshift, but they  
54:24
still have to test these sorts of things. Now,  quantum field theory in curved space-time has not  
54:31
been demonstrated in the experiment. Quantum field  theory, yes, I mean, so many times that's what  
54:36
CERN and Fermilab and all of these experiments  are about. But when you have gravity included,  
54:44
it still needs to be demonstrated. So some  of these predictions that we make could start  
54:50
giving you some hints that quantum field theory in  curved space-time, let's say, it's a good theory  
54:58
for these scales. It would be very nice to check  that. So for the audience member who's thinking,  
55:05
how does this work logistically? Do you have to  petition for time from this satellite, or do you  
55:11
have to ask the people who are in charge of the  satellite to perform an experiment? How does it   work? Well, I actually belong to a group that was  sort of a consortium in which they worked together  
55:27
with the theoreticians, with the experimentalists,  and the group sort of discussed about which would  
55:34
be things that would be interesting to  study. So the theoreticians would say,  
55:39
well, we would like to test this theory.  Let's say I had a colleague, Tim Ralph,  
55:46
who came up with a new theory that used quantum  field theory in curved space-time, but went beyond  
55:54
that and took into account closed timelike curves.  And then he proposed an experiment. And then the  
56:03
group found this interesting from a theoretical  point of view, but the important thing there was  
56:09
that the experimentalists found it feasible to  do the experiment, and the experiment was done,  
56:17
and the experiment didn't find evidence of this  sort of new theory. But you see, that is the sort  
56:23
of thing, that's great, that's the sort of thing  you want to be doing, that people are creative,   come up with new ideas, again the circle, cast  it in language first, then in the language  
56:35
of theoretical physics, which is mathematics,  make predictions, the experimentalists go test,  
56:41
and they say, well, yes or no, and then you go  on. So I think that there are groups like that,  
56:48
and usually also what we do is that we get  together, theoreticians with experimentalists,  
56:56
and make a proposal that might or not get  funded. Of course, with space-based experiments,  
57:04
it's more complicated. I have actually been  approached by NASA a few times, and they asked me,  
57:11
do you have an experiment that you think we could  do? But the things I've been working on lately are  
57:16
more things that you could also test on Earth. And  then you need to justify the expense. But well,  
57:25
I did point out to these papers, and I said,  well, I think it would be great if you could test   some of these. But I haven't heard like, oh yes,  we're doing it, or anything like that yet. Okay,  
Quantum Clocks
57:36
so now we go to the clocks question that you were  asking me, and the very small scales. So yes,  
57:43
like you were saying, quantum clocks are the most  precise clocks that we have, and actually, that is  
57:49
what we use to distribute clocks in the planet.  You need to synchronize very well computers, and  
58:00
airplanes, and all sorts of things that we need  a very, you know, for our instruments, we need  
58:08
very precise ways of measuring time, and these are  done by atomic clocks. So, you know, very roughly,  
58:14
how would an atomic clock work is that you  have many atoms here, for example, strontium,  
58:20
trapped in an electromagnetic potential. So  the sample could be like atoms that are cold,  
58:26
so that means they move very little, and they're  within some sort of volume, so typically like a  
58:33
millimeter, and so on. So the energy levels, the  internal energy levels of atoms are very sharp.  
58:42
So let's say between the ground state and the  excited state, the energy is very precise. So  
58:47
you can use this as a frequency standard that  gives you like the ticks of the clock very  
58:52
precisely. So you shine a laser, and you excite  the atoms, and so on, and well, that's more or  
58:58
less what you use. So there was this beautiful  experiment done many years ago by Dave Wineland,  
59:09
who got the Nobel Prize for trapping irons  in an ion trap. He did this experiment after,  
59:17
in which he would take an atomic clock and then  sort of put another one, or just move his clock  
59:26
upwards. I'm not sure actually what he did, but  he demonstrated time dilation at 33 centimeters.  
59:35
So before we know, okay, we can see time dilation  if we're in the Earth and then in a satellite, we  
59:42
know that. But now he said, look at these scales  of 33 centimeters, you can see time dilation  
59:48
already. And that time dilation is just due to  the gravitational potential difference? Yes, due  
59:54
to the Earth, just from the gravitational field  of the Earth. So basically, you're demonstrating  
59:59
that the space-time is curved. So that's really  amazing. I mean, these clocks are super precise.  
1:00:10
They have like a systematic uncertainty of they  can reach 10 to the minus 18. That means that the  
1:00:15
error is one part in 10 to the 18. So that would  be more or less like in years. I used to have it  
1:00:22
here because I forget, but the clock would lose  precision, would lose one second in something like  
1:00:33
13 billion years. I had the number here exactly,  but I now lost it. But more or less, that precise  
1:00:40
they are. And that's what I was telling my  colleagues in general relativity that found   it funny that I wanted to measure this curvature  of things. I said, no, look, I mean, these things  
1:00:49
are so precise that it's not unthinkable that we  can actually measure general relativistic effects  
1:00:58
at very small scales. So I was talking to Patrick  Gill. He's a colleague of mine who works at the  
1:01:05
National Physics Laboratory. So that is like the  institution in the UK where they do all these,  
1:01:13
with the Metrology Institute, where they do all  these standards of frequency and the different  
1:01:20
units and so on. So he's working with the quantum  clocks with Helen Margolis and so on. And I was  
1:01:27
telling them, you know what, soon you're going  to have a problem because you're going to get  
1:01:33
that the proper time at the bottom of your sample  with the proper time at the top is going to be  
1:01:40
different. And he was saying like, yeah, but we're  not too worried about this now. And so six months  
1:01:45
later, exactly that happened. Two papers came out  showing that they could see time dilation. Well,  
1:01:54
first there was like this one centimeter and then  even in one millimeter. So now if you think about  
1:02:00
the quantum clocks, the clock in the atoms in the  bottom see a proper time different from the atoms  
1:02:06
in the top. Yes. But okay, still, you know, people  working in clocks might not be that worried. When  
1:02:15
did this result come out? That must have been a  couple of years ago. Okay. So fairly recently,  
1:02:20
2020s? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Maybe this is actually...  Look, this is from 2020. This paper I put here  
1:02:29
is one of the papers and it says published in  2022. I think it might have been submitted in  
1:02:35
2020 or 2021, but it was published very recently.  Sure. It's still cutting edge. I see. So, okay.  
1:02:44
So it's not a problem as long as the atoms are  independent, because then what you can do, which  
1:02:51
is what we do with time dilation with GPS, is like  we know how that changes so we can theoretically  
1:02:58
correct for it. And then you just take that  into account and you don't have a problem.  
1:03:04
Okay. But now people want to make these clocks  more precise and beat this one 10 to the minus  
1:03:13
18 uncertainty by entangling the atoms. Because  we've showed in quantum metrology that if you have  
1:03:20
entangled atoms, you get, you know, a precision  instead of going like 1 over square root of n,  
1:03:25
it's 1 over n. It's called the Heisenberg limit.  And this makes things much more precise. Okay. So  
1:03:31
if you do that, then you have a problem. Then you  bang your head with quantum mechanics and general  
1:03:39
relativity being incompatible. Why? Because what  time are you going to use? The proper time is  
1:03:47
going to be different in different heights. And  the Schrodinger equation on the left-hand side  
1:03:53
is like d and dt, an absolute time. So here you  have a relative time different at each height.  
1:04:00
So which time you want to use? Okay. So again,  the experimentalists say, oh, we're not worried  
1:04:06
about it at all event because we just use the time  at the center of the trap. That doesn't work that  
1:04:15
well. And it's like a, it's a patch, but forget  about it. Let's say maybe for what they want to  
1:04:20
do, it's good enough. I don't know. But from a  theoretical point of view, this is not the right  
1:04:27
thing to do. But you're actually losing on the  possibility of learning what we should be doing,  
1:04:35
because this is really a very good example where  you are at these stages where quantum mechanics  
1:04:42
and general relativity interplay, but we don't  have a theory to describe that experiment. So what  
1:04:48
I was telling, I recently went and visited the  group at NPL, at the National Physics Laboratory,  
1:04:55
and I was having a little like discussion  about this. And I was telling them, you know,  
1:05:01
that we don't have experiments to address these  questions. And now you're having an experiment  
1:05:08
that actually is getting there. So let's use  this experiment to try. So you have a theory.  
1:05:16
That's good. The theory is that you're using  is that you say, well, I can more or less do   with taking the proper time at the center of  my sample. Well, if you want to be rigorous,  
1:05:32
really what you have is that you lost your notion  of clock time. And you need to come up with a  
1:05:38
new thing. But that is what opens the opportunity  of, you know, you came up with a theory, which is  
1:05:45
not very good, I think, which is measuring at the  center. Well, you mentioned theoretical problems,  
1:05:52
but it sounds like what you're describing  is more akin to missed opportunities for   probing the interaction of general relativity with  quantum theory. Yes, both in a way, right? I mean,  
1:06:03
what I was trying to explain to them is that as  a theoretician, we don't have a proper theory to  
1:06:08
explain your experiment. Now, your experiment is  an experiment, and experiment is the experiment,  
1:06:14
right? It's like in that sense, it's not wrong.  What is wrong is the theory that we're using to   describe your experiment. But you need to start  somewhere. Again, the little circle that we talked  
1:06:24
about. So I start with a theory that's not very  good. Then you do the experiment. We look at the  
1:06:29
experimental results. And then I come up with a  way of modifying my theory. So right now, I have  
1:06:35
a PhD student working on this problem that I like  very much. And we've made some progress before,  
1:06:43
not with atoms, but with light. I want to  show you more or less what we did before.   Please. So Einstein came up with this idea of the  Einstein light clock. So basically, he used this  
Relativistic Quantum Clock Model
1:06:57
idea of a clock to argue things for relativity  and so on. So he considered two mirrors and then  
1:07:04
a photon bouncing back and forth. And that gave  you the tickings of the clock. And then he talked  
1:07:10
about what happens if you move this clock, and so  on. But now, we can use quantum field theory and  
1:07:18
quantum optics to quantize the idea of Einstein's  clock. So I've done that. I wrote another  
1:07:25
series of papers in that direction. It's to say,  okay, now I have two mirrors, but I have a quantum  
1:07:33
electromagnetic field inside. So when you do  that, you get the field that you can write down  
1:07:43
as an infinite sum of different modes. So those  are states that are sharp in frequency, but the  
1:07:50
photons are completely delocalized in your box.  But you can use quantum field theory to describe  
1:07:56
that. So that was also a long journey, because  when I started to work with that, you could only  
1:08:02
do this in flat space. And the only motion that  people could describe was a sinusoidal motion of  
1:08:11
the walls. And this was like the dynamical Casimir  effect. But I wanted to do more than that. I   wanted to consider curved space from the Earth to  a planet and send a little box up to study how the  
1:08:24
curvature, the underlying curvature of the Earth  would affect the quantum clock, or how would an  
1:08:30
interplay of quantum states with time dilation  would look like, and all that sort of thing.  
1:08:37
And gosh, that was really, really hard, because  solving those equations was very complicated.  
1:08:43
And what allowed me to make progress was working  with George Malouko, a colleague in Nottingham,  
1:08:50
where I used to work, who is an expert in quantum  field theory and curved space time. And then,  
1:08:56
well, we managed to come up with a new methodology  where we could now start, let's say, solving those  
1:09:02
sort of problems in a more general way. And then  I had... A student and a postdoc that helped me  
1:09:09
generalize this to curved space and so on. And  then, so we've been now, we have a clock model,  
1:09:15
which is basically Einstein's light clock,  but with a quantum field. We fix a frequency,  
1:09:22
and the oscillations of the quantum states of this  frequency mode give you like the ticking of the  
1:09:29
clock. But now we can move that in curved space  and ask questions about the interplay of time  
1:09:35
dilation with quantum things. And we found some  interesting things, like when you move the clock,  
1:09:41
due to things like called the dynamical Casimir  effect, you create particles, like photons inside  
1:09:49
the clock, and these affect time dilation. LWR  Interesting. HL. So it's kind of fun doing that.  
1:09:58
Again, I don't think you go to the  very fundamental questions by doing it,   but you start learning certain things. And one  of the things I was interested in is that, well,  
1:10:10
if you use these clocks to measure space and  time or time dilation and so on, because the  
1:10:17
state of the field is a quantum field, then you  start getting into these uncertainty principles,  
1:10:23
things that you can actually not measure space and  time with infinite precision. Like if you measure  
1:10:32
time very precisely, then space is not, and this  sort of thing. So I wanted to explore more the  
1:10:41
constraints that you get in measuring space-time  by using a quantum system. LWR Usually when people  
1:10:49
speak about Heisenberg's uncertainty, they're  talking about position and momentum, and you're   talking about space and time. HL. Yeah, they don't  go together. So you have energy and time, and then  
1:11:04
momentum and position. LWR Yes. HL. But in these  clocks, you have an interplay of things. You have  
1:11:15
states that obey minimum uncertainty in space  and momentum, so they're called Gaussian states,  
1:11:26
coherent states. And then we move these in space,  and then you have constraints that come also from  
1:11:32
the energy and the time. So I didn't kind of go  into much detail. I wasn't very precise when I  
1:11:40
said that. But you start getting the role of the  different uncertainty principles that you get from  
1:11:46
quantum theory, you know, playing a role in how  well your clock works and things like that, which  
1:11:52
is very interesting. LWR Cool. This work goes  back to 2014. HL. Yeah. LWR So I'll leave a link  
1:11:58
to all of the articles that have been mentioned in  this talk, either visually or just audibly, in the  
1:12:04
description. So people, if you're interested,  you can read more. HL. Yes. This is how we got   started. So this first paper was in flat space,  but now I think this is the latest paper that was  
1:12:15
published about clocks that was published in 2023.  There we can now, since we managed to, let's say,  
1:12:23
generalize our techniques to include curved space  time. I mean, it sounds simple, but literally  
1:12:30
it took us more than 15 years to be able to do  that. And yeah, we're using quantum field theory  
1:12:39
in curved space time. So then we finally had some  theoretical methodologies that allow us to address  
1:12:47
that question. And what we did is we looked at  a clock, a light clock, but we now were able  
1:12:53
to describe the clock in the space-time of the  Earth, treating the space-time of the Earth with a  
1:12:58
Schwarzschild metric, and come up with a model of  a clock and discuss how the clock ticks and, you  
1:13:05
know, talk about the Schwarzschild radius of the  Earth and how does this show up in the face of the  
1:13:11
clock and so on. So that was like, we then came  up with a notion of clock time. In this clock,  
1:13:20
at each slice within the clock, the proper time  is different. And we said, okay, but you could  
1:13:27
still build a clock by looking at the collective  oscillations. And that gave me an idea that, okay,  
1:13:33
now maybe we can go back to the atoms and redefine  the notion of the clock time using the collective  
1:13:41
oscillations and so on. But a student of mine  is working on that and we're just starting. We  
1:13:51
don't really have much to say about the atomic  case yet. Okay, so now the last thing I want to  
Does Gravity Collapse the Superposition?
1:14:01
talk about with respect to these experiments  is math. So yeah, I was telling you how Roger  
1:14:10
proposed many years ago that if you have a massive  superposition, this is unstable. And he argued  
1:14:18
that by showing that there was a conflict between  the superposition principle and the equivalence  
1:14:25
principle. So he said, yes, you could have a  superposition of a massive system that, for him,  
1:14:32
this would already be quantum gravity because  you have a gravitational field in a superposition  
1:14:37
of two different configurations. But these are  unstable and they decay very quickly and that is  
1:14:44
why we don't see superposition in the classical  world. So what kind of masses would you need  
1:14:55
in order to see if the predictions of Roger are  correct or not? Lyle Troxell Do you mind briefly  
1:15:01
outlining why is it that the superposition  contradicts the equivalence principle or the  
1:15:07
strong equivalence principle? Yes, so he starts  by describing a mass that is in a superposition  
1:15:17
that is falling. And then he says, okay, if you  describe the situation from a Newtonian point of  
1:15:24
view, and he writes the wave function, and now  from an Einsteinian point of view, and he writes  
1:15:34
a different equation. So he says, these wave  functions have to be the same up to a phase. No,  
1:15:41
because in quantum theory, states, wave functions  are equivalent up to a phase. But you see,  
1:15:50
his whole argument, I actually, I'm going to show  you a paper that I wrote with Roger in the next  
1:15:57
slide. And in that paper, we write an introduction  where we go through Roger's arguments. But they're  
1:16:04
not necessarily simple. And one of the reasons  why is because we don't have a theory for that. So  
1:16:11
Roger makes arguments that are good arguments,  well-informed, but without actually having a  
1:16:18
theory. So sometimes the arguments are talking  about quantum field theory and curved spacetime,  
1:16:24
and then he might make a Newtonian approximation  and so on. But he shows that the Einsteinian point  
1:16:31
of view is different from the Newtonian point of  view, and that there is a contradiction there. And  
1:16:39
that then, because of that, he argues that these  superpositions should be short-lived. And he goes  
1:16:49
beyond that, because he gives you a formula that  measures sort of the error, and this gives you  
1:16:56
an energy uncertainty, and it's related to the  gravitational self-energy of the difference in  
1:17:02
the superposition. So you take some, maybe that is  maybe going more technical, but we can if you want  
1:17:10
to, because I know that your followers are quite  well-educated in physics. So let me jump and then  
Where the Field is Now
1:17:22
I come back a little bit here. This is the paper  that I mentioned that I wrote with Roger, and what  
1:17:32
we did in this paper is that we calculated how  massive would these superpositions have to be if  
1:17:38
we used the Bose-Einstein condensate, I'm going  to come back to that. But we found that you need  
1:17:47
at least something like 10 to the 9 atoms in a  superposition. And let me tell you where the field  
1:17:56
is now. So well, people started to put electrons  in a superposition of two different locations  
1:18:05
using like a double-slit experiment, I don't know,  maybe 90 years ago, I don't remember when was the  
1:18:12
first experiment with electrons. And from there  they said, okay, it works for electrons, amazing,   let's do it now with atoms, and you know,  then it's like how bigger can the states,  
1:18:23
the system get, and the record is held by Markus  Arndt's group in the University of Vienna as well,  
1:18:32
where he has been able to put big molecules  in a superposition, and by big I mean the  
1:18:39
molecules have around 2,000 atoms. Wow. But you  know, for gravity to act, you need at least 10  
1:18:47
to the 9. Actually for molecules you need even  more. So you can see we're very far from that.  
1:18:55
What do you mean for gravity to act? I thought  the assumption is that gravity acts as long as you   have mass, don't these have masses? Yes, but these  are stable superpositions. Oh, according to the  
1:19:06
calculation from Penrose? Yes, this is what Markus  showed, that you can have these superpositions,  
1:19:13
and I think they lasted milliseconds, I don't  exactly remember how long he had them for. So they  
1:19:20
are stable for that long in the lab. So gravity  is not causing the collapse of superpositions at  
1:19:29
those scales. I see, I see. But now the question  is, is Roger right? Because if Roger is right,  
1:19:36
then that explains why we don't see superpositions  in the macroscopic world. And what would be super  
1:19:43
interesting is to see that, now that is a big  open question in fundamental quantum mechanics,  
1:19:48
is to understand what takes you from quantum  states being in superpositions to the classical  
1:19:55
world where we don't see quantum superpositions.  It's a very interesting question. Markus and many  
1:20:01
other people are trying to address this question  in an experimental point of view, by trying to  
1:20:08
put more mass into the superpositions. There are  many different experiments going on at the moment,  
1:20:16
and they use, for example, nanoparticles,  nanobeads made of silicon or silica, diamonds,  
1:20:24
little mirrors, rods, even membranes. There's  many, many experiments going on. And also a  
1:20:30
record has been held by Markus Aspelmeyer, also  in Vienna. I spent three years in Vienna because  
1:20:36
of these amazing people and experiments there. I  was very lucky to get a visiting professorship for  
1:20:45
that long and be in the same environment where  these amazing scientists are. Markus was able  
1:20:54
to bring one of these nanobeads to the quantum  regime by cooling it down to a lower vibrational  
1:21:05
state. So they're already in the quantum, let's  say, scales, but with 10 to the 8 atomic masses,  
1:21:11
so quite a big bead. But he cannot put them  yet into a superposition of two different  
1:21:19
locations. That has not been possible. Also,  one of my colleagues, and I'm in Southampton,  
1:21:25
so one of my colleagues there, Hendrik Ulbricht,  also has a very recent, amazing paper where he  
1:21:35
takes these little beads and he manages to measure  gravity. But this is all classical. But anyway,  
1:21:42
I mean, at those scales where quantum starts to  kick in, well, what he wants to do is push these  
1:21:48
experiments so that maybe he sees some quantum  gravity still far from that, but right, let's say,  
1:21:55
approaching. But this is where things are at with  respect to the experiments with big mass. So what  
Bose-Einstein Condenstate
1:22:05
I did with Roger is that when he started to tell  me about his proposal and the experiments that  
1:22:14
people were doing, I noticed that all of these  experiments were using solids, no? Mirrors,  
1:22:23
beads, and so on. And it's very difficult  to cool a solid to very cold temperatures  
1:22:32
where you have little noise. So they haven't been  able to make more progress because of the noise,  
1:22:37
because you can't cool them enough. Now, a  Bose-Einstein condensate is a really beautiful  
1:22:44
system. I think it's my favorite system because  you can reach half a nano-Kelvin. The coldest  
1:22:50
things that we can do. And you can get up to 10  to the atoms. I mean, that's not very common,   but there's been an experiment. Using hydrogen,  in which they cool 10 atoms into a condensate. So  
1:23:02
let me tell you a little bit what a condensate  is. So you have a, let's say, when you learn   quantum mechanics, you learn that if you put a  particle in a potential, well, the particle is  
1:23:12
there moving in the potential, but if you cool  it to the ground state, it will, let's say,   if you manage to the ground state, the atom will  be completely delocalized within the potential.  
1:23:25
So you don't know what the position of the atom  is in that whole thing, no? That's really, I don't  
1:23:30
know, when I did that in quantum mechanics, I  loved it. Now think about having 10 to the eight,   10 to the 10 atoms, all cooled down. But atoms are  bosons, so they can all occupy the same quantum  
1:23:42
state. So you can cool them all down to the ground  state. And that is what is called a Bose-Einstein  
1:23:48
condensate. So you have the biggest system that  behaves in a quantum mechanical way. And like I  
1:23:56
said, in the experiment, people have been able to  cool these systems to half a nanokelvin. Right.  
1:24:02
So I was wondering if then this would be a good  system to test Roger's predictions, and that's  
1:24:11
what we did together. We said, okay, how would  it go with a Bose-Einstein condensate? And well,  
1:24:19
also super complicated, because you would have  to create a superposition of all the atoms on  
1:24:25
the left with all the atoms on the right. And  although the temperatures are that low, people  
1:24:31
have not been able to create these superpositions.  They're called noon states because you have N,   zero, zero, N. Yes, cool. And you know what, the  record is by one of my colleagues called Chris  
1:24:43
Westbrook, and he's been able to do two atoms. And  like, so you can have many, like you can have up  
1:24:50
to 10 to the, like you can have many atoms in  quantum states in a Bose-Einstein condensate,  
1:24:57
but not many atoms in a spatial superposition  of two different space locations. That's where  
1:25:03
gravity acts. So this is what I now have been  working on in the last two years. And well,  
1:25:14
it's not related to, it's inspired by this work  with Roger, but it's a complete new thing. I  
1:25:20
hope I can talk about it at a later time with  you. But in that previous paper with Roger,  
1:25:27
you know, we studied things like, Roger  had given formulas for uniform spheres,  
1:25:32
and in a BC you could have pancakes or elongated  BCs with different distributions of the density.  
1:25:41
And we studied if these would enhance the effects  predicted by Roger. And then, well, you have a lot  
1:25:47
of losses and we studied the losses and so on. And  that's how we came up with this. Well, with a BC,  
1:25:54
you need at least 10 to the nine particles, maybe  even 10 to the 10, in order to start being able  
1:26:01
to actually verify that the energy uncertainty  of gravitational origin that Roger predicts has  
1:26:10
an effect. So now I'm gonna finish this part with  the slides, just telling you of an example of the  
New Device: Atom Interferometer
1:26:18
work that I've done, where I brought together  quantum field theory and curved spacetime to,  
1:26:24
let's say, propose a new sensor. And it was quite  bold, because I came up with a proposal that you  
1:26:32
could use a Bose-Einstein condensate. The sample  itself can be 100 micrometers, 50 micrometers, the  
1:26:39
cloud of atoms. And the experiment is, again, a  tabletop experiment. We could put it in this room,  
1:26:45
no? Cool. And I claim that you could use the BC,  because you see an atom, we saw how precise they  
1:26:52
are. And a BC, you might want to see it as 10 to  the eight atoms cooled down to the ground state.  
1:26:59
So this is a very precise, it's a system that  is very sensitive to spacetime distortions. And  
1:27:07
I made a proposal on how could you use the system  to detect gravitational waves. Wow. And it's quite  
1:27:15
crazy, because gravitational waves are detected  in LIGO, where the apparatus measures each arm  
1:27:23
three kilometers. So this is very bold. And I've  been really kind of, when I met Roger, that was in  
1:27:32
2017, I was really invested in that, and trying  to convince the community that you need to do  
1:27:41
this experiment, because it really opens up a new  direction. And Roger was trying to convince me to  
1:27:52
work on the collapse of the wave function due to  gravity. I was very reluctant, because I thought,  
1:27:59
I want to put my time and my energy into this. And  well, after the years, Roger managed to pull me  
1:28:05
more into what he's doing. But yeah. So when you  talk about using atoms to measure gravity, what  
1:28:16
we usually do in quantum technologies is an atom  interferometer. So let's say you have a atom, and  
1:28:24
you hit it with a laser, with a photon, and you  make the atom, you put it in a superposition of  
1:28:30
two different positions, but they're free-falling.  So they follow different trajectories, and then  
1:28:36
you recombine them with lasers. And they recombine  at a point. But because they went through  
1:28:41
different trajectories, they pick information in  a phase that depends on the local gravitational  
1:28:47
field. And this is what a quantum gravimeter is.  Interesting. And I put here a single particle  
1:28:52
detector, because although they throw maybe 10  to the six atoms at once into the interferometer,  
1:28:58
all the atoms are independent. And each atom goes  through this superposition of trajectories. And  
1:29:06
then they interfere at a point. So I put here the  interference is local, because it's at the point   where they recombine. And then this is limited  by the time of flight. And the equation is very  
1:29:17
simple. It's just this equation that's here.  Basically, it depends with the time of flight   squared, which means the bigger the detector, the  more precise it is. That's why LIGO is so big.  
1:29:29
And they're thinking because they want to go to,  well, LIGO is with light, but the principle is the  
1:29:34
same. They now want to make a bigger detector in  space called LISA to have more precision. So a lot  
1:29:41
in physics, the tendency is to go very big, big  experiments, of course, are very expensive. And I,  
1:29:49
my, my husband says that I'm a rebel because I  like, you know, if everybody's doing one thing, I   always want to do something different that applies  to everything in my life. Yeah, that's another  
1:29:59
aspect that unifies us. Yeah, really? Yeah. No,  it's like I'm a contrarian at heart. Yeah, yeah,  
1:30:05
yeah, yeah, exactly. So if everybody wants to make  big detectors, I want to make them very small and  
1:30:10
so on. But it has paid off for me in science. So  maybe sometimes in life can make me like a Grinch  
1:30:17
in Christmas and things like that, because I was  like, oh, I don't want to do what everybody does.   So socially, I don't want to go to the movie that  everybody's watching. But in science, it's been,  
1:30:26
it's been good, you know. So, so, well, here I  also write that this is compatible with Newtonian  
1:30:34
gravity, because this is an experiment that is  described with the Schrodinger equation. If you  
1:30:41
treat the local gravitational field by Newtonian  gravity, everything works very nicely. And like I  
1:30:46
said, these are already commercial. My colleague,  Philippe Bouyer, has founded a company that he now  
1:30:54
sold called MuQuans. And there are other like  Mark Kasevich does that as well, in which,  
1:30:59
you know, they built these interferometers, these  gravimeters. And they sell them, they're like,  
1:31:05
like a meter big, I think, and so on. And that's  like, you cannot make them smaller than that,  
1:31:11
because then you lose precision. So if you  wanted to get atom interferometers to apply  
1:31:20
them to fundamental physics, to learn about the  equivalence principle, or to measure anything,  
1:31:27
respect to gravity, so you want to make them more  precise, you have to make them bigger. So Philippe  
1:31:32
Bouyer did this amazing experiment in which he  put his atom interferometer in a plane. So he  
1:31:39
flew the plane as well, and let it free fall for  a bit to get the long baselines. He also has an  
1:31:45
amazing experiment underground called, oh gosh,  is it? I forgot the name of it now. But it is like  
1:31:55
the arms of the atom interferometer are 300 meters  long. So this is huge. You can see here in sort of  
1:32:03
the tunnels and so on. And in Germany, you have a  drop tower. That is like, what is it like this? A  
1:32:11
drop tower. Yeah. So they put up here. Oh, okay.  Oh, a drop tower. They put up there like an atom  
1:32:17
interferometer, and then they let it drop to get  these long interferometer arms and be able to be  
1:32:24
more precise. Some other people also look at these  atom interferometries and put lasers and slow  
1:32:34
down the atoms so that they get, so for example,  this paper by Guglielmo Tino is really beautiful,  
1:32:43
trying to miniaturize the detectors. So what  I came up with this idea was, well, if you're  
1:32:52
trying to do interferometry in using these sort  of, call it spatial interferometry, because the  
1:32:58
atom goes through two different positions. Yeah.  The precision is going to be limited by how big it  
1:33:05
is. So you're going to have to make them bigger  to be more precise. But if instead of that,   we do interferometry, not in space, but in  frequency, then what is going to limit your  
1:33:16
precision is time. Uh-huh. So the sensor can be  very small, but you're going to have to produce  
1:33:27
quantum states that live longer in time. So with  this idea that I called frequency interferometry,  
1:33:34
I came up with a number of sensors, including the  gravitational wave detector. And then I applied  
1:33:43
it to searches for dark energy, searches for  dark matter. I also patent an idea on how to use  
1:33:51
these states to measure the local gravitational  field. So this might have commercial applications  
1:33:57
in the future. And I like that because I  like more fundamental questions. Actually,   my favorite question is like, what's the nature of  reality? What are we doing here? Where am I? Oh,  
1:34:06
yeah. It's a dangerous question, huh? Yeah.  Very. All of these things. But when you're  
1:34:12
doing that and you find some interesting things,  why not also come up with something that can be  
1:34:18
patented and commercialized and so on? And yeah,  then when I met Roger, I was really invested in  
1:34:25
this. And I'm still working on it. I have some  recent results. It was in the old slides. It  
1:34:37
doesn't matter. But I think I managed to give you  a flavor of what you can do by bringing together  
1:34:44
quantum technologies and apply them to fundamental  questions of where things are at. I think I want  
1:34:50
to finish by saying that this last proposal is  an example where we used not quantum mechanics,  
1:35:00
but let's say a more fundamental theory  because it takes into account relativity,   which is quantum field theory in curved spacetime.  And although it's not the finished theory because  
1:35:09
it cannot address the question of superpositions  of mass, you can apply it without problem to  
1:35:16
specific cases like the propagation of spacetime  of packages in the spacetime of the Earth and many  
1:35:22
other interesting instances. This allows you to  come up with, let's say, new sensors. And the  
1:35:32
theoretical predictions that we've made is that  these sensors are so, in principle, they still  
1:35:38
have to test them, so precise that you might be  able to detect a gravitational wave with a tiny  
1:35:44
system. And these are for high frequencies, by the  way. They don't really compete with LIGO because  
1:35:49
LIGO works in a different frequency regime. This  would be for frequencies higher than the ones that  
1:35:57
LIGO detects. But, you know, let's say using these  patches of the theory that incorporate relativity,  
1:36:06
I think already show you that you can, in  principle, make sensors that allow you to go  
1:36:12
closer to these scales where I was talking about  that we don't have the guide to unify. You know,  
1:36:20
when people were trying to detect gravitational  waves, the first apparatus that were built in  
1:36:26
Maryland, you can still see them, there are these  Weber bars. So Weber predicted that the phonons,  
1:36:35
so the vibrational modes of these big metallic  bars would resonate with gravitational waves.   And then he claimed that he actually had this.  He detected one, and then this got sort of  
1:36:44
controversial and then eventually disproved. But  actually, the proposal that we made in which you  
1:36:51
can implement it by using a BEC and using the  vibrational modes, like the phonon modes of the  
1:36:57
BEC, but because you can cool the BEC to half a  nanokelvin, that's 10 orders of magnitude cooler  
1:37:04
than the Weber bars were cooled initially, then  you can prepare the phonons in a highly quantum  
1:37:11
state, which you cannot do unless you go to those  cold temperatures. And then you can exploit all  
1:37:17
the sensitivities that we were talking about,  quantum technologies, to see changes in the  
1:37:23
space-time. And that's how we came up with that  proposal. You know, I think I can talk forever,  
1:37:30
so maybe it's good to leave it here. I think let's  see if I had some kind of concluding. Well, yes,  
Testing Ivette’s Predictions
1:37:39
my concluding slide was to say that I've managed  to raise funding to build a new experiment. So I'm  
1:37:46
working with Philippe Bouyer and Chris Westbrook,  who are going to test some of my predictions in  
1:37:57
a new proposal that I have for unifying quantum  theory and gravity. And well, we're still working  
1:38:06
very closely with Reuters. So I'm very excited,  because it's like a new era for me, now being able  
1:38:13
to work this close with the experiments. And yeah,  I'll leave it here. Professor, thank you so much.  
1:38:20
You've given far more than just a flavor. I lost  count of how many pioneering ideas there are here,  
1:38:27
with actual practical consequences in the near  term. Near term being within a couple of years. I  
1:38:32
don't recall the last time that's happened on this  channel, and all I do is interview people that are  
1:38:38
at the bleeding edge in their field. So thank you  for that. Thank you. Thanks. Yeah. No, thank you.  
1:38:44
It's a big pleasure for me to be on your channel.  The pleasure's all mine. Thank you. Great. Thanks.  
Outro / Support TOE
1:38:54
Also, thank you to our partner, The Economist. of  the algorithm, which means that whenever you share  
1:39:50
on Twitter, say on Facebook, or even on Reddit, et  cetera, it shows YouTube, hey, people are talking  
1:39:56
about this content outside of YouTube, which in  turn greatly aids the distribution on YouTube.  
1:40:02
Thirdly, there's a remarkably active Discord and  subreddit for Theories of Everything, where people  
1:40:07
explicate TOEs, they disagree respectfully  about theories, and build, as a community,   our own TOE. Links to both are in the description.  Fourthly, you should know this podcast is on  
1:40:17
iTunes, it's on Spotify, it's on all of the audio  platforms. All you have to do is type in Theories  
1:40:23
of Everything, and you'll find it. Personally,  I gain from re-watching lectures and podcasts.   I also read in the comments that, hey, TOE  listeners also gain from replaying. So how  
1:40:32
about instead you re-listen on those platforms,  like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts, whichever  
1:40:37
podcast catcher you use. And finally, if you'd  like to support more conversations like this,  
1:40:43
more content like this, then do consider  visiting patreon.com slash CURTJAIMUNGAL,   and donating with whatever you like.  There's also PayPal, there's also crypto,  
1:40:52
there's also just joining on YouTube. Again,  keep in mind, it's support from the sponsors   and you that allow me to work on TOE full-time.  You also get early access to ad-free episodes,  
1:41:03
whether it's audio or video. It's audio in the  case of Patreon, video in the case of YouTube. For   instance, this episode that you're listening to  right now was released a few days earlier. Every  
1:41:12
dollar helps far more than you think. Either  way, your viewership is generosity enough.

All

From Curt Jaimungal

Quantum Mechanics

Media theories

Podcasts

Learning

Related

For you

Recently uploaded


2:31:21
The "Inverse Problem" Of Dark Matter Is Insane
Curt Jaimungal
69K views
•
2 months ago


1:31:01
The More You Study Consciousness, the Weirder It Gets | The Ezra Klein Show
The Ezra Klein Show
 and 2 more
640K views
•
2 months ago


1:02:59
Heather Cox Richardson on Trump’s Plan for America’s 250th
Pod Save America
 and Runaway Country with Alex Wagner
151K views
•
1 day ago
New


1:33:21
Why Physics Breaks at the Planck Scale
Sleep On Physics
31K views
•
10 days ago


21:00
What does the $ actually stand for?
RobWords
1.2M views
•
2 months ago


11:45

HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Eurythmics - Sweet Dreams (Are Made Of This) | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
360K views
•
11 months ago


1:15:40
MIT’s Rizwan Virk: “We’re less than 50 years from proving simulation theory.”
The Jordan Harbinger Show
223K views
•
6 months ago


20:12
Europeans May Never Leave America After This...
European Reacts
22K views
•
7 hours ago
New


1:56:14
Roger Penrose: "My Crazy Idea That Explains the Universe"
Curt Jaimungal
624K views
•
7 months ago



In this video



Chapters

Transcript
Search in video
Dark Matter Model Fallacy
0:00
I saw the equations and suddenly, this  is my gravitational lensing problem.  He just said, "Oh, finally, you got  it, 30 years after we found out." 
0:09
And it was quite astonishing how  disruptive you think something could be.
0:17
Dark matter. 85% of the universe's matter  is supposedly missing. But what's the  
0:24
technical truth behind the popular  science headlines? Dr. Jenny Wagner,   a scientist at the Institute of Astronomy  and Astrophysics and the Helsinki Institute  
0:32
of Physics, and winner of the Prize for  Courageous Science, disagrees about how   we got that number. This is because she  proved mathematically that most of what we  
0:42
call evidence for dark matter is driven by the  models we insert and not the data we collect.
0:48
On this channel, I, Curt Jaimungal, interview  researchers regarding their theories of reality  
0:53
with rigor and technical depth. Today's  episode is no different. Wagner found that   when you strip out the model's assumptions,  the only information that the data gives you  
1:02
is local. This means every grand dark matter  map you've ever seen is extrapolation. Now,  
1:09
it's not wild speculation. That's not what  she's saying at all. Specifically, she's   saying a profusion of models can all fit the same  data equally well. This is called lensing data.
1:19
By the end of this podcast, Wagner makes the  case that this is what Einstein predicted   over a century ago. The homogeneous, isotropic,  spherical cow model of the universe eventually  
1:30
needs to be replaced by the next level of detail.  Today, she shows us how we may finally be there.
1:39
What do we actually know about dark matter? Dark matter. Dark matter is something that  I wouldn't say it's something that we know  
1:47
about. But it's rather something, it's a term  that came up because we missed matter when we  
1:54
looked at our observations. And so dark matter  was the replacement or was the substitute for  
2:01
this missing mass in our explanations  of certain observations. For instance,  
2:07
in observations of the cosmic microwave  background in the very early universe,   but also in the late universe where we have  cosmic structures that seem to hold together  
2:19
in a gravitationally bound object. But then, if  this object is actually gravitationally bound,  
2:26
then we miss a lot of matter because the luminous  matter that we see, the baryonic matter, this is  
2:33
too little matter in order to keep this structure  together. So if we do not have dark matter,  
2:40
then these structures would dissolve over cosmic  time. Then we wouldn't see them as they are.
2:47
So what's the problem with dark matter? What's the   matter with matter? What's  the matter with dark matter? The matter with matter is that, I would say,  in modern cosmology, people started out with  
2:58
observations, with observing stars, observing  gas clouds, observing x-rays from the cosmos. And  
3:05
all of this seemed to be fine until we suddenly  realized if we take a look at all of these things  
3:12
and we want to explain them in the way that we  want to explain stuff on Earth, like to transfer  
3:19
the laws from Earth to the cosmos, we realize  that matter is missing. And first people thought,  
3:26
okay, we can just improve our telescopes in  order to get a better estimate of all of these  
3:32
missing masses. But on the other hand if we now  estimate forward how much mass are we actually  
3:38
missing, it's 85% of the entire matter content  of the universe that seems to be missing. And  
3:45
this is something that we cannot just make  up by the stuff, for instance small planets  
3:50
or very faint gas that we haven't detected. So  a lot of mass seems to be missing. And this is  
3:58
the puzzling thing, that we think we need dark  matter in order to explain all of the structures,  
4:04
how they behave, and all of the cosmic structure  evolution as well, how the galaxies formed.
4:11
So what does gravitational lensing have to do  with any of this? I know you have a wine glass,   so why don't you tell the audience, or  explain, or visually show the audience,  
4:19
what is gravitational lensing, and then what  the heck does it have to do with dark matter? So, if we take a look at all the  cosmic structures that we have,  
4:27
then we usually need a lot of assumptions to  find that missing matter. For instance, that some  
4:33
gas is in equilibrium or that a certain stage of  evolution has been reached, that the structures  
4:41
are not merging, something like this. And strong  gravitational lensing is a much more pure probe  
4:48
of the total matter content of such a structure,  because it purely relies on general relativity,  
4:54
that heavy masses curve spacetime, and so  the light will not go straight forward to us,  
5:02
but it will be bent along the so-called null  geodesics. And in that sense, the only assumption  
Gravitational Lensing Mechanics
5:09
we make to probe the entire mass of a structure is  general relativity and how masses bend spacetime.
5:16
And in order to visualize this, here you see  a background source, like a pattern on the  
5:22
wallpaper. And here is my Earth-like gravitational  lens. It's like an inhomogeneous, imperfect glass.  
5:31
And if I now slide as a foreground object, bending  space-time, if I now slide this gravitational  
5:39
lens in front of the background source, you  will see that the background source will not  
5:48
look the same to us as an observer, because  now the light goes through the gravitational  
5:53
lens. And this means now that we do not see the  source as it is, but we see a highly distorted,  
6:01
sometimes magnified and demagnified pattern  that is a distorted image of the source.
6:09
And strong gravitational lensing is even worse.  It doesn't only create a single distorted image,  
6:15
but it creates multiple distorted images of the  same background source. And so the good thing is  
6:22
if we have multiple images that are created by  exactly the same background source, we can then  
6:29
correlate all the information from all of these  objects together in order to infer properties  
6:36
of the source or properties of the lens. And I  say or because if we know the lens perfectly,  
6:45
so if we can describe our lens, then we can  reconstruct a source. On the other hand, if  
6:50
we know the source as it is naturally, without the  lensing effect, then we can reconstruct the lens.
6:57
But in cosmology, we neither know the source. It's  an object in the early universe far, far away from  
7:04
us. That's one point. And the other point is our  lens. If it really contains 85% of dark matter,  
7:12
we do not know where it is because it doesn't  interact with light. So how do we know anything  
7:17
about the lens, about the mass distribution  that curves spacetime, in order to reconstruct  
7:24
the source? So it's a chicken-egg problem. We  neither know the source, nor do we know the lens.
7:29
Okay, so speaking of wine, many people,  when they're younger, almost everyone,  
7:35
doesn't like wine. They say to their mom or to  their dad, can I taste? And then they taste it,   they're like, I don't like this. But then at  some point that changes. And then you wonder,  
7:44
do I taste wine the same as I did when I was a kid  and I just like it now? Or am I tasting something  
7:51
different? And had I tasted what I taste now as  a kid, it would have tasted good. So a similar  
7:57
problem is there with pain perception. So if  person A can feel the same amount of pain as  
8:03
person B and say I'm okay with it, but person  B, that person A just thinks person B is a wimp.
8:09
Well, you don't know. Is person A  just having high pain tolerance,   or do they actually experience the pain as less?  And Daniel Dennett also talked about this. We  
8:18
don't actually know which one it is. We know the  difference. So we know, say, A minus B equals 5,  
8:25
but we don't know what's the value of A,  what's the value of B. Is that similar? Yes, yes. It's pretty similar as in, I would  say, as in everything in this world. We can only  
8:36
measure or we can only experience changes, but we  cannot have an absolute reference frame. I mean,  
8:43
if I see that my dad likes wine, I have the  expectation because I like my dad, I may also like  
8:49
wine. So if you try the wine and then you have a  certain expectation and it's completely different,  
8:55
you may not like it at first because it  doesn't fit with your expectation because   you have nothing else to refer to. And only if you  have tasted a certain amount of different wines,  
9:07
maybe even different qualities, different  ages, and all of this, then you will realize,  
9:12
oh, I like this wine more than I like that  wine. Or you may find out, I've tried a lot  
9:18
of wines and I don't like any of them. But  at first, you only have your expectation.  
9:23
You have to extrapolate from what you know or  what you think other people know. That's your  
9:30
ground starting point. And then you gain  experience. And then you realize, okay,  
9:35
I have a certain amount of experience  and then I can relate one to the other.
9:40
And I think this is the same in cosmology.  The only thing we can measure is changes.   And at first, this was Newton's great, I would  say, great insight to transfer the expectation  
9:51
that laws in physics on Earth are exactly  the same on the Moon or even in farther out  
9:59
space. This was Newton's idea. Let's transfer  what we know from Earth, our expectations,  
10:04
into space. It could be different. I mean,  nobody says that this is true. It could be  
10:10
that this wine is not good. But on the other  hand, we found out in a lot of examples,  
10:16
with lots of experiences probing ourselves through  the local universe, going to the larger scales,  
10:21
that actually a lot of these physical laws seem  to be also plausible in farther out space. So it  
10:30
seems the same experiences that we make could  be made at other positions in the universe.
10:36
Okay, and now the problem is what? Like, okay,  sure, we don't know the mass distribution,  
10:42
but if we knew it, we could predict the  lensing. And if we knew the lensing,   then we could predict the mass  distribution. The problem is what?  
10:49
That we don't know either and  we have to infer both? Or what? Yes, the problem is when we know the source  perfectly, we can reconstruct the lens. And when  
10:58
we know the lens perfectly, we can reconstruct  the source. But the problem is in the universe,  
11:03
we are not sitting at the source position. So  we do not know what the source looks like. And  
11:09
we do not know what the lens looks like  either because the lens is also very far   away. And in both of these cases, we have the  problem that the source is only visible to us  
11:20
in a very distorted way. So we do not  even know what's the morphology of it.
11:25
And on the other side, the lens, this is something  that we have even less knowledge of. Because we  
11:30
see, let's for instance take a galaxy cluster. We  see a few galaxies in this cluster. But the rest,  
11:37
if we assume that dark matter exists, 85% of  this cluster is most likely dark. And then,  
11:43
how do we make sense out of this lens? What  is the distribution of the mass in this lens  
11:49
if I know less than 20% of this matter? I have  a lot of room to wiggle to distribute the mass  
11:55
of the dark matter, and as well a lot of room to  wiggle how the galaxies move that I actually see.
12:04
Okay so let's get to Jenny's large claim. What is  your big claim? And then we spend the rest of this  
12:09
episode, the next hour or so, dissecting it and  getting into the details. What's the punchline?
Local vs. Global Information
12:16
The punchline that I hope to put forward is  dare not to know. I would like to say if we  
12:24
take a look at the observables that we have, we  should clearly separate our model assumptions  
12:30
from the data. And this implies, in the end,  that we may not need as much dark matter as  
12:37
we currently think we need to describe the  cosmic structures. So, I don't want to fill  
12:42
the knowledge gaps in our mass reconstruction  with model assumptions. I would like to say,  
12:49
let's stick to the information that the  data gives us, and that's it. And the rest   is whatever. There might be something,  there might be nothing, we don't know.
12:58
Okay, so the amount of dark matter is  potentially drastically overestimated?
13:05
Yes, it could be. I mean, the calculations  that I do and my colleagues did, I mean,   I'm not alone in this, we're a team. And so  what we found out is that if we take a look  
13:15
at the multiple images in such a strong  gravitational lensing event, then we can  
13:22
infer local properties of the lensing structure.  And we can also infer how the source looks like  
13:32
up to an overall scaling constant. So we get the  morphology of the source, like the relative view  
13:39
of it, and we get the local information of the  light-bending object in space-time, but only the  
13:48
local properties of this lens, which means we know  the local distortion directions, like how is the  
13:54
lens distorting each multiple. And we also know  what is the relative size between these multiple  
14:02
images. So we know what's the relative power of  the lens between the different positions. And  
14:09
all of this is the maximum information that is  completely given by the data. So we do not make  
14:15
any additional assumptions how the dark matter  could be distributed in the entire structure.
14:21
So I'm sure a critic would just say,  look, we have so much converging   evidence from simulations, rotation  curves, the CMB, the bullet cluster,  
14:31
I'm sure it's always thrown out. How can  you say that this is just model-driven?
14:37
Because most of these, what you think is evidence,  is actually model-driven in exactly the same  
14:45
way. Because we only have a limited amount of  reasonable models, and we usually imply these  
14:52
because, on the one hand, if we start from  the early days of modern cosmology, people  
14:57
tried to understand everything analytically.  So the first models were spheres, ellipsoids,  
15:05
and maybe something a bit more complicated. And  then in the 1970s, 1980s, computers started to  
15:11
take over. And this was the time when people  said, hey, we can do this numerically. We can  
15:16
implement an entire universe in a computer.  For instance, Volker Springel, he has one of  
15:22
the biggest cosmological simulations on Earth  that he says, I can model an entire universe,  
15:28
including all galaxy clusters and everything,  in a computer. And this is then numerical.
15:34
But on the other hand, if you just take this  numerical simulation, you have the question,  
15:39
what did you put in? You put in a certain  amount of assumptions, like for instance,   that your cluster is subject to Newtonian  gravity, or that your cluster is taken  
15:51
together by Newtonian gravity and expanding  on a certain cosmological model. You implement  
15:58
a lot of assumptions, and so based on these  assumptions, you will see certain structures,   or you will not see certain structures. This is  why Volker has additional simulations to say,  
16:08
let's assume dark matter, for instance,  has different properties. So let's play   around. If dark matter is just a collisionless  fluid, and these particles do not interact,  
16:19
what happens then? How do my structures look  like? If I then let these particles collide,  
16:24
how would my structures look like then?  And he finds out it's vastly different.
16:30
So I'm not a dark matterist, I'm not a relativist,   I'm not a cosmologist or an astrophysicist. I'm  just a fool. A fool with some good looks maybe,  
16:41
let's say. But they're not fools. So  when you bring it up to other physicists,  
16:46
the model dependent argument, that must have  occurred to them. What's the reception like?
16:55
I would say it depends on whom you ask. I  mean, I would say the community is divided,  
17:00
that half of the community says, yeah, of course  we believe in dark matter because we can simulate  
17:06
it, we see that it's missing in all of these  different probes together. But on the other hand,  
17:11
if you take a look, all of them have a  very large overlap of the same assumptions,  
17:16
and everything is filling a lot of voids  where we do not have data with models.
17:24
This is the camp that I would say  is in favor of whatever I model  
17:29
should actually be there in reality.  And then there is the other camp,  
17:34
which I belong to, and these people, they  say, if we now take a look at our observables,  
17:41
what have we actually measured? And if  we now use a model to describe this,  
17:47
we know that this is not the reality. So we  know that we make a simplification to reality.
17:53
As George Ellis usually says, the cosmos is much  more difficult and much more complex than just a  
17:59
spherical cow, because our cosmological standard  model is a spherical cow. It's homogeneous,  
18:05
isotropic, so the same in every direction,  and the matter density is the same everywhere.  
18:10
So this is something that is very, very  simplistic. And if we use this model,  
18:15
we need to make sure that we know in how far  does it fit our data. And if we get better data,  
18:23
is the model still appropriate to describe the  degree of details that we have in the new data?
18:31
How did Mark Gorenstein react? Oh, he was... When I told him that I think that  it's the local information of gravitational lenses  
18:42
that is actually the information in the data, and  anything else is just model dependent, he just  
18:49
said, "Oh, finally, you got it. 30 years after we  found out that lensing is degenerate and lensing  
18:57
models can fit the data equally well." So this  was for us, this was a puzzle. And funny enough,  
19:05
he came from astrophysics and then he moved on  to biophysics and he looked also a lot into the  
19:13
optical analogy between strong gravitational  lensing and optical stuff. And I came from  
19:18
biophysics and I moved into astrophysics. So we  had some kind of overlap, which was quite funny.
19:25
So in the end, I think he could have  found it as well, but he didn't see that  
19:30
to get rid of the model. He thought, okay,  let's just probe a lot of models and then  
19:36
we will find out what is the underlying  principle. So forward modeling to insert  
19:41
different models and finding out are the  observables still the same, or does the   model predict different observables? He thought,  if we do this long enough, we will find it out.
19:51
But actually I came the other way around.  I said we need to get rid of the model. We   need to find what is the common thing that the  formalism itself tells us without inserting any  
20:02
model. And I found out the formalism is local.  Every equation that is there has an X there,  
20:09
meaning position of the multiple image. There's  always an X. It's the potential of X. It's the  
20:15
deflection angle depending on the position.  Everything is depending. So I thought, okay,   it can only be something local. It cannot  be something global. And then I found out  
20:25
if we leave out the model, the only thing  that remains is the local information.
20:31
This video is sponsored by Shortform. If you want  a free trial and an exclusive $50 off their annual  
20:37
plan, then go to the link in my description,  shortform.com/TOE. If you're like me, you've  
20:43
encountered books that are so dense, finishing  them is actually just the beginning. Shortform  
20:48
helps with that. Their book guides go far beyond  pastiche summaries. They critique, they add  
20:54
context, they include interactive exercises, and  connect ideas across authors. Take Gödel, Escher,   Bach, or The Master and His Emissary, two of the  most demanding reads in consciousness studies on  
21:04
the popular market. My method is I read the guide  first, then the book, then I read the guide again.  
21:10
So it's a triptych of engagement that cements  understanding, better understanding for me.   The GEB guide maps recursive structures in a way  that exhibits intellectual pleiotropy, where one  
21:19
insight branches into consciousness, computation,  and self-reference simultaneously. Shortform  
21:24
covers philosophy, science, and psychology, ipso  facto, the intellectual core of this channel.
21:30
They publish new guides weekly, and subscribers   vote on what books get covered next.  Their browser extension, Shortform AI,  
21:37
summarizes articles and YouTube videos with  a single click. Go to shortform.com/TOE for  
21:44
a free trial and an exclusive $50 off your  annual subscription. That's shortform.com/TOE.
21:52
Okay, so walk me through, what  does that mean physically?   What does local information physically mean?
Statistical Mechanics vs. Gravity
21:59
Local information physically means that usually  people want to determine the entire mass of a  
22:06
gravitational lens, like of a big object. And  so they are after making an assumption based  
22:13
on the multiple images that they see, what is the  total mass of this object? So they are inferring  
22:19
a huge global mass for one object based on  a few data points. But if you now say the  
22:27
local information is the maximum information,  not the information you have, it's obvious,   you cannot get the entire mass. All you can get  is some directions where the lens is distorting.  
22:38
You only know the properties of the lens at  these positions, and this doesn't give you   any information about the mass directly,  not even a mass at these image positions.
22:51
Wouldn't the critic just say, hey, we  always have incomplete data for everything,  
22:56
not just astrophysically, down on Earth we  have incomplete data, we have incomplete data  
23:02
abound. And so what you're articulating  is just fallibilism, we could be wrong,  
23:08
or some form of epistemic humility. But at some  point, one has to commit. Like every measurement,  
23:14
yeah, has model dependencies, but  at some point, you just say, okay,   well, this is the model and this model works, or  something like that. So tell me what you think.
23:23
Yes, yes, yes. I mean, in principle, when I  realized that it's only local information that   we have, then I had the problem, okay, this model  that we have, we insert it. So on the one hand,  
23:34
we cannot say much without a model, but then  how good of a quality are our models that we  
23:41
have? And there, if you go back to what's their  origin, it started as some idea that we have.
23:48
It's called the singular isothermal sphere,  meaning it's a gas in equilibrium that's  
23:53
spherically distributed, because this comes  out as a solution of an analytic problem. How  
23:59
would a gas cloud look like that is very  idealized? And that comes from like the  
24:06
first calculations that we did for astrophysics  when we said we want to know how stars form,   so we consider a gas cloud that is collapsing  under its own gravity and all of this. So we  
24:16
had these power laws which is like one  over r to the power of something. And   the singular isothermal sphere happened to be  one over r squared. This was one of the first,  
24:27
I would say, like structure descriptions  that people had. And then they said, hey,  
24:33
if we now have some structure that is not an ideal  gas cloud, let's just stick to these power laws,  
24:39
and let's just fit for whatever goes one to the  power of alpha. And then they found this still  
24:48
doesn't fit. And then they did a more elaborate  model based on simulations to fit for something  
24:55
that is in the end a heuristic mass density  profile that seems to come up in simulations.
25:02
So you can now ask, we have a model, and  we could say, okay, we validated it in some  
25:08
sense by simulations. But do I believe that these  simulations are actually mimicking reality? That's  
25:15
one point. And the second point is, a theoretical,  fundamental, physical explanation, unfortunately,  
25:22
is still missing. This is why I also started to  develop a derivation of such mass density profiles  
25:29
in order to reason why this power law is actually  missing, that is not necessarily reasonable,   and why we should use it, why we should trust  it. And this is very complicated, of course,  
25:38
because a lot of people suffer here that normally  we have statistical mechanics. That's what we've  
25:44
learned since 1900-something. But the problem is  that this statistical mechanics is not suitable  
25:50
for gravity. And I think Roger Penrose,  he would definitely agree to this. He also  
25:56
propagates this quite a lot of times, that he says  gravity is exactly the opposite of what we do.
26:02
We think statistical mechanics happens.  The entropy should always increase,  
26:07
and then you have like a uniform  distribution of everything. But what   does gravity do? Gravity takes exactly  the opposite direction. Everything that  
26:16
is distributed is just collapsed into  a single point. This is, I would say,   maximum order instead of maximum entropy in  that sense. So how do you use a statistical  
26:27
mechanics approach that is doing the opposite of  what gravity does in order to describe gravity?
26:34
And this was my problem when I started to set  out, okay, how can we describe a mass density   profile? How can we derive this? And I'm not  allowed to use statistical mechanics. And so  
26:46
I called it DEMON for Dark Emergent Meta-halo  Ontological Nexus... And that was my approach  
26:52
that I put forward. And I found out that it is  possible to reason why this power law is good,  
26:59
but not using statistical mechanics, to just  say, okay, we start with Newtonian gravity,  
27:07
and then we say Newtonian gravity is scale-free.  And this scale-freeness is obviously something  
27:14
that leads to power laws. This is what we also see  in nature on Earth. And then you can reason why a  
27:20
power law should be a good approach. And then  depending on how you coarse-grain your galaxy  
27:27
distribution into some density, you can then  argue why you're going to go to the next level, a   certain experiment is reasonable or not,  and in which limit you can get this.
27:38
So I'm more and more convinced that these  power laws are actually reasonable. But still,   I mean, we need to further understand from a  fundamental physical perspective which model  
27:47
is actually good. And this is what I would like  to see in the near future for astrophysicists.  
27:53
Don't use black boxes. I mean, simulations are  important, but don't use them as black boxes   and just heuristically fit. Try to understand, to  bridge the gap, so we can bridge the gap between  
28:02
theory and simulation in order to get a better  understanding of what we're actually doing.
28:08
Why don't you give us an intuition as to what  a power law is and then what scale-free means,  
28:14
and why it's reasonable to think  of Newtonian gravity as scale-free,   and how that may imply power laws? What  does this all have to do with one another?
28:24
I mean, power laws is an inverse proportionality  in that sense, but to a higher exponent. So you  
28:30
have 1 over r to the power of alpha. And this  means that if you have the curve, I guess you can  
28:37
show the graph of the curve, how this looks like  for one over r squared or something like this.   And then you see that the farther you go away from  your origin, the less important this becomes. But  
28:50
the point is, it is still there. It is not going  exactly to zero. It's not really being damped by  
28:57
quite a lot. So this is the power law that you  can, for instance, describe what is the richness  
29:03
of people, so what is the wealth of people, and  then this usually follows a power law that you  
29:09
have a lot of people who earn hardly anything, and  then you have like your middle class, and then you  
29:14
have the bunch of millionaires, but obviously  it's not zero. And you cannot say if you have  
29:20
10 millionaires who have a certain amount of money  that you now know exactly what's the total amount  
29:26
of wealth that a person can have. Because there's  always the surprising moment that somebody,  
29:32
like a billionaire, could step into the room  and say, here's my paycheck, I earn much more.
29:37
And this is, I would say, the perk of a  power law, that sometimes there could be,  
29:44
depending on the exponent, there is no mean,  there is no variance, and this means that the  
29:50
universe could keep on surprising us that it's  not something that we can fully grab by, okay,  
29:58
here's the mean and here's the variance, and now  anything else would be completely challenging  
30:04
everything. And the perks of these power laws  is there is always a chance of surprisal,  
30:10
that if we find a structure that is too  big to be true, in a power law statistics,   this can come up, this can happen. And it's  not unusual in the sense that it's completely  
30:19
challenging the world view immediately. This is  why I like this idea of power law statistics.
30:26
And Newtonian gravity is one example, because it  has a gravitational law. The force is one over  
30:33
R squared. So this means that the force only  depends on the distance between two objects.  
30:41
It doesn't depend on the time at which these  two objects come together. It doesn't depend   on any other property than just the masses,  which are in the numerator, and this R squared  
30:52
in the denominator. And this is the nice thing  of scale-free gravity, like this Newtonian law.
31:00
Now, I have the pleasure of  speaking with you before this call,   and so I have a quote from you I want to read out.
31:08
Yes, yes, sure. I hope I wrote it down correctly. It's roughly  correct. The entire community suffers from the  
31:13
problem that people like to model. Forward models  can be generated by every bachelor student in the  
31:19
first week. It's an entire machinery. But  if you want to solve the inverse problem,   then it's much harder. It requires much more  math. It's ugly. It may take months or years.
Inverse Problem Methodology
31:29
I hope I've roughly captured you correctly. Yes. I hope I didn't lens, I hope I didn't distort what  you said. So anyhow, please explain the difference  
31:37
between forward modeling and then inverse  modeling, because it's extremely important.
31:45
Yes, I think that forward modeling is something  that everybody intuitively does. It's also in  
31:52
everyday life. When you see something, you  immediately try to find a cause and a reason,  
31:57
and how everything happens, what happens from  the start to the point at which you observe  
32:02
something. And so forward modeling  is something that everybody does,   and it's something that we build up a  certain expectation, and the moment that  
32:12
we get a confirmation from our forward model,  that it was predicting something correctly,  
32:18
we are happy. So this is something that gives us  some endorphins, if you want to see it like this.
32:25
But on the other hand, the moment that we  forward model, which is quite easy to do,  
32:30
obviously, to just think from start  and then think, how do I get to the  
32:36
point that I observe myself in my scenario.  This is the point that when you say, okay,  
32:42
I get the prediction, but now if the prediction is  wrong, nature tells you, "Sorry, no, this is not  
32:49
the way that I work." Then you try a different  model. And then if you get another rejection,  
32:54
you get another rejection. And then another,  another, another. And this is where we stand   in cosmology right now. We ask, okay, we have  tensions in cosmology. We have a lot of things,  
33:04
a lot of stuff we don't understand. So is it this  direction? And nature tells us no. Then we ask,  
33:10
okay, can we wiggle around with this  other parameter? No. Or can we wiggle   around here? No. And if this is not solving the  tension, we don't get a direction where to go.
33:21
And I don't know why the community likes to do  this. I guess only it's because you think you're  
33:28
close to the solution and you want to guess it  right. Because it seems that from a philosophical  
33:34
point of view, having a forward model and then  predicting something and getting the approval of  
33:39
nature, yes, this is right, this is supported by  the experiment, this is something that everybody  
33:45
values as it's a good scientific theory, because  it made a prediction and it turned out to be true.
33:52
But on the other hand, if you do the inverse  problem, you see something, and then you say,  
33:58
based on what I see, how can I reason? How could  I have gotten there in all possible ways that is  
34:06
there? Or what is the necessary model that gets  me there? If a mug lies on the floor and is in a  
34:14
thousand pieces, it doesn't matter whether  it was the dog who put it over the table,  
34:19
or whether it was the kid, or whether it was  myself. It doesn't matter. It just matters. The  
34:25
necessary assumption is the mug is in a thousand  pieces on the floor. It must have fallen from the  
34:31
table. This is the necessary model that I have  there if I see the table and if I see the mug.
34:38
Okay. But this is all. This is all. And this is  the point that I say, if we have this necessary  
34:45
model, we know that this is something that is  required by the data. And if I now say, okay, I  
34:53
know the mug is broken, I know it must have fallen  from the table, or maybe it was pushed from the  
34:58
table. Then I look, could it have been the dog?  Could it have been my daughter? Could it have been  
35:03
my husband? Whoever. Then I start to look, who  could it be? Like looking for the culprit after I  
35:11
fixed the point, I can go to the next part of the  model in order to make my causal relation working.
35:18
And I think that this is a more positive way of  doing science, to start with the necessary thing,  
35:24
because if I see it must have fallen off  the table, I have a positive idea. Okay,  
35:30
the mug is broken, but I have a positive idea  of I have a model that must be true. The next  
35:38
step is now to find who pushed it, if it  was pushed at all. Maybe the window was   open and it fell by itself. But all of these  additional assumptions are for the first point  
35:48
not necessary. But for the next point of my causal  relation. But if I'm wrong that it wasn't my dog,  
35:54
then it doesn't, I don't fall back to  square zero. I just fall back to it  
36:00
must have fallen from the table, and then  I just look for the next possible reason. Okay so if I'm understanding this correctly,  you're explaining some of my psychology. So I  
36:09
very much like cop shows or true crime shows. And  I think that's because I'm so theoretical that I  
36:16
constantly do forward modeling. So I care about  what is the cause and then I try to produce what  
36:22
the effect would be. So I'm thinking, okay,  here's an equation, here's a cannonball. As a  
36:28
first student you think of balls that are thrown  into air and then you think what would happen   if you did this. But you're thinking about it  experimentally from a data analysis point of view.  
36:38
No, the universe doesn't work from our model and  then runs it forward. The universe gives us data,  
36:44
and we're trying to get the model that accurately  matches the data. So this is what cops do,  
36:49
this is what detectives do. They have the  effect, they have the then, and they're   trying to infer the if. Whereas theorists  start with the if, and then they do the then.
37:00
Yes, CSI cosmology, if you  want to see it like that. Right. Great, great. Okay, so explain  how that forward versus inverse,  
37:08
which every student does forward. The  inverse is the reason why it's messy,  
37:15
and it's not a one-to-one  map, it's a one-to-many map. Right. So, as you gave the example with the  shattered glass on the floor, you look at that,  
37:25
it could have come from multiple sources. There  are many coarse grainings that are consistent   with that shattering. So it could have been  your dog, could have been your daughter,  
37:34
could have been your husband, could have been  you, and when you're sleepwalking, blah, blah,   blah. So how does this now, this abstract  concept of forward versus inverse modeling,  
37:43
relate to dark matter? And some of  the problems that you think we have   with modeling dark matter, maybe we've  overestimated the amount of dark matter.
37:51
I mean, the biggest problem that I see  is we are not short of models. I mean,   since Zwicky had the idea that there could  be some missing mass in the Coma cluster,  
38:01
which is one of our neighboring clusters, and he  found out there seems to be missing mass. He was  
38:07
actually more convinced that it's just a missing  mass that we have from, I mean, that hasn't been  
38:13
discovered. It wasn't a big thing. But then when  people saw that there is something, some potential  
38:18
for something new, of course, the particle  physicists immediately jumped at this. They said,  
38:24
okay, if this is a new particle, if this is some  new substance, then we can go and look for it at  
38:31
CERN, we can go and look for it at Fermilab and  everywhere. So theoreticians in particle physics  
38:38
got excited about this. And then there are now, by  now, myriads of ideas which particles it could be.  
38:45
And of course, CERN, Fermilab, SLAC, they all went  and tried to find a particle. And then the string  
38:52
theoreticians, I mean, they got their hearts  up that it could be something like a minimally  
38:57
coupled thing from supersymmetry. They said, okay,  maybe this is finally our minimum stable particle  
39:03
in supersymmetry. They were happy about this.  But then, after all of the particle physicists  
39:08
brought their idea forward and went to measure,  there hasn't been any detection. So there are lots  
39:16
of models. People tried a lot of models. So far,  no clear evidence this is a dark matter particle.
39:25
And then people said, okay, maybe it's not a  particle. People like Mordehai Milgrom, or there  
39:32
are several other people who said, actually, maybe  we're just misguided that we're not missing mass,  
39:39
that we are actually having something  wrong in our gravity. Worst statement,  
39:44
Einstein was wrong. The best clickbait.  Einstein was wrong. It's not missing mass,   it's actually missing gravitational understanding.  And so this is why Mordehai Milgrom, he started  
39:56
with the modified Newtonian dynamics, because  you think that most of these cosmic structures  
MOND and Modified Gravity
40:03
in their own vicinity can still be described  more or less quasi, that you say I can say  
40:09
to a good approximation Newtonian physics  still works for them. And so Milgrom thought,   how about we modify Newtonian dynamics because  our best probe that we have of how gravity works  
40:21
is the Pioneer satellites. And then he said the  scale on which they have probed the universe,  
40:28
we can be sure that the gravitation works  as Newton said. But if we now go out,  
40:34
we don't know. It could be different. So let's  modify Newton's law based on a scale that is  
40:41
larger than what we have measured with our  satellites. It's a totally valid assumption.
40:47
And so he went on and he found there is  actually, there seems to be a law that   seems to work. And MOND has been there.  There was a conference, MOND at 40,  
40:57
meaning the 40th anniversary of MOND. And of  course it suffers from problems. It's Newtonian,  
41:03
it's not general relativistic. Then people  said, yeah, it suffers from certain problems.   You have one scale parameter in there. You  cannot argue where it comes from. You fix  
41:12
it by fitting galaxies, for instance, or you're  fitting some galaxies and then you get the scale   parameter based on the data you measure. There  are lots of issues, and people say, this is why  
41:23
we don't want to have this modified Newtonian  dynamics as an alternative to dark matter.
41:29
But on the other hand, MOND survived 40  years, and it was able to solve some of  
41:35
the problems to extend the theory. And  I would say if we compare the ideas,  
41:42
missing mass to use dark matter, whatever dark  matter model it may be, or modifying gravity,  
41:48
we're still missing mass, and it seems  both of them have their issues. And we   could say both of them are in some sense not  sufficient. There still is some question here.
41:58
But on the other hand, as long as we do not  know, it can't be a particle, but is it really  
42:04
some modification of gravity? Maybe not really.  We cannot know what is actually out there. And  
42:11
I think as long as we don't know for certainty,  both of these ideas, both of these explanations  
42:18
are still somehow compatible with the data within  their realms. I mean, both of them have problems,  
42:25
but on the other hand, I do not see that I could  now, I cannot definitely refute MOND on something   that I see, and I cannot definitely refute dark  matter on something that I see. So I'm happy.  
42:36
The data tell me both of them have problems,  but in some sense, both of them are compatible  
42:41
with most of the data that I have. So for me, I  don't see any problem. Why should I now go for  
42:47
dark matter or go for MOND or go for anything  else in favor and leave the other stuff aside?  
42:53
I cannot say this works better than that  one, purely based on the data that I see.
43:00
The Economist covers math, physics, philosophy,  and AI in a manner that shows how different  
43:05
countries perceive developments and how they  impact markets. They recently published a piece   on China's new neutrino detector. They cover  extending life via mitochondrial transplants,  
43:16
creating an entirely new field of medicine. But  it's also not just science. They analyze culture,  
43:21
they analyze finance, economics, business,  international affairs across every region. I'm particularly liking their new insider feature.  It was just launched this month. It gives you,  
43:31
it gives me, a front row access to The  Economist's internal editorial debates,   where senior editors argue through the  news with world leaders and policy makers  
43:41
in twice weekly long format shows. Basically  an extremely high quality podcast. Something  
43:47
else you should know about is that if you go to  their app, they not only have daily articles,   but they also have long form podcasts with  their editors and writers. It is also available  
43:57
online. Whether it's scientific innovation or  shifting global politics, The Economist provides  
44:02
comprehensive coverage beyond headlines. As  a TOE listener you get a special discount.  
44:08
Head over to economist.com/TOE to subscribe.  That's economist.com/TOE for your discount.
44:17
Okay, so to stick and get this point fully  across about forward versus inverse modeling,  
44:23
as it's super, super important. And one of  the reasons why I'm so excited to speak with   you is that you've developed these data  analysis techniques that not only will  
44:33
be useful for cosmology, but potentially,  we spoke about this before, but off-air,  
44:40
potentially for particle collider physics,  particle physics, and for interdisciplinary  
44:46
work. You have some... Biophysics. Yes.  Biophysics, biomedical, whatever. Yeah,   your background, you have a background in machine  learning and cancer of various sorts. And so it's  
44:55
super interesting, because it's a template that,  I don't know if you can also help solve crimes. But it's a template.
45:03
Yes, in principle, I would  say it's also valid for CSI. Okay, so I'm in Toronto, and there are condos all  about. And so let's just imagine, let me give some  
45:14
analogy and see if it's roughly on track. Suppose  I'm trying to model that building's foot traffic.  
45:21
And the way I can't, it's too difficult for  me to do so, it's intrusive, I don't want to,  
45:26
but I can at least measure doors opening and  closing. I'm going to use that as some proxy. Then   I have some model of what the residents do, their  work schedules, the concierge's work schedules,  
45:36
visitors, and so forth. Then imagine  that the doors open, I collect that data,  
45:42
more than my model predicts. I could postulate an  invisible occupant called dark tenants, which...
45:52
Mr. X. Mr. and Mrs. X. Yes, yes. You would get a lawsuit  if you refer to your tenants as dark tenants,   especially if they look like me. But  let's just say... So it could be that  
46:02
there's some unknown residents,  it also could just be delivery   drivers, it could be that there's  automatic doors opening and closing.
46:08
You could call them phantom people. Yes, great, great. So another one  is, I think I did this a while ago,  
46:16
I was trying to measure my own electricity  bill a decade ago, and then I said, okay,   my fridge takes up this much electricity,  and so on, so on. And then the bill was  
46:25
a bit higher than I thought. And so I  could have posited some dark electricity,   or it could just be that my model of the  fridge, that it's nonlinear in the compressor,  
46:33
or that there was some other source, or maybe  the electric bill is wrong. So is that what   you're saying? It's like, we need to be careful  about what entities we're positing to exist.
46:46
Yes, that's exactly the point. I mean, if you try  to model who goes in and out the next door condos,  
46:53
then first and foremost, the way you described  your model. Have a look. How many parameters did  
46:59
you put in there? I mean, you had to look, you  need to know the working schedule of the people,   you need to know how many people live there, you  need to know, do these people have family who  
47:08
visit quite often? I mean, all of this, this kind  of like, it makes your parameter space explode.  
47:14
You need to keep track of a lot of things. And  now imagine you just are wrong in one of these  
47:20
things by a factor of two or so. Then your model  would be completely off because you have to look  
47:26
at the same time, you have to look at all of the  families in this building, and then if you just   with one estimate you're a bit off, this adds up.  And this is, as you said, your nonlinear effect in  
47:37
the fridge electricity. And then you can see that  all of this forward modeling is really fragile.
47:44
And this is why I also think that having the  inverse model is easier. It's actually, okay,  
47:50
it's mathematically more challenging,  but it's easier in the sense of you   only have fewer amounts of parameters, and  reducing stuff to the necessary ingredient,  
48:01
it gives you a clearer understanding of what is  actually there. You do not need to know all of  
48:07
the family members of each condo. You do not need  to know what's the working schedule of them. You  
48:13
just need to know, is there a bug in the door  openers that when some bee flies by the door is  
48:20
open? Or is there something that the moment that  the automatic light goes on the door goes open?  
48:26
You just need to understand when does the door  open? Because this is what you're interested in.
48:31
So your inverse model would be,  instead of trying to assemble all  
48:36
information you can about all  the inhabitants in the condo,   you just need to understand how does this  door work? And this is a much, I would say,  
48:46
a much easier problem to solve if you have  figured out that this is what you actually want.
48:52
Now going on MOND versus dark matter, wouldn't  the dark matterist, the proponent of dark matter,  
48:58
say, well, look at the CMB. That has nothing to do  with lensing, nothing to do with galaxy models, or  
49:05
rotation curves. And there's plasma oscillations  from 400,000 years or so after the Big Bang,  
49:11
and that's independent physics. There's  one of those acoustic peak... Sorry, sorry,  
49:17
acoustic peak... Baryon acoustic oscillations.  Yes, yes, BAO, BAO, yes. BAO, yes. All this is,  
49:23
again, it's independent evidence. It's not just  we're looking at the galaxy and saying that it's  
49:29
spinning too fast, or not in the right places  or what have you. So what do you say to that?
49:35
Yes, I agree. I mean, the CMB is one of  the, I would say, the most complicated   things to analyze. And it's definitely  a complicated and complementary probe.  
49:45
So you have the very early universe where we think  it was more or less a rather homogeneous soup.  
49:52
And then we see these tiny wiggles on top of it,  these fluctuations on the CMB. So in that sense,  
49:58
we have an easy game to do with the CMB, to  describe this cosmic microwave background   with our cosmological standard model. So you  would say it's a really clear and clean probe  
50:09
that you have something that is more or  less homogeneous and isotropic. If you   now fit something homogeneous and isotropic plus  epsilon, you would get really good constraining  
50:19
power with the data. And we have an all-sky  survey with the highest resolution we could   get from the Planck satellite after years of  expertise from COBE, WMAP, and all of this.
50:30
So CMB is really something that we would  say, yes, that is really a high precision  
50:35
probe. But to see the CMB, we need to get  through all of the foregrounds. I mean,  
50:43
the CMB was the baby picture of the universe.  Until this light reaches us, it has to go  
50:49
through a lot of stuff. And this means, have  we corrected the foregrounds correctly? I mean,  
50:55
there is the band of the Milky Way.  And usually we see the CMB picture,   like the fluctuation picture. We usually see this  as an all-sky map, but this is actually not what  
51:05
we measure. What we measure is something that is  rather at the upper parts and the lower parts,  
51:11
and in the middle there is this band from the  Milky Way that is usually with a less high  
51:16
significance. The signal-to-noise ratio there is  lower. So what people do is they improve on this  
51:22
data by simulations and also by extrapolations and  by additional data. And all of this goes through  
51:30
the data. Then everybody says that's a very clean  probe. But I would say the thing itself, yes. But  
51:38
the data processing that you need to do in order  to actually get to this is much more intricate.
51:45
So in that sense you could say we are fitting  something clear, we get a high precision,   admittedly, but still, have we gotten all of  the foregrounds right? And concerning dark  
51:55
matter here, for instance, we could  say okay we have a parametric model,  
CMB Data Processing Biases
52:00
we fit this parametric model to our observables.  So we find that these peaks, that relative height  
52:08
between the second and the third peak, which is  supposed to give us the amount of dark matter that  
52:13
we know based on our models again. So this means  we fit a model to data and then we find if we fit  
52:22
this model we are missing so much mass. So now  the question is, and this is definitely a very,  
52:28
very hard task, can we explain the cosmic  microwave background without dark matter,  
52:34
or what would then be the replacement for dark  matter? This is something that maybe we missed  
52:42
an understanding there. This is possible,  but on the other hand, I say the CMB is the  
52:47
hardest thing to explain in terms of getting  rid of dark matter. This is definitely true.
52:54
But on the other hand, I would  say if we start from us on Earth,  
52:59
we haven't seen dark matter. And if we  then go further out in the local universe,   it doesn't seem that we need a lot of dark  matter there either. So how come that suddenly,  
53:09
the farther away we go from our own  position, where we have lots of data,  
53:15
how is it possible that suddenly, when we go  far away, that we need a lot of dark matter,  
53:23
or that we miss mass? Is it rather, I would say  it could also be, well, possible, that we are  
53:30
actually missing something in our models. That we  are not missing mass, but just that nature is more  
53:38
complicated than we think, and the models that  we have are not complex enough to capture that.
53:44
I mean, you mentioned the bullet cluster.  The bullet cluster is one of the famous   examples where people said, this  is the evidence for dark matter.
53:54
The smoking gun. The smoking gun, in the literal sense, this is  why it's called the bullet cluster. Because you  
53:59
see that you have two big clumps of matter  that have been merging, have been colliding,  
54:07
and then they fly away. So they flew through  each other, and now they fly away at a certain  
54:12
distance. And then you see that you have in the  x-ray signal, you have the baryonic hot plasma  
54:21
that also interacted in the collision. And then  because there is a lot of physics going on there,  
54:27
like the plasma interactions and all of them, this  merger is then delayed for this x-ray signal. And  
54:35
then you see two bullets, one of them is really  clearly like a bullet, flying out again after  
54:41
this collision. And then people say, if we now  take a look at the position of this x-ray cloud,  
54:48
or the two x-ray clouds, and the position of  the galaxies involved in this merger, we see  
54:55
that there is an offset between the optical image  and the image that we have. And of course also the  
55:02
dark matter part that has been reconstructed  from lensing again around these optically  
55:08
detected galaxies. This is one part, and this is  offset to the x-ray signal that is the bullets,  
55:17
the bullets in the gas cloud. And this offset then  was taken as an evidence that here dark matter  
55:25
does not follow the luminous matter, the baryons,  because we have this offset. So the total mass is  
55:31
not where the mass of the visible things are,  mostly. This was propagated from 2004 onwards.
55:41
And a recent study just last year in 2025, there  was a big NASA press release from Sangjun Cha et  
55:49
al. Pardon my bad Korean. And these persons,  they had a look at the intracluster light,  
55:58
meaning all of the stars that are not bound into  the individual galaxies of the cluster. So because  
56:05
if you have a violent merger then of course not  only hot gas is emitted but there are also like  
56:14
galaxies that lose their stars. And these stars  they go into a collective cloud of stars which is  
56:21
called the intracluster light in the intracluster  medium. And with James Webb it became possible  
56:27
to track this intracluster medium because the  infrared wavelength at the center of the cloud   which James Webb observes, makes it now possible  to look at this. And so they took a map of this  
56:39
gas cloud of the stellar cloud, and they found  that this merger is much more complicated than  
56:46
just two clumps colliding and moving apart again.  They said it could have been that the biggest  
56:52
clump actually underwent an earlier merger, and  then they saw that there was an elongated arm  
56:59
going in the direction of the merger. And so it  wasn't just two spherical clumps colliding. There  
57:06
was no offset in that sense between the luminous  mass and the dark matter mass, because all of the  
57:13
stars in this intracluster light were actually  nicely following this merging structure. And so  
57:20
they said this cannot be a clear hint that dark  matter is offset to luminous matter. And again,  
57:27
refuting MOND. And so they said, if we now take  a closer look with new data that's actually  
57:33
possible now for the first time, we see we can  reconcile everything we know with the new data  
57:41
here. So there is nothing spectacular that the  dark matter would be completely detached here.
57:50
Interesting. I didn't know about that paper.  So I'll place that paper on screen and the   link will be in the description. And for those  who are driving and just listening to this,  
57:58
maybe running or what have you, but you  didn't see it and you were thinking, oh,   I wish I could see it, you can. That will just  rewind. We'll place the visuals of that on screen.
58:09
Okay, so what's the reception to that paper  been like then? I'm sure as with anything,  
58:14
philosophy, math, physics, everywhere, there's  usually counters to, not usually in math,   sorry, in physics or philosophy. But there's  
58:22
usually counters to when someone puts up  a position. So what's the counter there? I haven't heard much about objections or so.  I would rather think that it's, I would say  
58:31
it's a clear evidence that this cluster is much  more complicated. And this comes actually in a  
58:38
row of several other findings that have now become  possible with better technologies and better data.  
58:45
That people say, okay, first, back in the 90s, and  I mean the first gravitational lens was found in  
58:52
1979. And so we do not have that much experience  in lensing when we go to 1990, so everything was  
58:59
pretty coarse-grained and preliminary. But  now, today, after all of these years, we have  
59:06
a lot of data and we have a lot of experience with  different galaxy clusters. So if we now go back to  
59:12
the findings of the earlier times, and we re-look  at all of these galaxies or galaxy clusters,  
59:20
we find much more detail. And this detail  is then the thing that resolves the puzzle.
59:26
Like, for instance, here in the bullet cluster,  we have this intracluster stars, which now  
59:34
we solve the discrepancy between dark matter  and luminous matter. And the same happened   for a galaxy cluster that my team and I, we  were investigating. It was Abell 3827. This is  
59:46
another very beautiful galaxy cluster. And in the  center, you have four luminous galaxies. They're  
59:52
almost equally bright. And from this very unusual  configuration, it's pretty obvious that this is a  
Bullet Cluster Re-evaluation
59:59
dynamically very active cluster. Normally people  like to look at galaxy clusters that are relaxed,  
1:00:06
as we say, meaning we have one brightest  cluster galaxy and the rest is then just nicely,  
1:00:12
hopefully isotropically distributed. So the  ideal case would be a spherical galaxy cluster  
1:00:18
with one very bright galaxy in the center.  But this one here is exactly the opposite.  
1:00:24
Four luminous galaxies in the center and  then we have strong gravitational lensing  
1:00:32
around these four galaxies. And this lensing  almost forms a complete ring. This was why it  
1:00:38
was such a really beautiful, huge gravitational  lensing event around these four galaxies.
1:00:44
So people had a look at this, and then it  was pretty obvious at the start when you  
1:00:50
do forward modeling, you need to impose a lot  of dark matter. And when you reconstruct your  
1:00:56
total mass distribution with such a model,  you find again that the dark matter seems  
1:01:03
to be at different places than these  four luminous galaxies. And there,  
1:01:08
it was exactly the same process. People first  thought this is an evidence that dark matter and  
1:01:15
luminous matter can be decoupled from each other.  So what physicists call light does not trace mass,  
1:01:22
meaning you can have the luminous stuff  at a different position. And then people   first thought this was yet another bullet  cluster. But with more and more observations,  
1:01:33
you could see how this discrepancy was shrinking,  even in modeling. And then my colleagues and I, we  
1:01:41
analyzed this cluster with our model-independent  approach. And there we could definitely prove that  
1:01:48
this offset between the luminous part and the dark  matter part was completely driven by the models.
1:01:54
And this is the perk of our approach that  we can say we have a look at the local lens  
1:02:00
properties, and we can track how fast these  properties change over our multiple images.  
1:02:08
So we had huge, huge multiple images in this  case. It's a very beautiful example. And in each  
1:02:16
multiple image we found star-forming regions. And  so we could use these star-forming regions to chop  
1:02:22
up the multiple image, each multiple image, into  several parts. And then we mapped only these parts  
1:02:29
onto each other in all of these multiple images to  get the local lens properties. And so we saw that  
1:02:37
over the area of the entire multiple images, the  properties were changing. And this for us meant,  
1:02:48
okay, our approach relies on the fact that over a  certain area that we look at, that the properties  
1:02:55
do not change. So we assume that we have  constant properties in the area where we look at.
1:03:01
And if we now have patches across a multiple  image and we see each patch has a different  
1:03:07
property for this local lens property, sorry,  that each patch gives us a different value  
1:03:14
for a certain local lens property,  then we know, okay, for instance,   the mass density needs to change, or the  distortion strength needs to change over  
1:03:23
the multiple image. And this means the  lens is quite turbulent. It's changing.
1:03:31
So if we now assume we have a huge dark matter  halo that is smooth and hardly changing,  
1:03:37
then we can see that this is not fitting  the actual reality that is given by the  
1:03:44
data. And so we could say, if the mass density  already changes over a single multiple image,  
1:03:52
how can we extrapolate these lensing  properties into a region that is  
1:04:00
much more than just a single image? We have  more data, and it's much farther away from these   multiple images than just an epsilon, than just  the individual patches that we aligned together.
1:04:09
Can you explain to me, in an elementary fashion,  how is it that your approach can be called a  
1:04:15
model-independent approach? How can you do  science if you're not using models? What does  
1:04:22
that look like? The only truly model-independent  thing that I can think of is just you say,  
1:04:28
here's the data. And you just list the data with  conjunctions. You just say this and this and this.
1:04:34
Right, right. You always have to specify which  model it is independent of. And in this sense,  
1:04:39
I would say it's independent of a lens  model. So our formalism is independent of  
1:04:46
an assumption how the global mass distribution  of such an object, such a gravitational lens,  
1:04:52
looks like. So we just want to have  a look at the pure lensing formalism,  
1:04:58
which still makes assumptions. I mean, which  still describes how this light is curved around  
1:05:04
an object. But what we do is, in this  lensing formalism, we track the light  
1:05:09
bundles that are emitted from the source.  And then these light bundles are more or   less shot through the gravitational lens,  and then the observables that we get, this  
1:05:19
is what the lensing formalism tells us, it's these  observables depending on the individual positions.
1:05:26
And people who want to use a lens model, they  now use the formalism. And in this formalism,  
1:05:31
we have, for instance, that we need to specify  a gravitational potential. And then they say,   my gravitational potential is of this and  that form. So at position X, it has this form,  
1:05:41
at position Y it has this form and that value. And  so this is how this lens model is inserted into  
1:05:47
the formalism. And I just work on the basis of  the formalism. So for me, I have a gravitational  
1:05:54
potential at a position X. And what I do then  is to say, how does it change to a position Y?  
1:06:01
Or what are the changes that can be directly  tracked in the observables? While other people  
1:06:07
say, I want to make it more complicated, I use a  model. And then this model gives me what is the  
1:06:13
potential at position X, and what is the potential  at position Y? And then, of course, if you have a  
1:06:19
model, you know how it changes from X to Y,  but then this is a prediction of your model.
1:06:26
Why don't you sum this up into a core  thesis that holds this all together? So what's occurring to me is something like data  constrains local information. Everything else,  
1:06:36
every dark matter map that people  have seen, it's model-driven   extrapolation. It doesn't mean it's speculation  or just unconstrained surmising and conjecturing.
1:06:48
It is exactly that. It is exactly that. You got  it 100% right. You got it 100% right. That's  
1:06:55
exactly how you describe it. So the summary is  that the local properties that we extract from  
1:07:02
these gravitational lensing data sets, that  they are the maximum information we can gain  
1:07:08
about this gravitational lensing object, about,  for instance, a galaxy cluster or a galaxy. And  
1:07:15
what we know is that these local information  only encode the local shearing strength. So how  
1:07:24
much does a lens distort objects? And the relative  power, how much can a lens enlarge the image at a  
1:07:32
certain position with respect to another position?  This is the information we can get from the data.
1:07:38
And now the point is, the farther away we  go from the data, of course, the more any  
1:07:46
model assumption will take over. Like a real-time  model assumption will take over. In mathematics,   when you say I have a certain regularization  function that I say if I go far away from the  
1:07:57
data I want to have a flat, for instance if  you say what the gravitational potential in  
1:08:04
the vicinity of these images, if you say if I go  just far away from these multiple images I don't  
1:08:10
want to have any potential, let's assume I just  set it to zero or I set it to some constant. Then  
1:08:17
this is a regularization that you make. And  of course the farther away you go from these   images the more all of these assumptions will  take over to describe your global lens or your  
1:08:30
global mass density profile. Where you have data  you have information. Where you do not have data  
1:08:37
you have extrapolation, speculation, prediction,  whatever you want to call it. But in principle,  
1:08:44
this is the point. Local evidence and I would  say global extrapolation. Because the moment  
1:08:52
you use a model, you want to have this based  on fundamental principles. So you thought about  
1:08:57
what makes sense to combine all of these data  points into some overall model. So in that sense,  
1:09:03
I would say you make an extrapolation.  Physically informed extrapolation, if you want.
1:09:09
Is it like this? Yes, sure. Is  that the same as curve fitting?  
1:09:14
So you have discrete data points and then you  have a curve that you can place through it? Yes, yes, that's exactly it.
1:09:21
So would the analogy be, the data is the local  part, and then the curve fitting, the model that  
1:09:27
you suppose produces that data, of course in  the discrete amounts, but that is the global?
1:09:33
Yes, yes. I mean, you're a mathematician. You  can understand if I have a sample of data points,  
1:09:39
and I want to know what is the curve going through  all of these data points? Then you can assume,  
1:09:46
if I have sampled at a certain frequency, then  I can reconstruct my signal, my smooth signal,  
1:09:53
or my curve, if you want. But if you do not have  enough data points, then you have ambiguities.  
1:10:00
So what could be the actual signal? It's  the Nyquist-Shannon theorem. That you say,   if I have sampled at twice the frequency,  and I have a signal of finite bandwidth,  
1:10:10
then I can exactly reconstruct my signal.  If I lack data points, if I don't have the  
1:10:17
equidistant sampling, or if I do not have  finite bandwidth, I immediately get ambiguities,  
1:10:24
but I can resolve them if I have an idea, if  I have prior assumptions how my signal looked  
1:10:30
like. So then, using additional assumptions, I may  still uniquely fix my signal. I still can uniquely  
1:10:40
reconstruct it. If I do not want to use these  assumptions, that's the inverse problem method,  
1:10:45
I don't want to use any assumption, then I have  to live with the ambiguities. As good as it gets,  
1:10:51
I have different curves that fit the same  data equally well. If I have more idea  
1:10:57
what my curve actually was, then I can use  the assumptions to uniquely fix the curve.
1:11:04
So the universe doesn't give  you these equidistant samples? Yes, unfortunately not.
1:11:09
And you don't know the bandwidth? You don't know   what spatial frequencies  the mass distribution has?
1:11:15
No. I mean, can we observe the entire universe?  We can't. I mean, usually you need to see the  
1:11:22
entire signal to know that it has a finite  bandwidth. And the only thing we can do,  
1:11:27
and this is why I'm an observational cosmologist,  I say I have limited bandwidth physically by my  
1:11:35
particle horizon. Everything that I have ever  observed, or that we can theoretically ever  
1:11:41
observe, because the speed of light is finite.  So we have a light cone that we can observe,  
1:11:47
and all of this in our past that we can have  observed. That's our finite bandwidth in that  
1:11:53
sense. But we do not know what's beyond that. So  in that sense, we could do it, but we don't know  
1:11:59
the rest. There's always the philosophical  boundary of what comes behind the horizon.
1:12:05
Now your breakthrough, if I recall correctly,   came from reading someone else's  thesis in a completely different field.  
1:12:13
I believe it was quantum chemistry or  electrodynamics or something like that. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah, okay.
1:12:19
And it had to do with the Laplace operator and  Green's functions. Tell me about that please.
1:12:24
Yes. I mean, in principle I did my master's at  CERN in particle physics. Then I moved on to  
1:12:31
cancer research and machine learning because  astrophysicists didn't want to take on machine   learning at that time. And afterwards I moved to  astrophysics. But in principle all I've ever done  
Functional Analysis Breakthrough
1:12:42
was analyzing data under mathematical principles.  And then a friend of mine, he graduated in quantum  
1:12:48
chemistry, and so he asked me to have a look at  his thesis, which was more or less the mathematics  
1:12:55
of how to form molecules. And all of them, all  of the prescriptions, how we can understand which  
1:13:03
molecules can form based on all of the principles  that we know. And if I then had a look at it,  
1:13:10
I realized, gravity and electrodynamics have a  lot of things in common. Most importantly, the  
1:13:18
mathematics. And I saw the equations and suddenly,  I mean, he also described everything as local  
1:13:24
positions of electrons, and then you had the, how  do you call this, the ions in the molecules where  
1:13:31
you have the positive ions, and then you have the  electron cloud around this. And when I saw all  
1:13:39
of this, I thought, this is my gravitational  lensing problem. I saw the Laplace operator,  
1:13:45
I saw all of the functions and how to solve it,  and suddenly it was pretty obvious how to solve  
1:13:53
my problem to describe all of the degeneracies  in this lensing formalism. So how can I wiggle  
1:14:00
around the potential to keep all my observables  invariant? And then I saw in this thesis that  
1:14:06
the mathematics is exactly the same. So  I went back to my math book that I still  
1:14:12
have on the bookshelf here. And I found exactly  the theorems in functional analysis to describe  
1:14:19
my lensing degeneracies. So all I had to  do was copy the theorems from mathematics  
1:14:25
and translate them into the language  of this gravitational lensing problem.
1:14:32
So why didn't others see what you saw? I think it  was 30 years between when you made an application  
1:14:39
to an adjacent field. It's not even that far,  it's adjacent. I mean, it's not directly, but  
1:14:45
it was 30 years or so. So what did you see that  others missed? And what allowed you to see it?
1:14:51
I think, I mean, most astrophysicists that I have  met, they are more phenomenologists. They look at  
1:15:01
something and they have an intuition. If I have  twice the mass, I have like that many lens power.  
1:15:07
Or if I have twice the mass, these things should  run double fast or something like this. And for  
1:15:12
me, I cannot say much until I have written down  the equations. So for me, it's the mathematical  
1:15:18
framework that, in the end, gives me the reasons  to interpret physical things. So I think that this  
1:15:26
is why I found this degeneracy, because I saw the  mathematical formalism and I saw I can one-to-one  
1:15:34
translate this here. And only afterwards I found  out that this actually makes sense in physics.
1:15:40
So I first solved the equations and I knew this is  the solution. This must be right. But then I said,  
1:15:48
okay, I have the equations, but now they need to  get some physical meaning. Because most people,  
1:15:54
they either live in the world of mathematics  and then they have like variables, parameters,  
1:15:59
but then these parameters are usually  called in a certain name. And then they say,   but this is lambda. Like, for instance, the  cosmological constant, it has this lambda name.  
1:16:08
And then people say, yeah, but this is lambda.  This is a mathematical term. I want to know   what the physical realism behind all of this is.  What's the physical interpretation in this model?
1:16:18
And after I had the equations I then went on  to understand what do all of my parameters and  
1:16:25
variables mean in my equation. Carlo Rovelli said  you should not write down a single thing that you  
1:16:31
cannot attribute a clear physical meaning.  And this is something that I really took to   my heart. And I found out that the mathematical  formalism completely shows you the degeneracies  
1:16:43
because it's obvious. If I have a parameter  that is called the reduced shear, I mean,  
1:16:48
it's a small g. This is what's in the equation.  And then I thought, what does it mean? And it  
1:16:55
means that I can only constrain the local shearing  power. So what is the local shearing power? But  
1:17:03
this shearing power is independent of the mass  that it takes to shear this. It's just, okay,  
1:17:09
this is the amplitude of the shear and this is  the direction. But how much mass physically it  
1:17:14
takes to create that shear is irrelevant. And so I  saw that this is something that makes total sense  
1:17:22
physically because I do not know the total mass.  That was obvious. So I cannot constrain anything  
1:17:29
that is related to the mass. But I can constrain  properties that are more or less something with  
1:17:38
respect to a certain mass. You always see ratios  in these equations. And you can ask why. Well,  
1:17:44
it's always something divided by the mass. So  this is the getting rid of the degeneracies  
1:17:50
that we cannot constrain. So this was the, I would  say, the nice and beautiful part when I realized  
1:17:56
mathematics works out, and then I can learn  something about the physics from these equations.
1:18:04
Can you tell me who else inspires you,  or has inspired you? So for instance,  
1:18:09
you mentioned Carlo Rovelli, with the gist of  it being that don't write down anything that   doesn't have a clear physical motivation,  something like that. Who else? What else?
1:18:19
Well, my mathematics professor in my  first few semesters, he was really great,  
1:18:24
Professor Yeager, Professor Willi Yeager. And he  had several honorary doctorates. And in lesson  
1:18:31
number three, you immediately knew why. He was a  mathematician doing calculus, functional analysis,  
1:18:38
and in this direction, so more the, I would say  the numerical part of and the practical part of  
1:18:45
applied mathematics. And he taught me calculus,  functional analysis, and also a little bit of  
1:18:52
finite element theory. And whenever he did  something, like proof, theorem, whatever he did,  
1:18:58
he first explained what is it good for. And we  had a lecture with a lot of people from biology,  
1:19:05
chemistry, physics, everybody was sitting there,  also mathematicians. But he always made sure that  
1:19:11
we knew the practical applications and what is  it good for. What is the problem in the proof  
1:19:16
where we have to really take care that reality  and the proof still matches? And this was really  
1:19:23
inspiring for me. And this is, I think, what  went through all of my data analysis that I  
1:19:29
always remembered that you need to make sense  out of this and your mathematics should not,  
1:19:35
I mean, it should not be somewhere in  an abstract space. You need to be sure  
1:19:40
that all the requirements of your proof are  actually fulfilled in your physical problem.
1:19:47
This is from the mathematical side. And  another very inspiring person is George   Ellis from Cape Town. He is the one who  brought forward, based on, he did his PhD  
1:19:57
in Cambridge with Dennis Sciama. And I think  Dennis Sciama was one of the first persons  
1:20:02
in modern cosmology who tried to ask this inverse  problem question. And George Ellis and all of the  
1:20:09
collaborators from the inhomogeneous cosmology  community that I very much like and appreciate,  
1:20:14
they have brought forward that this inverse  problem approach should be pursued further.  
1:20:19
And I find this very inspiring, and this is  half of the camp of the cosmologists who say,   let's have a look what's in the  data and not model too much.
1:20:29
You said something that stuck with me. You said  that you can place infinitely many black holes,  
1:20:37
you can stack them in a null  set. What are you talking about? Yes. Yes, this is something that completely  struck me. When I tried to derive the lensing  
1:20:47
degeneracies mathematically, this all  lives in the very abstract notion of a  
1:20:53
Sobolev space in mathematics. And when I was  studying Sobolev spaces and all of these,  
1:20:59
what does a function require  to be integrated or what does a   function require to be differentiated? As a  student I thought, who the hell needs this?  
1:21:10
Why on earth should I care? And as a physicist  in third, fourth term, you do not encounter  
1:21:17
these issues because you're not as deep in  the research that you would actually care.
1:21:23
But then, when I had this formalism to solve, and  I suddenly realized it makes a difference if my  
1:21:30
function is smooth. It's just differentiable  twice. Is it even continuous? I mean, what do  
1:21:37
I know about this lensing potential?  I have no clue. So I wanted to have  
1:21:42
a function for my lensing potential that is the  most agnostic in terms of what do I have to put  
1:21:49
in the lensing potential. And suddenly I realized,  oh, it makes suddenly sense to say my function,  
1:21:54
my potential, should just be integrable  or maybe I want it to be smooth. Let's  
1:22:00
assume it's smooth. What can I say then? Or then  let's just be completely agnostic. What happens  
1:22:06
if this function is not even continuous  or so? And then I discovered suddenly,  
1:22:13
if I say the function should just  have the minimum requirements so   that it's integrable in my formalism, I  suddenly end up in these Sobolev spaces.
1:22:23
And in this Sobolev space, if a function  is integrable, you can still say that if  
1:22:28
you change the contents under the integral,  meaning your function, by a so-called null  
1:22:35
set, then you wouldn't change the integral. And  since all you care for in this formalism is the  
1:22:41
final result of the integral, you are allowed  to change your potential by this null set.  
1:22:47
And what is a null set? A null set could be in  physics. Now you go from mathematics to physics,  
1:22:53
what does it mean in physics? It could  be a countable set of black holes,   a countable set of point masses. And if you now  think in a physical sense, a potential that is  
1:23:04
really very nice and smooth, that's something  completely different than a potential that  
1:23:11
can have a lot of point masses everywhere and  is actually humpy bumpy full of black holes.
1:23:18
And this is something that quite struck me back  then when I thought, suddenly this makes sense  
1:23:23
because this was this one sentence in one of  the books on strong gravitational lensing. "Oh,  
1:23:29
and we can also put some black holes in this  potential. It doesn't matter." And I thought,  
1:23:34
where's this coming from? I don't know. And  for me, this sounded disruptive. I couldn't   imagine this. But the moment that I worked  through the mathematics, it was obvious why I  
1:23:45
could do this. But this came from a much more, I  would say, fundamental sound mathematical theory  
1:23:52
that I suddenly understood where it's coming  from. But physically, I would say, does this  
1:23:59
make sense? Could it really be that I have an  infinite amount, as long as it's countable,   an infinite amount of black holes in my  potential? So I would say mathematically,  
1:24:09
it's clear you can have it, you have this freedom.  But physically, you could ask, is this reasonable?
1:24:17
The formalism gives it to you, so your choice. So let's zoom out. You and Subir  Sarkar, who I spoke to on this channel,  
1:24:28
I'll place the link on screen, you both go  against the standard model of cosmology,  
1:24:34
but in different respects. So, where do  you agree with him and where do you differ?
Challenging the Cosmological Principle
1:24:40
Well, I mean, I've also talked to Subir quite  a lot, and he's a great discussion partner,  
1:24:45
and he's very knowledgeable. And this is why I  think that the stuff that he has put forward makes  
1:24:51
a lot of sense. And I would definitely trust the  results. So whatever he found is there. We cannot  
1:24:58
discuss it away. And he comes from particle  physics. So he says anything below this five  
1:25:03
sigma that he also mentioned in your interview is  nothing because it could go away as just a side  
1:25:10
effect or just some fluke. But everything  above this five sigma, whatever it means,   however you redefine your statistics, as he also  said, is something that has to be taken seriously.
1:25:21
And in several works he has shown that  he has an issue to reconcile the early  
1:25:27
universe with the late universe in terms of  a fundamental reference frame. That he says,  
1:25:34
if I'm now on Earth and I look into the cosmic  microwave background, of course we do not see   the nice pictures we've already spoke about. We do  not see this nice homogeneous isotropic picture.  
1:25:45
But we have to boost ourselves into this reference  frame, meaning we are moving with respect to this  
1:25:52
reference frame. And now, if Subir comes and says,  if this reference frame is fundamental, I should  
1:25:58
also see it in a later part of the universe. So  if I take a look at far away quasars, they live  
1:26:04
in a bit later universe, then I could say I should  do exactly the same boost and I should still see  
1:26:12
a homogeneous and isotropic distribution  of these quasars in this reference frame.
1:26:18
And so far I'm with him, but now the question is,  how do you now make sure that you are actually  
1:26:26
boosting yourself in the right reference  frame? I mean, how do you make sure that   you found all the quasars at the right  redshift? That it's really exactly that,  
1:26:36
in this shell of our cosmic time? Because  normally, like 10 years ago or 15 years ago,  
1:26:44
it was quite expensive to make these estimates  of how far these galaxies are away, like at which  
1:26:51
redshift are they. And he also had a study to  show that there was some contamination of low  
1:26:58
redshift quasars in his high redshift samples, so  he had to get rid of them. And on the other hand,  
1:27:04
it's also a question, how do you make sure that  you have actually sampled homogeneously or that  
1:27:11
you really got all the quasars in order to say,  I boost myself into this reference frame and  
1:27:18
I'm sure that I have enough quasars at the right  places. I mean, he also argues that he needed more  
1:27:26
than a million quasars in order to get his probe  to be significant. But the question is still,  
1:27:33
have we found all of them? Have we really found  all of the quasars and not something else?  
1:27:38
Because there could also be contamination from  other similarly looking sources, for instance.
1:27:44
And here I would be a bit more cautious to say  he found an effect that is definitely something  
1:27:49
there. But the question is the statistics that  we now apply to say this was really a five sigma  
1:27:57
detection, or is it really something that is just  as he analyzed it? Because there are also people  
1:28:06
who say it could be that these quasars change  over time. And if these quasars change over time,  
1:28:13
that could also create this effect. I mean, for  me I would say it is something that is definitely  
1:28:20
to be taken seriously and to be investigated.  But I also see the other camp saying, yeah,  
1:28:25
but what about this? What about the change  in the quasars? What about this? What about  
1:28:32
that? You will always have the, I would  say, the underdetermination that you can   say I see this as a hint for an inhomogeneous  cosmology or for some breakdown of Lambda CDM.
1:28:45
I would say the breakdown of Lambda CDM is not as  bad as breaking down the cosmological principle.  
1:28:52
This is even the better point and the stronger  probe, I would say. That most people just try to  
1:28:58
say something is rotten in Lambda CDM. Meaning we  have our standard cosmological model and this has  
1:29:05
a certain set of parameters for one specific class  of models, which is homogeneous and isotropic. And  
1:29:14
now Subir even says, it's not that something  is rotten in Lambda CDM. It's that something  
1:29:19
is rotten in the entire class of these models.  So it's not just that we have a problem that,  
1:29:26
for instance, a certain parameter has  this value and somebody else says no,   it has a lower value or a higher value. It's the  entire class of these models, this very simple  
1:29:36
assumption that the universe is homogeneous  and isotropic, that this is actually at stake.
1:29:44
So, if his effect is actually true, we  may not only have to abandon Lambda CDM,  
1:29:50
we will also have to abandon the entire class  of these spherical cow models. So this is,  
1:29:56
I would say, the more groundbreaking thing.  But on the other hand, the inhomogeneous   cosmology community, like George Ellis always  says, the universe is more complex than that,  
1:30:07
actually is waiting for this because, I mean, I  would say Einstein, 1917, already knew that this  
1:30:14
assumption that he made in his first cosmology  paper, to say, let's assume that the universe  
1:30:20
is homogeneous and isotropic, or statistically  even homogeneous and isotropic, that's what he   wrote. He wrote clearly, "I assume this. But I do  not think that this is true. Because even with my  
1:30:34
limited knowledge of stars and a little bit of a  galaxy, I see that there are stars and there is  
1:30:40
nothing. So I know that I make a simplified  assumption, and I hope that with more data  
1:30:46
we will overcome this simplified assumption  and we will get to the next level of detail."
1:30:52
So this is the interesting part. So an  opponent can always say to Subir, hey,  
1:31:01
your quasars are more variable than you think.  You haven't completed your sky coverage. There  
1:31:08
may be other prior assumptions. Yes. So do  you think that his model has more wiggle room,  
1:31:13
then Lambda CDM? And is that the core  here? That if a theory is flexible and   it's difficult to kill, then that's not  such a great theory. I think Lakatos,  
1:31:23
I don't know if you know who the philosopher of  science Lakatos was, but he said a degenerating  
1:31:28
research program is one that can absorb away  these issues because you don't want your science,  
1:31:34
your theories to bend so much and accommodate  everything or potentially accommodate.
1:31:39
Yes, yes. I mean, Subir is not making any, well,  he's just saying if I interpret everything in  
1:31:46
Lambda CDM within this framework, I run into  an inconsistency. So in principle he is,  
1:31:52
or not only Lambda CDM, he's even saying I use  the cosmological principle that the universe is  
1:31:59
the same around every point in the universe,  homogeneous and isotropic. And then he says,  
1:32:05
okay, if this is true, then I can do the  boost in the same way in the early and in  
1:32:11
the late universe. I end up at the same  homogeneous and isotropic distribution.  
1:32:16
And now he says I don't find this. So  in that sense he doesn't have a more  
1:32:22
complex model or so. He just shows that our  current model has an inconsistency. So he's  
1:32:29
just proving our model wrong if all of his  assumptions are true. That's his statement.
1:32:39
Didn't you give a talk about Lambda  CDM where you played both sides? Like,  
1:32:45
forward and then played devil's  advocate? That's a rare quality   to be able to do it, and then also to  do it publicly. So tell me about that.
1:32:53
Yes, yes. I mean, the point is, I mean, I'm also,  I mean, I started at CERN as a particle physicist,  
1:32:59
so I also think anything below 5 sigma is  maybe worth looking at, but it's not worth  
1:33:05
something that we say, okay, now we take  this seriously. So my colleagues and I,   we wrote a paper, we decided to write a paper  to collect all of the issues that we have,  
1:33:17
not only for the Lambda CDM tensions, but also for  the entire tensions of the cosmological principle,  
1:33:25
like one of the probes is Subir's matter  dipole. So to say, let's have a look,  
1:33:31
what do the data tell us about the cosmological  principle? Like about this homogeneous and  
1:33:38
isotropic universe that Einstein assumed in  1917? I mean, we wrote this paper in 2023,  
1:33:44
so more than 100 years later. And Einstein  back then said, "We have to overcome this.  
1:33:49
There must be the next level of detail." And we  wanted to ask, have we reached that level yet?
1:33:55
And so we teamed up with 22 or 23 scientists  and we collected in a review paper all of the  
1:34:02
hints that seemed to violate the cosmological  principle. And Subir's probe was one of them.  
1:34:08
And this was one of the few that actually reached  the five sigma for the statistics. Another one,  
1:34:18
which is also at the same time in  the other way that I think is the   bulk flow of Kostas Migkas. So Kostas Migkas,  he analyzed galaxy clusters and he wanted to  
1:34:29
know in how far these galaxy clusters on  the sky, how they are moving as an entire  
1:34:37
entity. Do they have some so-called bulk flow?  Do they move together in a certain direction? Or  
1:34:43
does every cluster move in a certain direction  and statistically the motion is averaging out?
1:34:49
This started as a PhD thesis and he thought, okay,  I now prove that nothing happens here and then I  
1:34:55
can move on to my actual project. No. He didn't  set out to find this, but he found a certain bulk  
1:35:02
flow on the sky that he said there is something  that is moving in a certain direction. It doesn't  
1:35:08
average out. And he turned out, after hundreds of  pages of papers that he wrote and his PhD thesis  
1:35:16
and a lot of different data sets that he analyzed,  this effect was also at a five sigma significance.  
1:35:24
And so in our paper we found, we had Kostas as  a co-author, of course. So we found that there  
1:35:30
are actually many effects that hint at a violation  of this cosmological principle. So Subir's is one  
1:35:38
of the most prominent with five sigma. Kostas  Migkas' bulk flows is also one at five sigma.  
1:35:44
And then we had several other effects as well that  were not at five sigma, but maybe at 3 or 4 sigma.
1:35:52
For instance, Alexia Lopez and Roger Clowes,  they found what was called back then the giant  
1:35:57
arc on the sky. A really very big structure on the  sky that seemed to be like clustering, but in a  
1:36:06
larger scale. And by now, they even found a  giant ring. So the whole structure is growing  
1:36:12
and growing. It's getting larger and larger.  And this means now, if we have a finite time  
1:36:18
from the Big Bang till now, how can we assemble  such a huge structure? The counter argument is,  
1:36:25
this is a chance alignment. This can happen.  And you just have one of these structures.   Or maybe like, let's say we have three of  these structures. On a statistical basis,  
1:36:34
this doesn't challenge our universe.  That's one of the arguments. But on the other hand, if you take this in  context, that we have the cosmic matter dipole,  
1:36:44
that we have these galaxy clusters that  are flowing in a certain direction,   that we have two large structures that seem to  be challenging our standard model, that we have  
1:36:55
additional bulk flows of other things, not only  galaxy clusters, that seem to challenge our model.  
1:37:01
And we have a lot of these probes. The CMB, I  mean, you think it's a clear probe. We talked  
1:37:06
to CMB scientists and we found out there are  also axes of evil in the CMB. And there are also  
1:37:14
anisotropies or even like asymmetries in the CMB.  And all of these things together, I mean, this was  
1:37:22
for me one of the key moments to say, either our  universe is more complex than a spherical cow. Or  
1:37:30
all of these probes are missing something. And  it's not even the same thing. Because they all  
1:37:35
seem to miss something different. Like, do we get  all of these calibrations wrong? In each probe,  
1:37:42
do we have different calibrations? And all of them  do not seem to be right? This was something for me   that I found most convincing to say we are at  the stage that Einstein said, now we see the  
1:37:54
next level of detail. Now we should look at what  is the next level of detail for our cosmology.
1:37:59
And I would see it positively. I mean, I  wouldn't say it's cosmology in crisis. It's,  
1:38:06
we have, after a hundred years of research, we  have reached a stage where we can say we are  
1:38:12
now ready to move on. After a hundred years  of this first standard model that we have,  
1:38:17
we are now ready to see the next level of  detail. I mean, homogeneous and isotropic,  
1:38:23
that's the second most boring thing you can  do. And as long as your data is bad enough,  
1:38:31
you will not see the next level of  detail. But if you increase your data,   if you increase your quality, you will see more  details than homogeneous and isotropic things. You  
1:38:41
will start to see dipoles. You will start to see  directions that are preferred. It seems that we  
1:38:47
are at this point. I would say it's rather a very  positive thing to think of than a negative thing.
1:38:55
Now, those rings that you mentioned.  Roger Penrose claims that those CMB   rings are echoes from a previous universe.  One that was not a part of the Big Bang. A  
1:39:05
prior Big Bang. And then prior Big Bang ad  infinitum, his conformal cyclic cosmology.  
1:39:12
You work with that kind of data. You just  referenced it. Is he onto something? You  
1:39:17
sound like a typical forward modeling  speculator. Do we have something here?
1:39:22
And that's, I think, that's the fun with forward  modeling that you can kind of like speculate and   gamble. Is he onto something? And here, this is a  brilliant example again of forward modeling. What  
1:39:33
do you want to believe? I mean, Roger's idea  goes far beyond anything that goes currently  
1:39:38
to our observational points. The first picture  that we have is the cosmic microwave background.  
1:39:44
And he now claims we have space and time  before the Big Bang. This is revolutionary.  
1:39:50
And then you could say, but how  do you test this with our data? Here, which I find is really great, is that he  makes predictions that can actually be tested  
1:39:59
in our own data that we have at the moment. And  he says that in this cosmic microwave background  
1:40:06
there should be these remnants of the black hole  mergers, the so-called circles of low variance.  
1:40:11
And he and another person, they also teamed up  in order to measure these, to find these rings.  
1:40:19
And in the WMAP data after seven years of data  taking, they claimed that they found four of these  
1:40:28
concentric rings. But now again the question is,  the other camp says, and there is another paper  
1:40:35
says, yeah, he claims that he has significant  evidence. They do not state how many sigma,  
1:40:41
if I'm not mistaken. But the other camp says,  yeah, but what about the foregrounds to the CMB?  
1:40:47
You need to take this into account as well. And  then the significance changes. And on the other  
1:40:52
hand, they claim, if you now try to say it's a  significant detection, with respect to what? And  
1:40:59
then Roger Penrose and his colleague, they used  a certain kind of statistics that they said,   this is significant. But the other team  says, we used a different ground truth,  
1:41:10
a different simulation in order to see, is this  actually significant? And if you add everything  
1:41:15
up, they say, at the moment in this data that we  have, we don't find significant evidence for this.
1:41:23
So it doesn't mean that Roger is wrong.  It doesn't mean that Roger's theory is   supported. It means the jury is still  out on this, and we need more data,  
1:41:31
better data from the cosmic microwave background  in order to now see, is this theory supported or  
1:41:37
not? But the problem here is, this theory just  stands now at the moment as is. There is neither  
1:41:43
evidence against it nor evidence supporting it.  So it's another theory that we can gamble on.
1:41:50
Does this mean that you found an  alternate way to test Roger's theory? No, I mean, I didn't work on this at all. I'm  more of a late universe person. But in principle,  
1:42:00
the question is always, if you try  to find the statistical significance,  
1:42:06
you need to compare to simulated universes  that you think are in accordance or consistent,  
1:42:12
as Neil Turok would say, with the data that  we have and all the knowledge and our theory   that we currently have. And here, this is the  difference between these two camps. That they say,  
1:42:24
we do not have different data. We just have  a different way of interpreting the data.
1:42:30
Speaking of Neil Turok, he's also been on this  channel and you referenced him before as well.  
1:42:35
He pushes back, much like yourself, against  exotic dark matter. He thinks that it may just  
1:42:41
be neutrinos. You're both minimalists in this  sense. Do you find your work converging with  
Minimalist Neutrino Solutions
1:42:46
his? Or do you see yourself as coming  from completely different directions? Oh yeah. Neil is a great guy. We even met at a  conference and we talked to each other. I very  
1:42:57
much support his view that if we do not  see more particles coming from detectors,  
1:43:02
we should stick to the contents that we have. And  then we should make a self-consistent picture of  
1:43:08
the universe with the stuff we have without going  to look for mysterious things. And in that sense,  
1:43:14
I think the idea he's proposing with the  right-handed neutrinos is pretty cool. Because  
1:43:19
we have already seen neutrinos, just left-handed.  But it looks reasonable to make a small extension  
1:43:26
in our sector to say we allow for the right-handed  ones as well. So in that sense, we're definitely   converging. And I also agree that we should try to  find a theory that does not use any exotic stuff.
1:43:40
But where I see myself a little bit diverging  from him is his idea how to solve the cosmological  
1:43:48
constant problem. So at the moment, he says,  we have explanations for two of his five  
1:43:54
parameters. But for three, he still needs to have  phenomenological fitting functions. And for dark  
1:44:00
matter, this is still one fitting function, but he  puts forward half of an explanation that he says,   we still need to make more sense out of this,  but the right-handed neutrinos might do the job.  
1:44:09
That's good. But for the cosmological constant,  he says he might have an explanation of why this  
1:44:16
constant is so low. And on the other hand, why  it comes from the vacuum energy of quantum field  
1:44:22
theory. And here Subir Sarkar brought forward  this explanation has a lot of problems. And  
1:44:28
if Neil finds a solution, that's great. But in  my opinion, lambda is coming from a classical  
1:44:35
theory. It came into the world based on some  classical invariants. So I think we should find  
1:44:41
an explanation of lambda which is first based  on classical mechanics or classical theories.  
1:44:48
And only then say, okay, there might also be an  attempt to unify, and we can identify gravity   and quantum afterwards to say there is also  an explanation for lambda in quantum theory.
1:44:59
Ah, okay. So you think that the vacuum  catastrophe is somehow misplaced or  
1:45:05
misconceived or ill-conceived because you're  trying to come up with an explanation for this   lambda which stems from general  relativity, a classical theory.
1:45:14
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. And you're trying  to find its roots in a quantum theory. Yes. Yes. Now, of course, the  counter would just be, well,  
1:45:20
anything that's classical emerges from the  quantum. So that's a natural predilection.
1:45:25
Yes, yes. I mean, that's a thing that would be  nice to have, to say we can argue from quantum  
1:45:31
fields to the classical regime. But on the other  hand, it seems that there is a problem there. I'm  
1:45:38
not sure how it can be resolved. I mean, it's  not my field of expertise. But Subir says that  
1:45:43
it seems pretty hard to solve it from the quantum  point of view. So I would say maybe to go a step  
1:45:49
backward and to say it came in classically. Let's  try to solve it classically, that might be the  
1:45:55
more reasonable first approach, in my opinion. I  mean, people like Thomas Buchert or Subir Sarkar,   we all try to make sense out of this also from the  classical point of view. To see, is the data maybe  
1:46:06
splittable or partitionable in a different way  so that lambda is a phenomenological parameter  
1:46:13
that is actually standing for some inhomogeneous  spacetime curvature or something else that can  
1:46:19
come from some classical explanation. And not  immediately, at least some quantum explanation.
1:46:24
Hi, everyone. Hope you're enjoying  today's episode. If you're hungry for   deeper dives into physics, AI, consciousness,  philosophy, along with my personal reflections,  
1:46:33
you'll find it all on my Substack. Subscribers get  first access to new episodes, new posts as well,  
1:46:39
behind-the-scenes insights, and the chance  to be a part of a thriving community of   like-minded pilgrimers. By joining, you'll  directly be supporting my work and helping  
1:46:49
keep these conversations at the cutting  edge. So click the link on screen. Hit  
1:46:54
subscribe and let's keep pushing the boundaries  of knowledge together. Thank you and enjoy the   show. Just so you know, if you're listening, it's  C-U-R-T-J-A-I-M-U-N-G-A-L.org. CURTJAIMUNGAL.org.
1:47:07
Yes, see, many people, when challenging something  as widely held as Lambda CDM, which is not just  
1:47:14
held because scientists are obstinate or  recalcitrant and they're fools and they're   just unwilling to move on. That's foolish. That's  not why that's held. There's great reasons for it.  
1:47:24
There's great evidence for it and so forth. But  when someone comes along like a Subir or a you  
1:47:31
and puts cracks in it, sometimes it's thought that  that is a dismal view of science. But actually,  
1:47:39
you're saying, no, no, no. It's a hopeful  view. We're on the precipice of something. Yes, yes. I mean, I always see, I don't know  why this is the case. I mean, Subir always  
1:47:49
says particle physicists try to weird down their  models. They try to find something new. They want  
1:47:56
to be proven wrong. And in astrophysics,  it seems to be the other way around. I   wouldn't say that. But I think that people  get used to things. I mean, humans are like,  
1:48:07
they want to have like traditions. They want to  have stuff that is predictable. And if we now say,  
1:48:13
wait a moment, our universe is surprising.  It may give us something that is unexpected  
1:48:18
all the time. And we cannot control  this. Maybe it's a reason to panic. On the other hand, after 40 years of  getting used to dark matter, I mean,  
1:48:28
there are people alive who fought for dark matter  to be in the picture. And who were the first ones  
1:48:34
to do these simulations to show dark matter  actually makes sense? They fought for it to be  
1:48:39
there. And then do they want to see it die again  after like 40 years of research and all of this?
1:48:45
And it's always the question, did we do all  of this in vain? What's super interesting is  
1:48:51
you're more radical for being conservative.  So for instance, you're more radical for   being conservative in a way to do it. For  instance, when we were speaking before,  
1:48:57
you were talking to me about a colleague of yours  who invented or proposed some crazy form of dark  
1:49:02
matter. And that the more that the data was  collected, the less there was speculation and   then the less of that sort of dark matter was  permitted. And you're actually sobering them.  
1:49:12
But this sobering process, if people have been  used to being intoxicated, can feel like, well,  
1:49:20
I want to stay where I was before. But you're the  more conservative one, at least in this respect.
1:49:25
Yes, yes. I mean, I have, because I have a  problem of trying to chase something. I mean,  
1:49:32
I'm willing for crazy ideas. I mean, I  also investigated naked singularities   and how we could detect them. I mean, I  also tried to write a paper on that. It's  
1:49:40
not that I don't like crazy ideas.  I have a video about that, actually. Oh, really?
1:49:47
Yeah, it's a crazy thing. So a whole podcast  with JB Manchak about naked singularities and  
1:49:53
then pathological spacetime. Because many people  will say the word that a closed timelike curve  
1:49:58
spacetime or one that doesn't have a, one that's  not globally hyperbolic is pathological. Well,  
1:50:05
we have rotating black holes and so forth.  And they're not globally hyperbolic. But   it's also somewhat of a sociological word to say  pathological. Einstein thought black holes were  
1:50:15
pathological in and of themselves and potentially  the Big Bang. I think people even doubted their   existence until we got this first picture of  a black hole from the Event Horizon Telescope,  
1:50:26
that people said, okay, finally, we have a  proof that there is something experimental  
1:50:32
that we can attribute to these spacetime  singularities, whatever you want to call this.
1:50:40
And I mean, when I saw, it was just a conference  during the pandemic. And then there was a guy who  
1:50:45
said, okay, I think I can explain dark energy  with primordial black holes. And then he went  
1:50:52
on and he thought, to repel each other with  a certain charge, then I could explain the  
1:50:58
spacetime expansion. He tried to understand dark  energy in terms of repelling black holes. So,  
Naked Singularity Detection
1:51:10
and repelling black holes, then he tried to  calculate the charges, and it turned out they were  
1:51:15
naked singularities. And so I thought, because  everybody was skeptical, and so I thought, hey,  
1:51:22
it's winter break, I have nothing to do. How about  I just prove this wrong in like 14 days? So I sat  
1:51:29
on my desk and I took his work. I took the charges  and the masses that he predicted. And I went on to  
1:51:37
conservatively think, if I had such black holes  in my universe, what would be the consequences  
1:51:44
for this? Like, for what modeling? I do this.  And I found out I cannot kill this theory.
1:51:51
Because you think of naked singularities, I'm  thinking, yeah, naked singularities are disruptive  
1:51:56
things in spacetime. It turns out, if you have  a naked singularity and you send a light ray  
1:52:05
through a plasma cloud, and you think, okay, what  happens to this plasma, sorry, if you have a naked  
1:52:12
singularity and this is a charged singularity  and you have a plasma cloud in this vicinity,  
1:52:18
what happens to the charges in the plasma cloud?  I thought this would just be disruptive. You would   even have like proton decay. Or I mean, I was  thinking about the worst things. It turns out,  
1:52:28
even naked singularities, you need to take  this plasma cloud very close to it in order  
1:52:33
to actually dissolve it. And for normal settings,  or for when you say this is likely to be observed,  
1:52:41
you wouldn't find this thing. Because it's a  singularity. It's really a point-like thing.   You need a very perfect alignment between us, a  plasma cloud, and something to observe an effect.
1:52:52
And the other thing is, I mean, I'm  a gravitational lensing person. So,   normally you have a point mass. And a point  mass is a very easy model to describe the  
1:53:01
lensing signals. And then you would say, I have  a mass and the Einstein ring is proportional to  
1:53:08
the square root of the mass. So if I have a  star that sends light over this point mass,  
1:53:14
I would see an Einstein ring around this  point mass. And it's square root of mass.   So if I have an exorbitantly large mass, I  should have a huge Einstein ring. And then  
1:53:23
I looked at the equations and I found out, no,  actually, because it's a naked singularity and  
1:53:29
it also carries a charge, this huge Einstein  ring doesn't occur because the equations tell  
1:53:34
me that the Einstein rings are actually  much smaller and I couldn't observe them. And it was quite astonishing how disruptive  you think something could be, and it's so  
1:53:44
hard to disprove that theory. And in the end,  I talked to an observer from the Westerbork  
1:53:52
radio telescope, and he said, "Yeah, I've  seen many of these really exorbitantly crazy  
1:53:58
ideas and models that couldn't be proven  wrong. You cannot prove something wrong.   That's really difficult." And he also  said, "Yeah, I definitely believe you  
1:54:06
that you tried your best, but it's really  hard to challenge something like this." And with dark matter, it's even more intricate,  as you said. I mean, you have a theory. Dark  
1:54:16
matter is just a word. So what do you call dark  matter now? Is it just the missing mass in terms  
1:54:24
of clouds that you can't observe? Or do you want  to have a new particle? And then, depending on  
1:54:30
what kind of dark matter, you can always wiggle  yourself around. If there is a new observation,  
1:54:36
you could say, "Ah, sorry, dark matter wasn't  collisionless. I see an offset. So it has to be  
1:54:42
collisional." So then we need to constrain the  offsets. So you can always amend your theory.
1:54:50
You know, I was going to say that I've seen a  pattern that the more restrained the theory,  
1:54:57
unexpectedly, you get more critiqued. Because  you would think that it would be more,   the more speculative you are, the  more crazy you are, as you mentioned,  
1:55:04
the crazy dark matter, that that would be  less accepted. But someone like yourself,  
1:55:09
someone like Subir, someone like Jacob Barandes  and Tim Maudlin on the quantum mechanics side,  
1:55:14
who are more restrained, actually, or they have  realist interpretations of quantum mechanics,  
1:55:21
they get critiqued. But then I also realized,  everyone gets critiqued. There was this comedian   who was saying that people think everyone hates  America. If when you're in America you feel  
1:55:31
like every other country hates you. And then he  said, yeah, but every country hates every other   country. And you always hate your neighbor  more than you hate America. Just everyone,  
1:55:40
everyone critiques everyone. And everyone  always feels like they're the ones that's   on the defense and they're the underdogs.  So I think it's just par for the course.
1:55:50
But I think that's exactly the point. I mean,  I grew up, I thought, okay, math and physics,   that's something that has something absolute.  There is some truth in it. Some absolute truth.  
1:55:59
You can say one plus one is two. There is math  that you cannot be wrong in that. No, one plus  
1:56:05
one is not two. It depends on the system you are  in. One plus one can be something else. I mean,  
1:56:11
if it's in the binary system, you would add up  differently. So it depends on your reference   frame. And in physics, you have more room to  wiggle. It's not math even. It's even less,  
1:56:21
I would say, with rigor. But on the other hand, I  usually feel like a lawyer. I have a certain case,  
1:56:29
then I need to take some sides. What do I think  is the most reasonable thing? Then I defend this.  
1:56:35
I try to find arguments in favor of this way to  see the world. I mean, this is how I see physics.  
1:56:44
It's not absolute anymore for me. It's more, I'm  a lawyer in that sense, to say I have now chosen a  
1:56:51
certain camp, the camp of wanting the least amount  of magic in my universe, and the most amount  
1:56:57
of things that I can actually experience and I  can see, like empiricism. Yes. And then to say,  
1:57:04
how can I keep this worldview, or how can I live  in this worldview, given the input from outside?
1:57:13
Let's get into applications. Yes. So, particle  physics has a similar issue where there's a huge  
1:57:20
amount of data, huge amounts of model dependence,  and triggering and reconstructing events and  
1:57:27
background and subtracting away the background.  So can your methods transfer to collider physics?
1:57:36
In principle, yes. I mean, there's lots of  data. So in principle, you would actually  
1:57:41
have the luxury to say, for the inverse  problem, we just try to find what are all   the possibilities that we have tracked here. So  in that sense, that's even better. Because this  
1:57:52
is what I think that cosmology lacks. Cosmology  is merely observational science. So we cannot  
1:57:57
make experiments. So we cannot interact with the  things that we think are there. We set up models  
1:58:03
and then we can only watch. But we cannot say,  we believe that this mechanism is happening,  
1:58:09
and now I go into the lab and I show, if I apply  all of the requirements, I can create something.
1:58:15
And I think maybe this is the reason, now  that I think of it, this is why forward   modeling is so popular. Because usually we have  a chance of being the agent of producing it,  
1:58:27
given these prerequisites. So on  Earth, being a particle physicist,   it makes sense to forward model, to say,  if I do this and that, if I collide this  
1:58:37
particle with that particle, I will see this  collision, then there will be this particle   and that particle going out. I will have some  hadron jets. And in the end, I will see here,  
1:58:46
there's my Higgs. And this is why forward modeling  makes sense, because I can prove myself wrong  
1:58:52
or right by exactly performing my experiment.  And then I know this formalism leads to this.
1:59:00
But in cosmology, we have a different setting.  We cannot just go into the lab and say,  
1:59:07
here I have my forward model,  and let me rerun the universe. Let me, yes, exactly. So, now I  want to have modified Newtonian  
1:59:15
dynamics for sure. So let me rerun the universe. And the simulations, they try to replace this.  But obviously, simulations are different in the  
1:59:26
sense that we face, it's on a computer. We  have numerical instabilities. It's not the  
1:59:31
real thing. It's just a surrogate of a real  thing. So in that sense, you can always say  
1:59:36
simulations are as good as it gets, but it's still  not 100% like an experiment. And so in that sense,  
1:59:43
I would say maybe particle physics does not  need that much of inverse problem solving,  
1:59:49
because they have lots of data and they have  this agency that they can just create particles   as they want, or do the collisions and not  find a particle, which has also happened.
2:00:01
In that sense, maybe particle physics is not  the best target. But I would say I'm coming  
2:00:07
from cancer research and biophysics, and there  I saw exactly the same problem. For instance,  
2:00:14
for cancer, there are more than 100 types  of cancer, and you think, again, like in  
2:00:22
a forward modeling approach, you have certain  processes that you say, if I have for instance  
2:00:28
a certain DNA that is replicated, or so, if I  then translate this in the wrong way, proteins,  
2:00:35
then cancer can grow. And this is the signaling  pathway approach. You start from different models,  
2:00:42
cancer can evolve through different pathways, on  the different enzymes, on the different stages of  
2:00:51
all of your cells, on the different stages which  your cells are in, and then it can happen that  
2:00:59
you have a certain signaling pathway where you  say, okay, this type of cancer is growing in  
2:01:05
this way. But suddenly you have a patient where  you say, nothing of this fits, and the medication   we apply doesn't work. Why? Oh, there is a second  signaling pathway in which this cancer can also  
2:01:16
grow. And then you suddenly start to realize that  you have different options to end up in what you  
2:01:22
think is the same state. And of course, then you  could also apply the inverse modeling to ask,  
2:01:29
what is the necessary ingredient in order  to get to this stage, or hopefully in order  
2:01:35
to prevent this cancer? In that sense, I would  say there is a lot of potential there as well.
2:01:41
So what happens next? Where  is this research leading? I mean, for me, I would say I've realized that  after almost 10 years in lensing, I've realized  
2:01:53
lensing isn't good for anything unless you couple  it to other data. And this is why in the last two  
2:01:58
years I've started to look into kinematics,  because if I have a structure that is a lens,  
2:02:06
then I would like to know, can I constrain the  structure from the inside a bit better? Because  
2:02:11
now I know how to shoot light rays around it.  But inside, for instance, in a galaxy cluster,   I have galaxies and these galaxies move, and I can  measure part of the movement. So now I'm trying  
2:02:22
to get a more holistic approach to say I have  local information from lenses, and funny enough,  
2:02:29
math is your friend. I found a way that actually  I can transfer my local lensing approach to the  
2:02:36
kinematics, to the description of the kinematics.  And so I hope in the future I can also get local  
2:02:42
kinematics information about such a structure.  And then to patchwork all of this, as we said,  
2:02:49
I want the positive way of science, meaning I  know from the lensing the local stuff. I hopefully  
2:02:55
then know from the kinematics, and I have a  lot of stuff. So I will more or less reveal,  
2:03:00
shed more light into the structure by all of  these individual information pieces that I will  
2:03:06
puzzle together. But I know that I can only fall  back to the local information as my ground truth,  
2:03:12
as the stuff that I have already validated by my  approaches. So that's the next step for this one.
2:03:21
But on the other hand, it also needs  funding. And I think that our community,  
2:03:28
I would really like to see some light at the  end of the tunnel, that some more funding flows  
2:03:33
in our direction. Because I get rejections  with words like, nobody has done progress in  
2:03:39
30 years on this project, or in this research  direction. Why should you? And then I think,  
2:03:47
yeah, give me a chance to do it. Or at least  give me a chance to move a little bit forward.  
2:03:53
Maybe I'm not reaching the final goal, but  it's a direction that needs more attention.
2:03:59
Because if I take a look, people say, for  instance, I don't like artificial intelligence,   or I'm against artificial intelligence.  I'm not. But I see that in cosmology we  
2:04:09
have a hard time to actually succeed with  artificial intelligence. Demis Hassabis,  
2:04:15
he won the Nobel Prize for AlphaFold, for this  protein folding. And when he gave his Nobel   lecture, he had three criteria, what makes  a successful AI application. Number one is  
AI Limits in Cosmology
2:04:27
your feature space, and it should be really  large. Like a human cannot understand it,   you really need a huge computing form to resolve  all of the parameters you have in your problem.  
2:04:38
And the parameter space is huge. You cannot  do everything. And the second is your goal  
2:04:45
function. What is my function I want to optimize  for? With AlphaFold it was pretty obvious. You  
2:04:52
have the free energy should be minimized. And  then you know how the protein is folding. And   the third part is you need lots of data in  order to train your artificial intelligence.
2:05:02
And if you now look at cosmology, what do  we have? None of the three. Do we know our  
2:05:08
feature space? No. Because we don't have like  23 amino acids that we can combine to proteins  
2:05:17
if we just assemble them long enough. We do  not know what dark matter is. So what are we   looking for? What's our feature space? Is  it a particle? Is it a fluid? What is it?
2:05:26
Wait, what is a feature space?  What does a feature space mean? A feature space is the space of the ingredients  that you have. Like, for instance, I would say,  
2:05:35
if I have a galaxy cluster, I would say,  okay, what do I need? I need galaxies. I  
2:05:42
need the positions of the galaxies. I need the  velocity of the galaxies in order to describe   such a gravitationally bound structure. But  I also need the dark matter in this galaxy  
2:05:51
and the positions and the velocities. So, if  I want to understand how a galaxy cluster is  
2:05:56
taken together by artificial intelligence,  I would need the position and the velocity   of dark matter. If I do not know what it is, I  cannot reserve part of this feature space for it.
2:06:09
Then the second part is the goal function. What  is the goal? I mean, do we really understand  
2:06:15
gravity to a degree that we say we can write  down this optimization function? I mean,  
2:06:22
Demis Hassabis used the free energy for  the proteins. What is energy in general  
2:06:28
relativity? Masses have to be defined,  and the definition may not be unique. So,  
2:06:34
there we struggle from the other side to say,  from the GR point of view, from Einstein's  
2:06:40
general relativity, how can we write down such  a goal function to describe, for instance,  
2:06:47
a galaxy cluster? Like I said, also statistical  mechanics to describe it is not going to cut it.
2:06:54
And then third, data. We can use  simulations. We have lots of simulations,  
2:07:00
and in simulations we have, I would say, enough  data to train. But this is very costly to store  
2:07:07
on the one hand, very costly to produce from  the starting point. And the big question is,  
2:07:12
is it actually realistic? Are we training  on something that makes sense? For instance,   for strong gravitational lensing, there was  an AI approach. And this AI approach trained  
2:07:22
on simulations because we do not have enough data  from strong lensing from the observational point  
2:07:27
of view to train such a machine. So they used  simulated data, and they found out that when  
2:07:33
they tried to recover the simulations, great  rates, 100%, I mean, not 100%, but 95% recovery  
2:07:42
rate of the data and correct descriptions. But  then they went to the observations. And then the  
2:07:48
rates went pretty much down. Because there was  something missing in the simulations that was  
2:07:53
in the data. And so the training process was not  realistic enough, and you can't see it enough so  
2:07:58
that the machine could actually find all  of the lensing events that were there,   or that we actually know they were there.  So, there is something missing here.
2:08:07
And last but not least, if you take the  observations, like, for instance, DESI has now  
2:08:12
found 11 million galaxies in our local universe,  like 11 million galaxies. That's not half of the  
2:08:22
population of Ghana. So, just to put in a context,  and you have to take a certain redshift in a huge  
2:08:31
cosmological volume. And now compare this to what  we know on Earth. I mean, the population of Ghana,  
2:08:37
if I'm not mistaken, is 37 million people.  So, in a very small country in Africa. So,  
2:08:43
if we now compare this to the 11 million galaxies  in this cosmic volume, you know how the sampling  
2:08:50
is. I mean, we have a lot of data. We have a high  degree of detail. But I don't think that it's  
2:08:58
enough to train artificial intelligence. Leave  aside the, we don't know what's actually in your  
2:09:04
observations due to dark matter, dark energy,  and the unknown ingredients of the universe.
2:09:10
And this is why I think we first need to  understand ourselves. What are we talking   about? What is dark matter? What is dark  energy? And when we have these questions,  
2:09:19
I think we can use artificial intelligence.  But so far for the exploration process,  
2:09:26
we may get some hints where to go or not. But we  cannot expect, for instance, an AI to understand  
2:09:32
the global mass distribution in a strong lensing  event when I've already shown that only local  
2:09:38
information is the one we get from the data. So,  in that sense, the AI would just speculate better,  
2:09:44
or give us a more sophisticated model, but  we still don't know why this model, okay,  
2:09:51
it fits the data, but as do all other models, as  I've shown. So, what is the gain using artificial  
2:09:58
intelligence, for instance, in this problem,  if all we get back is a more complex model,  
2:10:06
and even maybe a less transparent model that  we cannot understand. I mean, if we get a more  
2:10:12
complex model and not just a power law, how do we  now argue that this is reasonable physically? The  
2:10:19
machine may give us something that fits the  data, but it's just one option of many. This  
2:10:24
is what we know. But then, how do we argue that  this is the true model? This is the truth that's  
2:10:30
actually out there. When we already know from the  data, the inverse problem, we cannot know this.
2:10:36
Now, I know you said you will be talking about  this issue and your colleague may push back and   you say, just give me a chance. Maybe I can't  take the ball all the way to the end of the  
2:10:46
football field, but I could take it a few feet  further. So, allow me to ask, what changes if  
2:10:55
you get to the end of the football field? Paint  that picture for me. What changes in cosmology?  
2:11:01
What changes in cancer research? What does the  future look like if your method of prioritizing   inverse problems over forward problems, and your  solutions via these inverse problems, takes off?
Scientific Method Evolution
2:11:13
Well, I mean, inverse problem solving is, I would  say, a typical thing that you use when you solve  
2:11:19
criminal cases. So now let's assume that we  use it also more in biomedical, in astro,  
2:11:26
in cosmology, wherever we have, like, complicated  problems with maybe non-unique answers. So,  
2:11:32
if we do this, I would say we have to  rethink our scientific method completely.  
2:11:38
If we replace this forward modeling with  this inverse problem-solving approach,   it would mean that we change the way we  think about science. And in my opinion,  
2:11:48
this would be a better world because we would  have a more positive way of knowledge gaining.
2:11:54
And I would like to show you how I mean  this. I mean, imagine you now have this   inverse problem-solving method and you build  a tree of necessary models from the trunk to  
2:12:04
the branches to the leaves. And every higher  level is based on the assumptions the lower  
2:12:11
levels. So in that sense you now think, I want to  solve a problem, I have already built the trunk,  
2:12:18
now from one branch I want to go to a smaller  twig. So to extend my model a little bit further.  
2:12:24
If I guess a little bit wrong, I can only fall  back to the level beneath this one. But I will  
2:12:32
not fall down the entire tree to the ground.  This is what forward modeling sometimes does,  
2:12:37
you end up at square zero, you do  not know how to climb up again. And  
2:12:42
this way here we avoid this problem. And  so I hope this would be more positive,  
2:12:48
encourage more people to care about science, if  they have already built their trunk of knowledge,  
2:12:54
a certain part, they only need to extend their  knowledge a little bit. So that's more positive.
2:13:00
And on the other hand, this is even more  important, if we now take a look at how science  
2:13:05
is done, it's usually investing a lot of money  into a high-risk, high-gain science research.  
2:13:13
If we now say we already have a solid trunk and we  just need to extend it a little bit, it takes out  
2:13:18
the high risk of all of this. And another point  that comes with it, if you now climb up the tree,  
2:13:26
the further you climb, the less choices you  should get. It's like in a criminal case,  
2:13:32
the more evidence is presented, the more people  you should be able to kick off your suspect list.  
2:13:38
So, in the end, you narrow down the choices.  And then this means you need fewer and fewer  
2:13:45
resources the higher you climb up. So, this idea  is highly efficient. It's resource saving. And  
2:13:53
in that sense, I think you could even fund more  projects than before, at a lower risk, of course.
2:13:59
And so, well, I think if you build up all of this,   it sounds more positive for me than gambling  on certain forward models. And in the end,  
2:14:08
you may not even be able to find counter  evidence or evidence in favor of something.
2:14:14
This is super interesting because theoretical  physics is, in large part, model generation. So,  
2:14:22
on the arXiv, almost every day is a new model.  Here's how the universe works. Here's how,   even on this channel, theories of everything.  New model. Well, here's how quantum theory works.  
2:14:31
Here's how it doesn't work. Here's how blah, blah,  blah, blah, blah. Here's how GR works. Here's how   you combine them. Here's what spacetime is. Here's  what spacetime isn't. And then the question is,  
2:14:39
well, look, in absence of data, it's always  caveated like that. In absence of new data,  
2:14:44
we don't have anything that's beyond the  standard model. In absence of new data,   what else are we to do as theoretical physicists?  All we know how to do is just generate models,  
2:14:53
and we don't exactly have data to go by.  So, in your analogy, it sounds like what   you're saying is that would be the equivalent of  just adding more suspects to your criminal list.
2:15:05
Yes. Yes. Yes. And that's the opposite of what   should be done. You should  be narrowing suspects down.
2:15:11
Yes. Yes. But, okay, I'm sure you've  spoken to theoreticians about this,   and this goes against the whole ethos. And  again, like I mentioned, it's caveated with,  
2:15:20
in absence of evidence. So, what do you  say to this, throwing models to the wall   and seeing what sticks? It seems  like that's all that can be done.
2:15:28
Yeah, but on the other hand, I mean,  there are people like Neil Turok who say,   we have a lot of data, so let's use it in a  different way. Let's try to be minimalistic.  
2:15:39
And in that sense, to clean up. I mean,  Bjørn Hein also said, for particle physics,  
2:15:44
that when they found all the new particles,  and they always inserted yet another field,   yet another particle and so on, so their model  just grew. And he said that the discovery was  
2:15:54
so quick. They just added and added and  it somehow worked out. But he said we were   always hoping that a few years in the future  somebody would come and clean up that mess. So,  
2:16:05
they were obviously putting together a model  with a really hot needle because they had so  
2:16:11
many discoveries. But they thought, in the  end, hopefully somebody will look from top   down in order to make sense out of this from a  higher viewpoint and then to clean up the mess.
2:16:21
And I think it's the same with all of these models  that we have in cosmology or astrophysics. We're   not short of models. But to pair them with  each other, find what do they have in common,  
2:16:32
where do they differ, why do they differ, all  these things are the important things to do. It's  
2:16:38
not coming up with another model. It's trying to  embed the model that we now have, we want to put  
2:16:44
forward the landscape of all the other models. And  in addition to relate them to the other models,  
2:16:51
say here is where I differ, here is where I agree  with the others. And this is what I did with my  
2:16:57
approach, to say the maximum information is where  all models agree. And then it's pretty obvious  
2:17:03
where the models will differ from each other and  will differ from the information in the data.
2:17:12
What question keeps you up at night? What question has been keeping me  up at night since I was 16? I mean,  
2:17:20
I would really like to understand what is  gravity. That's the thing. I do not know why,  
2:17:26
but this is something that completely struck me  the first time I heard it. When I first heard   about Einstein's general relativity, I thought,  what is this? This is really bizarre. And then  
2:17:37
I realized, gravity, this is a force, but on  the other hand, it seems to be spacetime. So,  
2:17:43
what is it now? What is real? What is not  real? And how can I understand this really?  
2:17:49
This is something that's, it's not just like  electromagnetism that lives on a background.   It seems to be the background. And this is  something that is still keeping me going. I  
2:18:00
mean, academia is not the easiest way to  earn money. Actually, it's the hardest,  
2:18:05
and it's the most stressful one. But this is the  only reason why I'm doing this. I want an answer.
2:18:12
What's some concept? So, maybe it's this  one. But what I was going to ask is,   there must be some concept, whether it's  mathematical or physical, that you couldn't  
2:18:21
understand. Maybe you tried for months, even  years to understand it. Then all of a sudden   it made sense. And so what was that concept or  idea, or what have you, and what made it click?
2:18:33
I think the best, there were several, of course.  I mean, when you study, you learn a lot of things   and you always ask yourself, why? Why do I need  to know that? And then there is a certain point  
2:18:44
when you're suddenly confronted in your research  project with something, you think, wait a second,   I've heard about this during my lectures,  and back then I wondered what is it good  
2:18:53
for. Now I know it. And one of the key moments  in that direction for me was the Sobolev space.
2:19:01
Because when I studied functional analysis, I  mean, I had the best professor in the world to do  
2:19:07
this. He was really trying to make it applicable  and to show all of the things that he knew from  
2:19:14
his applications. But it was always something  that I never connected much to because he was  
2:19:19
more of engineering problems and all of that.  And suddenly when I saw in my lensing formalism,  
2:19:25
Sobolev spaces physically mean you can  have an infinite amount of black holes   in your spacetime. And math doesn't care  about this. This was something that I found  
2:19:36
completely intriguing, but on the other  hand also bothersome. And I thought, okay,  
2:19:42
finally I understand why this concept  was invented, or discovered or needed,  
2:19:48
in mathematics in order to tackle cases  like this. That was super interesting.
2:19:56
Now, where can people find out more about you?  Potentially some funders who are listening,  
2:20:01
who are watching, who want to help this sort of   research. And then also maybe some  other researchers who would like  
2:20:08
to collaborate with you. Where should  people go to find out more about you? Oh, first and foremost, I'm really happy to  collaborate with anybody on the entire planet.  
2:20:18
So the sun never sets over my projects.  I really love this internationality. And  
2:20:25
during the pandemic, I really liked this,  the review that we wrote on the cosmological   principles. For example, it was written from  researchers all over the world. And everybody  
2:20:35
has met everybody on this project. It was just  collaboration. So if you want to find out,  
2:20:42
at my webpage. And I also have a Wikipedia  page. But all of them contain my email   address. So drop me an email. I'm always happy  to answer. I'm always happy to go on podcasts,  
2:20:53
talk about all of these things. Because I  think that the more people know about this  
2:20:58
and the more people know a little bit more of  the details, people might be more convinced.
2:21:06
And lastly, what's a life lesson that you  wish you could impart to your younger self?
2:21:13
Well, there are many. But I would say the most  important one is don't listen to others. Like,  
2:21:23
make your own judgment. Because I would say,  based on the experiences that I've made,  
2:21:29
and I draw a lot on the philosophers of  cosmology that I have been collaborating with,  
2:21:35
they taught me that in principle, there are  many possible ways of living a self-consistent  
2:21:41
and fully reasonable life. To say, I  have a theory, I have a way of living,   I have a way of interpreting things that I see,  to make sense out of everything. But not everybody  
2:21:52
would agree on the interpretations and how to do  this. And I think I grew up a little bit in the  
2:21:59
wrong bubble. And it took me a hard time to get  out of this bubble and to meet with the people.
2:22:07
For instance, last year I met Thomas Buchert from  Lyon. He is the guy who says that if we take GR  
2:22:15
seriously, then we always need to intertwine  the cosmological background with the matter  
2:22:22
on top of it. And as Einstein said, both of them  are one. There is an equal sign in the equation.  
2:22:29
So this means I cannot decouple my cosmology from  the evolution of the masses. And he says that  
2:22:36
matter has a back reaction on the spacetime. And  we need to take this into account. And when I met  
2:22:42
him, he said, "Yeah, I'm also skeptical of dark  matter and of dark energy, because in the end,  
2:22:48
it's all the underdetermination problem, that  you chop up your entire signal into parts.  
2:22:54
Part of it is, let's say, like the baryonic  physics. Part of it is dark matter. Part of  
2:23:01
it is dark energy. But the question is, if you  have several unknowns that are hard to capture,  
2:23:07
you can redistribute your entire  signal, because it's hard to say,   under which assumptions you assume this is a dark  matter property, this is a dark energy property."
2:23:18
And then he also told me, "Yeah, it's really  hard to kill dark matter or to kill dark energy,  
2:23:25
because there are always the two camps  in this underdetermination to say,   this is definitely a sign against dark energy,  and we don't have to take a certain amount of dark  
2:23:32
matter against the cosmological principle.  Others say, no, it's an evolution in time. Or,  
2:23:37
no, it's actually a special property  of dark matter that we have missed." And I would say, you have to make up your  own way. You have to find your own way  
2:23:46
that you say, this is something that I find  reasonable. And not just take on what other  
2:23:52
people say just because you think, yeah,  I accept them as authorities or think that  
2:23:57
they know more than I do. I would say being  critical, also in what happens on Earth,  
2:24:04
it's the same. Being critical and making your own  judgment, I think, is the most important thing.
2:24:10
Thank you. Thank you for spending  so long with me and the audience. Yeah. Could I ask a question? I saw that you  have, like, always mostly 30,000 to 100,000  
2:24:24
viewers or so. This is, I mean, it's  highly impressive. And you have like   half a million subscribers. So, who's your  target audience? I mean, can you see, like,  
2:24:35
from which countries or so, what  people are mostly watching your blog?
2:24:41
Yeah, well, those are two different questions. So,  the target audience, we always aim this podcast  
2:24:47
to skew toward the research direction. So, we aim  it toward researchers. We aim it to be technical,  
2:24:53
as if this was behind the closed doors  of academia. And it's just professors   speaking. I'm not a professor, but you get the  idea. So that's the target. And the audience  
2:25:03
skews technical. But the majority of people are  actually, well, they're artists. They're people  
2:25:11
who are computer scientists, philosophers. It's  a mix. And these people are interested in deep  
2:25:17
questions. In fundamental questions. And what is  this place? What is time? What is reality? What is  
2:25:24
consciousness? So, it's people who are probing and  they want something more than the mysticism that  
2:25:31
they've heard before from many popularizers of  science, like the particles in two places at once.  
2:25:37
The cat's dead and alive at the same time. Isn't  it cool? Isn't it cool? Isn't it cool? That's the   same hundred times that I tell you over and over.  And they're like, okay, but what's, what else is  
2:25:46
there? What's the actual math behind that? What  does the math say? Does the math validate that?   Does the physics validate it? People want to  know. Can the cat really be dead and alive at  
2:25:55
the same time? Because this doesn't, physically,  this doesn't make sense. So what does it mean?
2:26:01
Yeah. And is that exactly  what a superposition says? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, in principle,  no, that's interesting. So,  
2:26:08
you really capture the entire scope of  people. It's not just the engineers,   which are usually the ones who go into  that direction. So it's really more great.
2:26:19
Yeah. I aim toward researchers and academics. I  aim that. And I think we have a large proportion  
2:26:27
toward that, more so than the average, because  we're technical. If it limits the audience,  
2:26:33
and it does limit the audience, but the  bulk of the audience, yeah, I imagine,  
2:26:38
are scientists and logicians and  sorts. And just lay people. Truck  
2:26:45
drivers, not like their developers, nurses.  That's cool. That's cool. That's cool. I mean, if you could get a chance, I mean, it  might be interesting to get George Ellis for  
2:26:54
the podcast, because he does cosmology, he does  philosophy of science, and recently he abandoned  
2:27:01
all of this, because I think he understood  cosmology really to the fullest, and he said,   "Now it's boring, gravity is the same everywhere,  I don't care." And then he said, "Now I'm doing  
2:27:11
neuroscience, because now I want actually to see  where is consciousness coming from?" And he's  
2:27:16
also, like, driven by mathematics. And he says the  mathematics is the same everywhere. And he won the  
2:27:21
Templeton Prize. This very famous prize. It gets  more than a Nobel Prize. For applying mathematics  
2:27:30
of cosmology to the real estate market in South  Africa in order to improve the conditions for  
2:27:37
the underprivileged people there. And he won the  Templeton Prize in principle for doing good in his  
2:27:43
own country, for the people. But in principle, I  mean, he says the math is the same. And this is  
2:27:51
why he could actually apply the same equations  to one and that one in order to help people on  
2:27:58
Earth with what he learned from the cosmos.  So he's also interdisciplinary in that sense.
2:28:04
Yeah, I would like to speak to him. Anyhow, I  want to thank you once more, and the audience,  
2:28:10
you as well. Thank you for having me. It  was a really lovely chat, highly inspiring.
2:28:18
Hi there, Curt here. If you like  content from Theories of Everything,  
2:28:24
the very best thing you can do is to check  out my Substack at CurtJaimungal.org. Some  
2:28:32
of the top perks are that every week you get  brand new episodes ahead of time. You also  
2:28:38
get bonus written content exclusively for our  members. That's C-U-R-T-J-A-I-M-U-N-G-A-L.org.  
2:28:49
You can also just search my name and the word  Substack on Google. Since I started that Substack,  
2:28:54
it's somehow already became number two in the  science category. Now, Substack, for those who  
2:29:00
are unfamiliar, is like a newsletter, one that's  beautifully formatted. There's zero spam. This  
2:29:06
is the best place to follow the content  of this channel that isn't anywhere else.   It's not on YouTube. It's not on Patreon. It's  exclusive to the Substack. It's free. There are  
2:29:18
ways for you to support me on Substack if you  want. And you'll get special bonuses if you do.
2:29:23
Several people ask me, like, you've spoken to so  many people in the fields of theoretical physics,  
2:29:30
of philosophy, of consciousness. What are your  thoughts, man? Well, I remain in interviews as  
2:29:39
a way to peer into my deliberations on these  topics. And the perfect way to support me is  
2:29:48
CURTJAIMUNGAL.org. Or search on Google. Oh, and  I've received messages, emails, and comments  
2:29:58
from researchers that they recommend Theories of  Everything to their students. That's incredible.  
2:30:05
If you're a professor or a lecturer or what have  you, and there's a particular standout episode  
2:30:10
that students can benefit from, or your friends,  please do share. And of course, a huge thank you  
2:30:16
to our advertising sponsor, The Economist. Visit  economist.com/TOE to get a massive discount on  
2:30:25
their annual subscription. I subscribe to  The Economist and you'll love it as well.   TOE is actually the only podcast that they  currently partner with. So, it's a huge honor  
2:30:35
for me and for you, you're getting an exclusive  discount. That's economist.com/TOE. T-O-E.
2:30:43
And finally, you should know this podcast is  on iTunes. It's on Spotify. It's on all the  
2:30:49
audio platforms. All you have to do is type  in Theories of Everything and you'll find it.  
2:30:54
I know my last name is complicated, so maybe  you don't want to type in Jaimungal, but you   can type in Theories of Everything and you'll  find it. Personally, I gain from re-watching  
2:31:03
lectures and podcasts. I also read in the comments  that TOE listeners also gain from replaying. So,  
2:31:09
how about instead you re-listen on one of those  platforms like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts,  
2:31:15
whatever podcast catcher you use. I'm  there with you. Thank you for listening.

All

From Curt Jaimungal

Media theories

Learning

Related

For you

Recently uploaded


2:11:10
Professor Jiang: World War 3 Is About To Begin, Let Me Explain!
The Diary Of A CEO
 and Predictive History
14M views
•
1 month ago


1:52:22
This Physicist May Have Just Solved Quantum Gravity
Curt Jaimungal
20K views
•
1 day ago
New


43:07
Where do first names come from?
Words Unravelled and RobWords
321K views
•
7 months ago


2:53:43
Biggest Mysteries in Physics: Antimatter, Dark Energy & ToE - Don Lincoln | Lex Fridman Podcast #497
Lex Fridman
543K views
•
3 weeks ago


13:24
Rating Good and Terrible British Accents by American Actors
Lost in the Pond
478K views
•
4 months ago


1:03:19
Alright... Let's listen to Abbey Road | Gen-Z Music Producer Reaction
Isaac Brown
271K views
•
10 days ago


1:34:36
NEVER Judge a Book By Its Cover! BIGGEST Surprises They Didn't See Coming...
Top Talent
19M views
•
2 years ago


52:07
I Went To The Strait of Hormuz - It Didn't Go Well (#238)
Sabbatical
749K views
•
5 days ago
New


1:58:18
The Man Behind AI Safety Thinks AI Is Conscious
Curt Jaimungal
 and The Roman Forum with Roman Yampolskiy
70K views
•
3 weeks ago


13:51
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Moody Blues - Nights In White Satin | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
380K views
•
1 year ago


1:45:37
Happy Happy Joy Joy - The Ren & Stimpy Story
Documentary • 2020
Free with ads
Unrated


21:16
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING ' Peter Frampton - Do You Feel Like We Do' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
235K views
•
1 year ago


9:10
Why does a table have a gender? (Grammatical gender explained)
languagejones
4.3K views
•
5 hours ago
New


8:48
How to Tell Americans and Canadians Apart
Lost in the Pond
64K views
•
1 day ago
New


2:29:38
Contact
Science fiction • 1997
Free with ads
PG


2:21:30
The Physicist Who Uncovered "Negative" Time
Curt Jaimungal
466K views
•
2 months ago


1:27:07
UFO Roundtable: Former CIA Scientist Proves Aliens Exist!
The Diary Of A CEO
 and The Age Of Disclosure
4M views
•
1 month ago


33:35
18 Illusions That Will Break Your Brain.
Very Nearly Interesting
270K views
•
5 months ago


1:56:40
Archaeology Warning: They May Have Secretly Found Antarctica  300 Years Before Us! - Graham Hancock
The Diary Of A CEO
 and Graham Hancock Official Channel
7.7M views
•
12 days ago


40:15
I asked Prof. Brian Cox 100 Questions
100 Questions with Tom Simons
 and TommyInnit
1.9M views
•
1 month ago


14:54
Ergativity: The Most Confusing Concept in Linguistics?
languagejones
118K views
•
3 months ago


23:22
Why Don't Forensics Account For Gravity And Drag?
Veritasium
890K views
•
1 day ago
New


1:04:58
Heather Cox Richardson: What History Predicts Happens Next
The Prof G Pod – Scott Galloway
 and Heather Cox Richardson
618K views
•
5 days ago
New


31:12
Does MSG actually make food taste better?
Ethan Chlebowski
454K views
•
3 weeks ago


21:00
What does the $ actually stand for?
RobWords
1.2M views
•
2 months ago


54:06
Tim Miller Can't Stop Talking About Giorgia Meloni (w/ Bill Kristol) | Bulwark Podcast
The Bulwark
185K views
•
1 day ago
New

4:44
France and Germany's Fighter Jet Program (FCAS) Is Dead || Peter Zeihan
Zeihan on Geopolitics
60K views
•
13 hours ago
New

17:51
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Meatloaf - Bat Out Of Hell' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
223K views
•
1 year ago

16:57
European Reacts to Foreigners Didn’t Expect America’s World Cup to Be Like THIS!
European Reacts
4K views
•
1 hour ago
New

17:16
What really happened to the last Neanderthals?
Stefan Milo
303K views
•
8 days ago

17:38
Eagles - Lyin' Eyes | BEST STORYTELLING WE'VE HEARD IN A WHILE! | First Time Reaction
Cliff Beats Classics
69K views
•
4 days ago
New

28:51
Gen-Z Music Producer listens to Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young for the first time...
Isaac Brown
233K views
•
1 month ago

30:06
My First Red Hot Chili Peppers Experience! Vocal ANALYSIS of "Under The Bridge"
The Charismatic Voice
577K views
•
1 year ago

8:19
FIRST TIME HEARING 'Aerosmith - I Don't Wanna Miss A Thing | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
7.8K views
•
2 years ago

1:31:01
The More You Study Consciousness, the Weirder It Gets | The Ezra Klein Show
The Ezra Klein Show
 and 2 more
643K views
•
2 months ago

18:13
Why Did Ancient Dogs Trust Humans More Than Any Other Animal?
Professor Primal
31K views
•
11 days ago

1:41:29
The Breakthrough in Physics We’ve Been Waiting For
Curt Jaimungal
515K views
•
1 year ago

1:42:38
The Time Machine (1960)
Action & adventure • 1960
Free with ads
G

1:18:56
The "All At Once" Universe Shatters Our View of Time
Curt Jaimungal
302K views
•
1 year ago



7:11
Nobel Prize under fire: is dark energy real?
Sabine Hossenfelder
60K views
•
8 hours ago
New

    
true




Skip navigation
Search



Create


Avatar image
This Physicist May Have Just Solved Quantum Gravity
Curt Jaimungal
Curt Jaimungal
548K subscribers

Join


765


Share

Ask

Save

20,489 views  Jun 22, 2026  Theories of Everything with Curt Jaimungal
SPONSORS:
Exclusive Plaud Prime Day discount for Curt's viewers: use code CURT for up to 20% OFF at https://www.plaud.ai/curt
Accelerate your efficiency. Sign up for your one-dollar-per-month trial today at http://shopify.com/theories
I personally subscribe to The Economist. TOE listeners get 35% off the annual subscription. No other podcast has this! https://economist.com/TOE

This is a breaking podcast. We're premiering a new paradigm for quantizing 4D gravity here first, without strings.  Neil Turok — inaugural Higgs Chair at Edinburgh, former director of Perimeter Institute, and 2026 Fellow of the Royal Society — believes quantum gravity may not require strings, extra dimensions, or a multiverse. The key: a 1970s theory called quadratic gravity, long abandoned over two seemingly fatal problems. Turok and Bateman argue both problems dissolve — one by reinterpreting a classical instability as ordinary gravitational expansion, the other by a subtle tweak to the Born rule that allows quantum states of negative norm without ever producing negative probabilities.  One quiet assumption, Turok argues, underpins decades of string theory's necessity. Drop it, and the whole case for a multiverse unravels. Neil graciously gave me a sneak peek at his and his PhD student Sam Bateman's new research. Bleeding edge! I hope you enjoy.

TIMESTAMPS:
00:00:00 - Quadratic Gravity Emergence
00:05:03 - Renormalization and Asymptotic Freedom
00:10:57 - Ghosts and Krein Spaces
00:16:00 - Generalizing the Born Rule
00:23:27 - Ostrogradsky Instability Reinterpreted
00:31:29 - UV Completeness and QCD
00:38:21 - Higgs Compositeness and Hierarchy
00:43:58 - CPT Symmetric Universe Minimalism
00:52:54 - The 36 Fields Mystery
01:00:10 - Orthodoxy vs. Revolutionary Ideas
01:06:39 - Gravitational Entropy and Smoothness
01:16:14 - Multiverse Measure Problem
01:23:05 - Theoretical Physics Health
01:30:07 - Sam Bateman’s Breakthrough
01:43:33 - Philosophy of Cosmology

LINKS MENTIONED:
Neil's Papers: https://inspirehep.net/authors/985402
Renormalization of Higher-Derivative Quantum Gravity [Paper]: https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract...
Quadratic Gravity: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadrat...
Asymptotic Freedom in Higher-Derivative Quantum Gravity [Paper]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science...
Ostrogradsky's Theorem: http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/O...
Krein Space: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indefin...
CPT-Symmetric Universe [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08928
Pathologies of Dimension-Zero Scalar Fields [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.05683
No-Ghost Theorem for Pais-Uhlenbeck Oscillator [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/0706.0207
Cancelling the Vacuum Energy [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.06258
Gravitational Entropy [Paper]: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07279
Neil's Lecture: https://pirsa.org/15100070

Neil Turok on the Big Bang [TOE]:    • The (Simple) Theory That Explains Everythi...  
Neil Turok on Black Holes [TOE]:    • The Most Astonishing Theory of Black Holes  
Carlo Rovelli [TOE]:    • The Loop Quantum Gravity Debacle: Carlo Ro...  
Leonard Susskind [TOE]:    • The Crisis in String Theory is Worse Than ...  
Jacob Barandes [TOE]:    • Harvard Scientist: "There is No Quantum Mu...  
Geoffrey Hinton [TOE]:    • Why The "Godfather of AI" Now Fears His Ow...  
Harvey Friedman [TOE]:    • The Genius Who Invented Reverse Mathematics  
Scott Aaronson [TOE]:    • Scott Aaronson: The Greatest Unsolved Prob...  
David Deutsch [TOE]:    • The Multiverse May Be Real | David Deutsch  
Peter Woit & Joseph Conlon [TOE]:    • String Theory's Biggest Critic Debates Str...  

More links at https://curtjaimungal.substack.com

FOLLOW:
Spotify: https://open.spotify.com/show/4gL14b9...
Substack: https://curtjaimungal.substack.com/su...
Twitter:   / toewithcurt  
Discord Invite:   / discord  
Crypto: https://nowpayments.io/donation/TOE
PayPal: https://www.paypal.com/donate?hosted_...


Guests do not pay to appear. #science
Neil Turok presents a potential, simpler approach to quantum gravity rooted in four dimensions by revisiting quadratic gravity. This discussion explores overcoming longstanding theoretical challenges, such as the Ostrogradsky instability and negative norm states, to propose a framework that avoids the complexity and assumptions associated with string theory.
Summary

How this was made
Auto-dubbed
Audio tracks for some languages were automatically generated. Learn more
Ask
Get answers, explore topics, and more

Ask questions
Chapters

View all
Explore the podcast
Theories of Everything with Curt Jaimungal
290 episodes
Theories of Everything with Curt Jaimungal
Curt Jaimungal

Podcasts
Transcript
Follow along using the transcript.


Show transcript

Curt Jaimungal
548K subscribers
Videos
About

Twitter

Discord

Dedicated Subredddit
216 Comments
Nathan McKnight
Add a comment...

Pinned by @TheoriesofEverything
@TheoriesofEverything
1 day ago (edited)
- Exclusive Plaud Prime Day discount for Curt's viewers: use code CURT for up to 20% OFF at https://www.plaud.ai/curt
- Accelerate your efficiency. Sign up for your one-dollar-per-month trial today at http://shopify.com/theories

6


Reply


21 replies

@Lasselucidora
1 day ago
Of all the scientists I do not understand, I like most of all to not understand Neil Turok.

39


Reply


1 reply

@jeremytitus9519
1 day ago
Disappointing absence of dinosaur combat.

34


Reply


1 reply

@LordCaptainFather
1 day ago
Always great when Kurt interviews leaders in a verified field, with mathematically robust frameworks.

10


Reply


@stanbleszynski8825
1 day ago
Great idea!  I have been toying with an idea of replacing Hilbert space , not with Krein space but rather with Clifford Algebraic operator space   Cl3,0(R) where Bohm quantum probability formula from  p=<S|F>^2 becomes  p = ( S F" + F S" )/2   ( whare ()" is Quaternion conjugate ) .  It works much better , and it's also self-complexifying which automatically reproduces spinor math and the transformation rules.

20


Reply


16 replies

@maestroarabiya7915
1 day ago
Thanks Neil and Curt 
Extraordinaire Thank you

7


Reply


@jambalaya974
1 day ago
Love your videos Curt. Please keep going. You are important.

7


Reply


1 reply

@taylortails
1 day ago
Keep up the good work Curt and Neil!

6


Reply


@zetristan4525
1 day ago
They didn't teach me this in ostrogradschool

2


Reply


@antoniobraga7207
1 day ago
Not sure i got it completely but from what i got great work

3


Reply


@МатвейДанатов
1 day ago
OH YEAH!

5


Reply


@ShannonWiltshi-jq8fl
1 day ago
Awesome interview Curt. Turok is doing amazing work. 

I think he may have solved a consistency problem, which is important. But consistency and explanation aren’t the same thing. A theory can be mathematically self-consistent and still leave the deepest questions untouched. The interesting question isn’t whether quadratic gravity works mathematically. It’s whether it explains more of reality than the framework it inherits.

It may solve the ghost problem. I’m less convinced it solves the ontology problem. Making a framework self-consistent isn’t necessarily the same thing as explaining why that framework exists at all.

5


Reply


2 replies

@swifttiger5546
1 day ago
Wow, so juicy, exciting! The dialogical format here is perfect, the joy of discovery and ideas suffusing it throughout. Yay and thank you both.

4


Reply


@SunRays996
1 day ago
Thank you for your commitment and contributions to science and humanity

4


Reply


@paulkohl9267
5 hours ago
Krein space and the projection opertator view of Relativistic QM blows my mind. It is a beautiful and significant result. Thank you Curt and Neal for this highly interesting video.

1


Reply


@rg.spencer
5 hours ago
I have to understand this theory! there are so many things there I resonate with

2


Reply


@ricardodcborges
22 hours ago
top interview !
congrats to both!
Turok is back and Curt amazing good interviewer !

4


Reply


@kensho123456
1 day ago
I agree.

4


Reply


@thedodubb
12 hours ago
Two fantastic science communicators, ty for the interview!

2


Reply


@igboukwu
15 hours ago
Thanks, Neil, for speaking up. You have accomplished more than anyone I can think of without holding any political power.

2


Reply

    
In this video



Chapters

Transcript
Search in video
Quadratic Gravity Emergence
0:00
What happened at the Big Bang? What  goes on in black holes? These kind   of questions have not been solved by these  very complex frameworks for quantum gravity.
0:10
You don't believe this, and  you have some recent results. I used to believe it, that quantizing gravity  required extra dimensions, strings, membranes.
0:19
What are the assumptions that go into this theory? One of them is that the theory lives in a Hilbert  
0:25
space. We have an example of a theory  which doesn't require that assumption. For some background for the viewers, I was  sent this paper last night. Professor Neil  
0:34
Turok is the inaugural Higgs chair at Edinburgh,   former director of Perimeter, and  a 2026 fellow of the Royal Society.
0:43
States of negative norm are called ghosts.  A state with negative norm corresponds to  
0:49
a negative probability. That's just not true.  You can't observe the norm of a quantum state.
0:54
Provided the S-matrix or Hamiltonian  of this theory has this symmetry,  
1:00
the answers you get are always positive,  and the probabilities always add up to one. We claim we understand quantum  gravity in a certain limit. The  
1:09
trick we used to make sense of it may  or may not apply to the full thing.
1:14
On this channel, I, Curt Jaimungal,   interview researchers regarding their theories  of reality with rigor and technical depth.
1:22
Sam says, "I think I know how it works." And all it took is a slight  tweak of the Born Rule.
1:28
Today, ghosts, the Born Rule, why  strings may not be forced in nature,  
1:33
and why simplicity still matters. Why is simplicity so important? Simplicity leads to understanding.
1:41
Quantum gravity in four dimensions is usually said  to require strings or require some other extra  
1:48
structure. You have some new interesting  results, which we're premiering today.
1:53
Okay. So I used to believe it, that quantizing gravity  required this huge amount of extra paraphernalia,  
2:06
extra dimensions, strings, membranes.  The whole story has become more and more   complex as time progressed without  actually solving any real problem.
2:19
And what I mean by real problem  is what happened at the Big Bang,   what goes on in black holes, is  there information loss? These kind  
2:27
of questions have not been solved by these  very complex frameworks for quantum gravity.
2:34
So what we've recently realized is that  there's rather a simple-minded approach   to quantum gravity, which actually has  been around since the 1970s. It was  
2:46
begun by somebody called Kelley Stelle,  who unfortunately passed away recently.
2:53
But he wrote a paper arguing that if you  include terms in the gravitational action,  
3:01
so you generalize Einstein's action — Einstein's  action involves the curvature of spacetime,  
3:08
and also a length scale, which is  called a Planck mass, or Planck length,  
3:14
or Newton's constant, it's all the same thing. So there's a scale in Einstein's  theory of gravity. If you include  
3:21
terms in the action which are  the square of the curvature — In addition to the regular? In addition to the regular Einstein action and the  cosmological constant, which has no derivatives,  
3:32
then you have Einstein's term, which has  two derivatives because it's a curvature,   and then you can include curvature squared terms.
3:40
And that makes gravity much  more like a gauge theory,   because in a gauge theory the action  is an integral of the field strength  
3:50
squared. Maxwell theory, QCD, they all work the  same way. So in gravity you can put the curvature  
3:57
squared into the action. And then there's almost a  trivial argument that tells you that that theory,  
4:03
which includes Einstein but also these  four-derivative terms, is renormalizable.
4:11
Now, renormalizable means that when you do  quantum field theory and you calculate things,   it is possible to — although  you get infinities in various  
4:22
calculations — you can absorb these into  redefinitions of the coupling constants.
4:29
And so basically, you're led to a sensible theory  with what we call a continuum limit. Namely,  
4:36
at short distances, the theory  is completely under control. So there is a renormalizable  theory of quantum gravity,  
4:43
which has been known since the 1970s. And as  I say, this is the simple-minded approach.
4:49
Now, there are reasons why people  have more or less abandoned it,   though they keep coming back to  it. It's called quadratic gravity,  
4:59
because it's quadratic in the curvature.  The action is quadratic in the curvature.
Renormalization and Asymptotic Freedom
5:04
So, yeah, there's actually more and  more interest in this possibility,   which certainly is the simplest  possible theory of quantum gravity.
5:14
So it's renormalizable, and then in the 1980s,  Avramidi and Barvinsky showed it's asymptotically  
5:22
free. So just like QCD, the theory of the strong  interactions, when you go to short distances,  
5:29
the coupling constant goes to zero. And it  becomes a trivial theory of just waves which  
5:35
don't interact. So you can imagine, at very short  distances, this theory is really extremely simple.
5:42
So what's wrong with the theory? All those  statements I made about renormalizability,  
5:47
asymptotic freedom, they are the Euclidean theory.   That is how we do computations  of the strong interactions, QCD.
5:57
You can put it on a lattice and study the  theory, but the only way we really know how  
6:09
to study non-perturbative properties of any  field theory is to work in imaginary time.
6:19
Okay, the reason is that if you work in real time,  
6:25
then the quantum mechanical path integral is very  oscillatory. It involves the imaginary number,  
6:33
exponentially imaginary number, it's oscillating  like crazy, and if you try to integrate anything,  
6:38
these oscillations are just impossible  to control if you do it directly. So you have to do some trick to  control those oscillations. And  
6:47
going to imaginary time is a  beautiful mathematical trick,   which converts an oscillatory integral into  a perfectly damped convergence integral.
6:59
So there's this mathematical trick which  people have used forever in quantum field   theory and in QCD, but not much in gravity. It  doesn't work with Einstein's theory of gravity.  
7:12
People have studied that. But if you include  these squared curvature terms, they suppress  
7:18
the curvature on short distances. And it looks  like this theory is sensible in Euclidean time.
7:26
So, now that's all very well. What I'm  saying is that it looks like there's   a sensible theory in imaginary time.  But we don't live in imaginary time,  
7:34
we live in real time. So we have  to do this procedure called the   Wick rotation or analytic continuation  from this imaginary time to real time.
7:45
When you do that, two disasters strike,   and this is why people sort of abandon this  approach, although they keep coming back to it.
7:55
What we've done recently is half understand how  to deal with that. Okay, so the two problems:  
8:02
one of them is probably the oldest no-go theorem  in physics. It's called the Ostrogradsky theorem.  
8:10
And so in 1850, Ostrogradsky — I think  he was in St. Petersburg — decided to  
8:18
generalize what Hamilton had done with the  Hamiltonian treatment of classical mechanics.
8:24
And so Ostrogradsky asked, what if  instead of F equals MA, instead of  
8:30
a second derivative equation, what if we had  three derivatives in the equation of motion,   or four, or five, or any number of  derivatives? Does anything go wrong?
8:40
And he found something very interesting,  which is the Hamiltonian, or the energy   of the system. If the equations of  motion have more than two derivatives,  
8:49
then the energy, or Hamiltonian, is what  we call unbounded below. You can have  
8:57
configurations of arbitrarily negative  energy in this higher-derivative system.
9:04
Now that, on the face of it, looks like  a disaster, because if you brought such a   system into contact with the real world,  where generally the energy is positive,  
9:15
this system could interact with everything  else, and its energy could go down,  
9:21
and the energy of everything else would  go up, so it's an infinite source of   energy. And we don't see such things in  nature. And they might be wildly unstable.
9:32
So, this is called the Ostrogradsky  instability. And in general,  
9:37
it's true. If you try to write  down a high-derivative system,   you will find it's unstable. In general, there  are exceptions, but in general, that's a problem.
9:48
So people got very worried about this, and  often when people were building quantum field  
9:54
theories — and actually the first person, as  far as I know, the first person to try to use   a higher-derivative quantum field theory was  Homi Bhabha, who's an Indian nuclear physicist.
10:05
And people were trying to  understand nuclear forces,   so they were trying all kinds  of models and field theories. And Bhabha and Heisenberg and many other field  theorists played with high-derivative theories.
10:17
The reason they played with them is they   thought it would make quantum  field theory more convergent.
10:25
It would reduce the infinities. And it's related to the fact that gravity  with four derivatives is renormalizable.
10:32
So it's a similar reason. Now, the disaster that happens in the quantum  theory is slightly different than the classical.
10:41
What you find is that the space  of quantum states does not have  
10:47
a positive inner product. It has  what we call negative inner product,   and states of negative norm are called  ghosts, traditionally in physics.
Ghosts and Krein Spaces
10:59
What people have often said,  and what we realized is wrong,   is that a state with negative norm  corresponds to a negative probability.
11:11
And you'll find this argument everywhere, or  in many places in the literature, that, whoops,   we can't allow negative norms, they're unphysical,  they correspond to negative probabilities.
11:21
That's just not true, because a quantum state  is nothing but a label for a system. Its norm  
11:28
is neither here nor there. You can't  observe the norm of a quantum state.
11:35
So you've got these labels. Some of  your vectors in this abstract space of   states have positive length squared,  let's say, and some have negative.
11:45
So it's like in Minkowski spacetime. We have  distances which are space-like or time-like,  
11:50
and one of them is negative and the other  is positive. And some are null. There are   some null directions. So then the  question we wanted to address is,  
11:57
can you live with a quantum theory in a space  of states which has these three possibilities:  
12:04
positive, null, negative norm states?  And what we found — so mathematicians  
12:11
were studying this, and this is called a Krein  space. It's a generalization of Hilbert space.
12:18
And what we found is that provided there is  a certain discrete symmetry in your theory,  
12:27
which we call ghost parity symmetry,  and it's a very trivial thing —
12:32
It's an operator which, when you  act on a negative norm state,   gives you minus one, and acting on a  positive norm state gives you plus one.
12:42
If you have a theory where that  operator is a symmetry of the theory,  
12:49
you can now define transition  probabilities without ever  
12:55
normalizing the state. And the way you  do it is with projection operators.
13:01
Okay? So even if I'm in Minkowski space, you know,   it's a non-degenerate space, every vector can be  uniquely expressed as a linear combination of,  
13:14
let's say, space-like and time-like vectors.  There's nothing singular about it. And the way  
13:19
you project — you can still project a vector  onto its components, space-like or time-like.
13:26
So you can do the same thing in  this Hilbert space. But what you   have to do is replace the Born rule. In  quantum mechanics, the probability for  
13:36
an event is the inner product between an  initial state and a final state squared.
13:43
Okay? And now, if you were going to  normalize this — so normally we think  
13:49
of those states as being normalized. You  know, integral of wave function squared   is one. But imagine you can't normalize now  because you're in this more general space.
13:59
So what you do is you replace the Born  formula. I, then some kind of matrix  
14:06
transitioning you from I to F. This is  some time evolution operator. So IF,  
14:15
IS — that's called the S-matrix — ISF  squared would be the normal procedure.
14:21
So let's replace the initial state. So we've got  two copies of the initial state because we have   this thing squared. Replace the ii with dividing  by its norm. Now you have a projection operator.
14:35
So a completely equivalent formulation of the  Born rule is to say, project onto initial state,  
14:41
evolve with the S-matrix, project onto  the final state, evolve with the S-dagger,  
14:47
complex conjugate, and trace the  answer. Trace means sum over all  
14:52
states. That'll give exactly the same  answers in normal quantum mechanics. But the beauty is, because now it involves  projection operators, it gives sensible answers,  
15:03
even in a Krein space. And what we've  shown is that provided the S-matrix,  
15:08
or Hamiltonian, of this theory has this  symmetry — the one I mentioned — the  
15:15
answers you get are always positive, and  the probabilities always add up to one.
15:20
So we found that in dealing with  theories which have four derivatives,  
15:25
we have to very slightly generalize  the framework of quantum mechanics. But essentially, it's a trivial change. And  then we find all the probabilities are positive.
15:37
So even though there are ghost states, you still  trace over them. You trace over everything.
15:44
So this is very exciting, because now  I have to say that there's a caveat,  
15:50
which is that we haven't solved quantum  gravity yet, but we're halfway there.
15:57
That's optimistic, of course, but  that's a nice way of saying it. So when you look at this quadratic gravity action,  there are two terms which are allowed. That's all.
Generalizing the Born Rule
16:08
The symmetries of general relativity only  allow two terms. One is what's called the  
16:14
Ricci scalar squared, and the other one  is the Weyl curvature squared. And this   is the most general action. So there are two  couplings you can play with. What we've shown  
16:24
is that if you take a limit where one of those  couplings is zero, that basically decouples the  
16:32
graviton and everything associated with the Weyl  curvature. You're left with the curvature scalar.
16:40
That action is renormalizable, asymptotically  free, and gives positive probabilities.
16:47
So we claim we understand quantum  gravity in a certain limit,  
16:54
in which the only degrees of freedom  are the local scale of the metric.
17:01
So this is fine for describing cosmology. There are even black hole-like solutions  
17:08
to this theory. It's a kind of  toy model for quantum gravity. The trick we used to make sense of it  may or may not apply to the full thing.
17:19
We will have to search in the full  theory: is there a similar discrete  
17:25
symmetry, this thing that gives plus one on  positive norm, minus one on negative norm? If there is, then this will be a  complete theory of quantum gravity.
17:35
Okay, what are the assumptions  that go into this theory? Well, let me first say what  the assumptions were behind  
17:42
the claim that you need strings and  10 dimensions to do quantum gravity.
17:48
The assumptions underlying that claim were that  
17:57
essentially the only allowed theories  had two derivatives in the action.
18:06
So when people quantize strings,   they were not considering theories, even  of strings, which had four derivatives.
18:15
Okay, so that was one assumption. There are  plenty of other assumptions. Probably the  
18:22
strongest assumption was that you  have to construct the theory only  
18:29
in perturbation theory. Okay, so the  thing that's always bothered me about   string theory is it has no full  formulation. There's nothing like  
18:39
general relativity where there's a principle  that gives you the full nonlinear theory.
18:44
String theory is kind of constructed with  trying to respect certain principles,  
18:51
like Lorentz invariance and unitarity,  positive probabilities, and so on.
18:58
But string theory's assumptions are really  rigid, and one of them is that the theory  
19:04
lives in a Hilbert space, which means that  the norms of all quantum states are positive.
19:10
And now that we've seen that you don't need  that assumption, the whole thing has no basis.
19:19
I mean, if it's true — we think it's  true — we have an example of a theory   which doesn't require that assumption,  and which is what we call UV-complete.
19:29
It has a full continuum formulation.  This is a self-contained complete theory,  
19:34
like QCD, which we believe is such a theory. And yet it doesn't live in a Hilbert space.  It lives in a space more like Minkowski space,  
19:46
with positive norm states and negative  norm states and null states. So just   a tiny generalization of the orthodox  principles means you don't need strings,  
19:59
you don't need extra dimensions to  describe gravity. So that's quite shocking. And of course it begs the question,  what are the other assumptions that  
20:08
people were making which led them to  conclude there's a multiverse? I mean,  
20:14
you make one false move in theoretical  physics and you're totally wrong. Okay.
20:20
So that's the danger we all have to worry about. And I think people are not  sufficiently worried about that.
20:26
We should be examining very, very closely each one  of our assumptions to say, is it really necessary?
20:34
Or is it just that we're traditionally  used to making that assumption? For me, the hardest part about most conversations  is actually what happens after. That is,  
20:43
the follow-ups that I'm supposed to send,  or the ideas that I have on walks later   that just escape my mind by the time that I  sit down. Fortunately, I've been using Plaud,  
20:53
P-L-A-U-D, and the shift is super simple. I  stop trying to hold everything in my head.
20:59
Plaud starts with hardware, which is what  makes it different. There's the Note Pin S,   which is a wearable, and it's completely  hands-free. I use it when I'm moving around,  
21:08
when I'm out for a walk, when I'm thinking  out loud, even when I'm in the shower,   wherever I don't want to pull out my phone.  And when I need to capture phone calls or more  
21:16
intentional conversations, I use the Note  Pro. It magnetically attaches to my phone,  
21:22
records calls and meetings, and  keeps everything organized afterward. What Plaud truly does is it turns what I've  heard into something that I can actually use.
21:30
Summaries, action items, follow-ups,   without the mental overhead of  reconstructing everything later.
21:36
It basically becomes a searchable  record of your own work. So if your work lives in conversations,  whether that's research, medicine,  
21:43
law, or just a huge amount of  meetings, it's worth looking into. It's also built around enterprise security  standards, SOC2, HIPAA, and GDPR compliant.
21:54
Check it out at plaud.ai/curt. That's   P-L-A-U-D dot A-I slash C-U-R-T and  use code CURT for a 15% discount.
22:06
This video is sponsored by  Plaud. All opinions are my own. I subscribe to The Economist. Their science  
22:13
and their AI coverage is among  the best I've found anywhere. And I say that as someone who reads plenty of it.
22:20
I'll give you some examples. They just ran an  analysis on how attitudes towards science are  
22:25
changing in American politics and what  this means for research and funding in  
22:30
scientific institutions moving forward.  This sort of high-quality reporting is   fantastic. They even covered how dark  energy may be weakening over time. Now,  
22:40
if that holds up, it completely changes  our understanding of the universe's fate. If you watch this channel, those are exactly the  kinds of questions that we explore every week.  
22:49
I subscribe to The Economist because their science  and their AI reporting regularly surprises me with  
22:54
how deep it goes. And they're also, of course,  known for global affairs, both political and   economic reporting. They are top-tier, and  interestingly and flatteringly, TOE is one of the  
23:05
only podcasts that The Economist partners with.  So as a listener, you get an exclusive 35% off.
23:13
That's not a deal that they have just  anywhere. Head to economist.com/TOE to  
23:19
subscribe. That's economist.com/TOE for 35% off.
Ostrogradsky Instability Reinterpreted
23:27
Okay, let me see if I got this correct so  far, and feel free to correct anything,   including that I'm citing the wrong  names, my pronunciation, anything.
23:35
Of course. So in the 1970s, late 1970s, '77, someone   named Kelley Stelle came out with  a theory called quadratic gravity.
23:43
Exactly. That adds something to the  Einstein-Hilbert action. It adds an R squared. Exactly.
23:48
Actually, in its most general form,  adds an R squared plus the Weyl squared. Yeah, exactly. Well, firstly, why do we  care about quantum gravity?
23:55
Why is it such a difficult problem? One of the problems is that  it's non-renormalizable. Exactly.
24:00
Okay. This theory is renormalizable. Yep. However, going back 150 years or so, there's  another person's no-go theorem in a sense,  
24:10
called the Ostrogradsky theorem,  which says that if you have more   derivatives in a certain class of  theories, then you get instabilities.
24:18
Exactly. These instabilities are of two forms. One is that you can be unbounded below.
24:24
Yes, I'm sorry. You can be unbounded. That's infinite. Automatically from below. Yes. Meaning that you'll just constantly decay,  
24:29
and it doesn't look like our universe is  constantly decaying as far as we can tell. Exactly. Now, maybe there's some Dirac sea argument  for bosons or something like that.
24:36
I don't know. That could fill this, but whatever. That's right. That horn is not the horn you're going down.
24:42
There's another horn. I'll tell you a little bit more about that horn,  because there's this Ostrogradsky instability.
24:49
Now, the fascinating thing about  gravity is it has this character,   that a gravitating system — gravity has negative  energy, right? The potential energy of a bound  
24:59
system has positive kinetic energy at the  bottom, but gravitational energy is negative.
25:04
So already when we deal with gravity,  we're somehow used to the fact that,   no, the energy isn't positive, right?  Potential energy is not positive. And  
25:13
it's more than that. Observations show us that the   universe is expanding exponentially now.  It doesn't sound like a very stable system,  
25:22
right? Gravity has this weird property, if  we believe in the cosmological constant,  
25:27
that the universe is going to expand exponentially  forever. That sounds awfully like an instability.
25:33
When we've studied this four-derivative  theory of gravity, we show that the  
25:39
Ostrogradsky instability is nothing  but normal gravitational expansion.
25:46
And if we analyze the expanding  solution in just the same way   that we do with Einstein's theory,  we discover it's absolutely stable.
25:55
Interesting. So the Ostrogradsky instability went away just by   reinterpreting the theory  as a gravitational theory.
26:03
Okay, I didn't know that part. Yeah. So for some background for the viewers,  I was sent this paper last night,  
26:10
and maybe it's published now by the time  we release this. I didn't see that part. Okay, so my understanding —
26:16
That's another paper. I see. Okay. Great. Right. My understanding is that you looked at  the other horn of the Ostrogradsky instability,  
26:25
which says that you will have negative norms. Exactly. Negative norms are not wanted in a  quantum theory. They're called ghosts.
26:32
There are two kinds of ghosts  people may have heard about. One   is a friendly Faddeev-Popov, Casper-like ghost.
26:38
Yes. Which is fine. Yes. Then there's another one, which  is the paranormal activity kind.
26:44
Yes. But what your innovation is,  along with your partner Bateman — Sam Bateman.
26:50
Great. Yeah. Is to say, actually, this  is a pseudo-Hilbert space.
26:57
I was looking for that word. I thought it was called the pseudo-Hilbert space. It is. It's called the Krein space. Right, right. Okay. So Riemannian spaces are just  plus, plus, plus in the signature.
27:04
Pseudo-Riemannian, you allow a negative. Exactly. And then Hilbert spaces are plus, plus, plus. And then I didn't know — I would have thought  it would be called pseudo-Hilbert space.
27:13
Yeah, yeah. No, exactly. It's called Krein. So again, my student, Sam Bateman, has this  deep interest in the mathematical literature,  
27:24
mathematical physics literature, and  he's just been exploring. And of course,   the internet is very helpful,  and even AI can find papers.
27:32
And so somehow Sam came across this notion of  the Krein space, which is not generally known to  
27:37
physicists. Krein was interested in it because  he was studying differential operators. He's  
27:43
a functional analyst. And so normally when you  consider eigenvalues in the Schrödinger equation  
27:49
or whatever, you very often make the assumption  that the space of functions is a Hilbert space.
27:57
But Krein said, you know, let's drop that  assumption. Let's allow these negative norms in  
28:04
our functional analysis. And what he discovered is  you can prove all kinds of additional things. So  
28:10
this mathematical concept was sort of lying around  in the literature just waiting to be used. And as  
28:16
far as I know, nobody else ever used it. So indeed  it is a pseudo space. It's nothing but that.
28:24
Then what you said is, well, maybe  negative norms are not a problem   because they themselves are not observable.  And physics is about what can you observe.
28:33
Exactly. And there's plenty of unobserved.  You can have a red dancing unicorn   in your theory in the equations. If it's  unobservable, it actually doesn't matter.
28:41
Maybe there's another set of equations with the  exact same observables without the red unicorn,   but it doesn't make a difference.  You don't see it in the lab.
28:48
Okay, so the negative norms are  not in and of themselves a problem.
28:54
Correct. What is observable are the  probability transitions. Exactly. And then those are fine.
29:00
Exactly. Yes. So you mentioned BRST and  Faddeev-Popov. So that's very  
29:06
good because physicists are actually very  used to working in pseudo-Hilbert spaces.
29:12
That's what these mathematical ghosts live in.  But the usual prescription is you think you're  
29:20
in this big space, which has both positive  and negative and null states, and then you  
29:25
perform a projection. And you say there's a  physical subspace where everything is positive.
29:31
And you use this bigger space  to prove certain things. You  
29:36
basically respect more symmetry  by working in this big space,  
29:41
but ultimately you project onto a physical  subspace, and that's a Hilbert space.
29:47
So people construct transition amplitudes, they  actually sum over all these unphysical directions,  
29:53
but at the end of the day, they do a  projection onto the physical subspace. What our construction does is a generalization  of that, which is actually more economical.
30:04
Because we live in this big space, and we don't  treat the amplitude as a physical quantity either.
30:14
It's not in quantum mechanics. You've got to square it. We don't do that. We construct the probability directly.
30:22
So you've got some operator A, which describes  the full physical process. It's a projection  
30:28
onto the initial state, scattering matrix,  projection onto the final state. And what  
30:34
we show is that probabilities are the trace  of A-dagger A. And you're just not allowed to  
30:41
think about A. A is not a physical thing, but  the trace of A-dagger A is — when we trace,  
30:47
that means summing over all  states, including the ghosts. So in our construction, there's  no need to do any projection.
30:56
You sum over these states, even  the ones with negative norm. You never project anything.
31:01
You just directly construct the probability. And it turns out it's positive, provided  you have the symmetry in your theory.
31:09
So we've broadened the class  of quantum field theories to   ones which don't satisfy the usual axioms.
31:16
They don't live in a Hilbert space. But they have all the other good properties. They're causal, they're unitary, they  satisfy everything else you could want.
31:26
Now, the paper is out by the  time this comes out, hopefully. Yes. And people may have the question of, well,  you're talking about quantum gravity initially,  
UV Completeness and QCD
31:33
and then I look at the action,  and it's this perfect square,   which we're going to talk about  why it has to be a perfect square.
31:38
Right. But the quantity in it is a  field, just a scalar field. Just a scalar. So what's its relationship to quantum gravity?
31:46
It is a particular limit of this quadratic  gravity. So quadratic gravity has a bunch  
31:54
of different types of excitations.  It has a graviton-like excitation,  
32:00
which has spin-2. It has a vector excitation,   more like a Maxwell vector. It has a spin-2  ghost, a guy that creates negative norm states.
32:15
Those are all coming from the Weyl curvature term. The Ricci curvature is telling  you about the scalar mode,  
32:25
which is the local scale of the metric. So by going to the four-derivative theory,  
32:30
you have more degrees of freedom  than you had in Einstein's gravity.
32:37
You've got all these ones  I described: the graviton,   the ghost graviton, the vector  mode, and the scalar mode.
32:47
And what we've been able to do so far is  study a limit of the theory in which the  
32:54
tensor-like modes, the gravitons and the  vectors, decouple and they become trivial.
32:59
So all we study is the scalar mode. And   that scalar mode we're claiming  is a sensible quantum theory.
33:06
So if you like, it's a special limit of  quantum gravity, doesn't have gravitons,  
33:12
won't have gravitational waves. Okay, so it's not the real world,  it's not the right theory of gravity,  
33:18
but it's a limit of something which  might be the right theory of gravity.
33:24
And you mentioned that it's UV-complete? Yes. Okay, what about IR complete or whatever?
33:30
Okay, so it is very similar to  QCD. Now, QCD is, as we believe,  
33:36
a complete quantum field theory. It has a  continuum limit, it's completely well-defined.
33:41
As you know, it has very strange consequences in  the IR. At large distances, it confines. You're  
33:48
not allowed to have free charged particles in  QCD. You have to have glueballs or protons,  
33:58
whatever. So QCD is confining. That means it's  called asymptotic freedom and infrared slavery.
34:06
So in the infrared, things get strongly coupled  and you just can't pull out the individual gluons.  
34:14
They're too strongly interacting. Instead, the  only kind of real physical excitation in QCD  
34:21
is a glueball, which is made out of many gluons.  That's what people study in lattice gauge theory.
34:30
So this theory is similar. It's very weakly  coupled at short distances in the UV,  
34:37
but at large distances strongly coupled.  Still completely well-defined. You can put   this thing on a computer and you could  try to find what are the excitations,  
34:45
what's the analogue of a glueball in  this theory. We haven't yet done that,  
34:50
but actually I have a student doing it.  It'll be interesting to find out what   happens. It's also like a toy model  of QCD. It has the same properties.
34:58
It's completely well-defined on the lattice,  and then you can study what happens. Now, this in itself has a lot of potential, but  we're just beginning to scratch the surface.
35:11
So there is a puzzle in basic physics,  which is the separation of mass scales.
35:17
We've got the Planck mass, which  is 10 to the 19 GeV, a huge number.
35:23
Then we have the weak scale, which is 100 GeV.  
35:28
That's the scale of weak physics.  We have strong interaction physics,   a fraction of a GeV, around a GeV. So that's  kind of particle physics scales, so GeV scales.
35:39
And then we have the cosmological constant, which  is down at a milli-electron volt. So essentially,  
35:45
there are three widely disparate scales,  and this is called a hierarchy problem.
35:52
Why do the laws of nature have this  ridiculous separation of scales?
35:58
Now, imagine you have this theory  which is asymptotically free. In   the ultraviolet, the coupling's weak.
36:08
Let's say we define the theory at very  high energies where the coupling's,  
36:13
let's say, one-tenth. And then I think I know what I'm doing. It's a  perturbative theory. It's weakly coupled. Now  
36:22
we go down to lower energies. Imagine this high  energy is the Planck scale, just as an example.
36:30
You can then ask yourself, at what scale would  
36:35
this coupling become strong  as I come down in energy? When couplings run with energy,  it's only logarithmic. And that's  
36:43
what happens in this theory.  It's a very, very slow running. So, as you come down in energy scale, it is  absolutely natural and almost unavoidable  
36:55
that the scale where it becomes strong  is exponentially smaller than the scale  
37:01
you initially defined it. And, in fact, that's  the case with QCD. QCD predicts a mass scale of  
37:08
around a GeV. But we have the Planck mass in our  theory. No one regards that as fine-tuning. Why?
37:15
Because the QCD coupling is something  like a 30th at the Planck scale,  
37:20
and then we come down in energy  and become strong at about 1 GeV. Not a surprise, because it  runs so slowly with energy.  
37:28
And it's exactly the same with this theory. So, we hope — so there's a kind of  puzzle in particle physics and gravity,  
37:37
why is the Higgs mass so much  less than the Planck mass? And within the normal standard model,  
37:43
that's just tuned. We just pick these  two numbers to fit the real world.
37:49
But now let's ask why those numbers are different.  Well, if the Higgs is made out of this scalar,  
37:58
which is connecting the Higgs mechanism  with gravity, it's pretty exciting,   then it's totally natural for the Higgs mass to  be exponentially smaller than the Planck mass.
38:09
So there's a hope that this picture  will solve the hierarchy puzzle.
38:15
Let me ask you something. The Higgs  is not fundamental in your picture.
38:20
No. Why did they still give you the Higgs chair? Well, that's to do with Peter Higgs.  Okay, so Peter Higgs — I mean,  
Higgs Compositeness and Hierarchy
38:33
he was a much more shy and withdrawn  person than me. Notoriously shy.
38:40
And probably a lot more humble than me. Peter  came up with the idea of the Higgs boson in  
38:46
the early 1960s, when there was no experimental  evidence, right? So it was a pure theoretical  
38:54
concept, but it was absolutely radical at the  time. Peter Higgs really thought about — well,  
39:02
he was inspired by superconductivity,  which is a real phenomenon. Somebody called Anderson made a field theory  model of superconductivity and realized that  
39:13
this is the way to essentially — magnetic  fields are expelled from superconductors,  
39:21
and Anderson understood that could happen if  a particular kind of scalar field condensed.
39:28
It's a composite field in the superconductor.   It's made out of electron pairs.  It's called a Cooper condensate.
39:36
So Anderson had realized there's this amazing  mechanism which has the effect of giving the  
39:45
photon a mass inside a superconductor.  And Higgs said, oh, wait a second,  
39:51
we could use this in particle physics.  So he generalized this method to a  
39:57
relativistic field theory. At the time,  everybody told him this was nonsense.
40:03
They said you're using classical  notions in a quantum field theory.  
40:10
It violates various assumptions. One of the basic assumptions people had made  in quantum field theory is called cluster  
40:19
decomposition. It basically says that things  which are at a distance are uncorrelated. Okay,  
40:25
so it's kind of intuitive. Why should this thing  know about that? The Higgs model absolutely  
40:32
violates this. It says the vacuum is full of a  condensate such that if I measure the value of  
40:39
the Higgs field over here, it's exactly the same  as the value over there. It's utterly correlated.
40:45
So people were shocked. It violated the basic  assumptions, but ultimately turned out to be  
40:51
true. So Peter was a radical in his way, and  Peter would be the last person to defend the  
41:02
Higgs boson as being fundamental. I mean, the  thing that stimulated it is not fundamental.
41:09
The analog Higgs boson in the superconductor  is not fundamental. It's made out of electrons.
41:18
Now, why would you question — well, yeah,   so the fact is that the Higgs theory  he invented is not UV-complete.
41:29
It has a coupling in it, and if you go to  high energies, it has all the wrong behavior. It blows up at a finite energy scale. It's  called the Landau pole. So we know the  
41:41
Higgs theory is not UV-complete.  So now we have a scalar theory,   which is UV-complete. It's highly suggestive  that actually the Higgs boson is in some  
41:52
way a composite of this other scalar that is  complete. Or at least it's very worth exploring.
42:01
I remember the doubt before launching  this podcast. What if no one listens?   What if I'm wasting my time? If you've ever  felt that way about starting a business,  
42:09
Shopify is the partner that turns uncertainty into  momentum. They power millions of businesses and  
42:15
10% of all US e-commerce, from Allbirds to  Gymshark to brands just getting started. No  
42:21
straggler left behind. Shopify's AI tool writes  your product descriptions for you. It enhances  
42:27
your photography. It builds you a stunning store  from hundreds of templates. Forget about the  
42:33
dormative haze of bouncing between separate  platforms. Shopify puts inventory, payments,  
42:38
and analytics under one roof with the propriety  of a true commerce expert. Their award-winning  
42:45
24/7 support means you're never alone, and that  iconic purple Shop Pay button — it's the backbone  
42:52
of their checkout. The best converting on the  planet, turning abandoned carts into actual sales.
42:59
It's time to turn those what-ifs  into wins with Shopify today.  
43:05
Sign up for your $1 per month trial at  shopify.com/TOE. That's shopify.com/TOE.
43:15
I'd like to explore the relationship between this  4D gravity quantization paper, set of papers that  
43:21
you have now, and your Latham Boyle, simple TOE,  CPT symmetric universe, whatever its moniker.
43:29
Yes, CPT symmetric universe. This is all the same  thing. Okay. So, what we realized in proposing the  
43:38
CPT symmetric universe and then exploring it  — and I should just say the philosophy behind  
43:46
it was extreme minimalism, right? What we've  seen in the observations, both of the universe  
43:52
on large scales and in colliders on small  scales, is surprising economy and simplicity.
CPT Symmetric Universe Minimalism
44:00
What we see is minimal. We can use five  parameters to describe everything on  
44:07
large scales, and then the standard model  of particle physics is actually a very   economical framework. In both cases there's no  evidence for anything else. The more we look,  
44:21
the less we find. That doesn't mean we should stop  looking. If we find something unexpected, it could  
44:29
completely disprove our framework, which would  be very welcome. But I think that it's a sensible  
44:38
starting point to see what the minimal theory  is that I can use to explain everything we see.
44:48
You know, of course, that's the obvious thing  to do, but strangely, that's not what people   have been doing. So we decided to do that.  Having decided to do that, all sorts of things  
44:57
started to fall into place. We could explain the  dark matter in a simpler way than anyone else.  
45:03
We could explain why the universe is smooth and  spatially flat, and the horizon puzzle. All these  
45:12
things dropped out without requiring all the bells  and whistles that previous people had assumed.
45:19
The one thing that didn't drop out was the  fluctuations. So we look at the sky, the hot  
45:27
plasma of the hot Big Bang, which surrounds us,  and we measure its temperature, and we see these  
45:32
fluctuations in the temperature. And they're very  important because they gave rise to galaxies,  
45:38
and they're our ancestors. So now we can see  those things. What caused those fluctuations?
45:47
So, in the inflation models, they are caused  by quantum fluctuations on microscopic scales  
45:54
which get exponentially stretched to large  scales. In our case, we don't have inflation,  
46:01
so we can't stretch these things.  So, how else could you get them?
46:06
So the point of view we took is,  look, let's just take it at face   value. Imagine they look like the vacuum  fluctuations in a quantum field. They have  
46:16
the statistical properties called Gaussian  random noise. But they have a spectrum,  
46:23
meaning the strength of the fluctuations as a  function of scale, a wavelength. Their spectrum  
46:30
doesn't look like a normal scalar field. It's  more red. There's more power on large scales.
46:36
What does it look like? It looks exactly  like a four-derivative field. That's what  
46:43
we see in the sky. So if you just say,  how would I interpret the sky as a quantum   fluctuating field? It's a four-derivative  field, there's no question. So that's what  
46:54
started us on the path of thinking about  high-derivative fields. And now this is  
46:59
closing because we see what you need for  quantum gravity is a four-derivative field.
47:04
It tells us what we're looking at in the  sky is a signal of quantum gravity. So,  
47:10
the more we pursue this simplicity, the more  unexpected unifications seem to be happening. It's  
47:23
a wonderful thought that actually, look at the  sky, we're just seeing the birth of the universe,   and those are precisely the quantum fluctuations  in quantum gravity. What more could you ask for?
47:33
Interesting. So, I recall if the CMB  fluctuations were because of the 36 fields from —
47:40
Right. — people can watch the earlier  episode to understand what those are. Right. Same kind of fields, yeah. There's a paper by Klöhn and Hell —
47:49
Aha. Good. — about that they won't propagate. No, the paper by Klöhn and Hell — it's  true. The paper's come out criticizing  
47:58
us and saying we're making obvious errors, okay? So, I have responded in great detail to the  journal and — they asked me to referee it. It's  
48:15
hard to say something polite about it, but I will  try. So, they recapitulate various old arguments,  
48:24
one of which is Ostrogradsky. They do  something quite strange in their paper,  
48:32
which is the following. These four-derivative  scalars of the type we introduced for cosmological  
48:42
reasons, and to explain the microwave  background, these four-derivative theories  
48:49
coupled to gravity, okay? But the way we used  them was to say, given a curved background,  
48:58
given a spacetime, put these scalar fields  on and see how they quantum fluctuate. Klöhn  
49:07
and Hell don't do that. They put in the  scalar fields, which couple to gravity,  
49:12
and they treat their action as if it is  the gravitational action. Okay? It's not.
49:21
So, can you explain the difference  between those two approaches? Yeah, so in the one approach you  treat — in the approach we used,  
49:28
because at that time we weren't yet ready to  study quantum gravity, right? So we said, okay,  
49:35
we'll do something simpler, which is to assume a  curved background, but that's just fixed. And then  
49:41
we studied quantum fields on that background.  And actually, the question we were asking is,  
49:49
what is the stress-energy in quantum  fields fluctuating on a fixed background?
49:55
The puzzle we wanted to resolve is, does  that stress-energy make sense? You see,  
50:01
there's a terrible thing about quantum fields,  even in a fixed background, their energy is   infinite. There's what's called a UV divergence.  We were trying to study gravity in two steps.  
50:17
First of all, just take a curved background  with fields on it, then take those fluctuations,  
50:22
calculate the energy in them, and see what  effect those would have on the gravity. Okay? So,  
50:30
it's not a full-blown theory, it's just an attempt  to understand how can gravity possibly couple to  
50:36
quantum fields that have divergent energy?  Right? This is a very fundamental problem.
50:43
So, we were studying these four-derivative  fields on a fixed background. So,  
50:48
Klöhn and Hell took the same model of  these four-derivative fields and said,  
50:53
okay, let's study that as if that describes the  dynamics of gravity. That's not what we were  
51:00
doing. And then they discovered that this is not  a good theory of gravity. Well, you know, so what?  
51:07
It's not what it was invented to do. So we have to  add other terms which describe gravity, and then  
51:13
we have to combine the whole thing. So yeah, their  analysis seemed off the point. And then secondly —
51:20
So their analysis was correct, but  it wasn't what you were saying? I'm not sure it was correct. The paper  is not clearly enough written to tell.
51:27
Okay, but either way, it's  not what you were saying. Totally irrelevant to what we were  saying. The other thing is they  
51:34
repeat the folklore that negative  norm states are not admissible.
51:45
And therefore, they just completely missed  the point, which is in our latest work.
51:50
That, to describe four-derivative theories,   you have to be willing to include negative norm  states. If you just rule them out from step one,  
52:00
you know, I agree with them. The normal  procedures of quantum mechanics don't work,  
52:05
or quantum field theory don't work. But  that's why you have to go beyond them.
52:10
So yeah, I mean, there are lots  of other issues with their paper.   It's actually quite hard to figure out what  they really are saying. But yeah, I think A,  
52:25
they're off point, and B, they don't know  about our new stuff. And when they do,  
52:32
I will be delighted to go and explain and have  them try to poke holes in it. But you know,  
52:38
trying to poke holes is good. All criticism  is welcome. And that's how we make progress.
52:46
Is there anything about the way that you've solved   negative norm states or reinterpreted it  such that it also rescues other theories  
The 36 Fields Mystery
52:54
which were considered dead because  they produce negative norm states? Well, yes, there is. For sure an infinite class  
53:02
of higher-derivative theories  will have the same property.
53:07
That when you take this broader picture  of the Born rule, they will still be   consistent. So yeah, there's an infinite  class of theories waiting to be explored,  
53:16
and they will be renormalizable, and  they could be asymptotically free. So, all we've done is really the simplest one.  We've shown that quantum gravity itself, this  
53:26
quadratic gravity theory, includes one of these  fields. Now, as you know from our earlier work,  
53:33
we needed 36 of them to cancel all of the  divergences in the standard model. So,  
53:41
there was this kind of numerological miracle  that if you take standard model fields and you  
53:46
compute the stress-energy tensor in the standard  model vacuum, all of the infinities go away. The  
53:56
standard model cancels against these other  fields only if there are 36 of them, and only  
54:02
if there are three generations of elementary  particles. So this is the simplest explanation  
54:08
for why there are three generations of elementary  particles. Our explanation involves these fields,  
54:13
but 36 of them. Now, what I've just told you about  with this quadratic gravity only has one of them.
54:19
And we don't yet know how to square the circle.  We don't yet know how to do that. There's 36 in  
54:28
one argument, there's one in the other one. But  at least these two things seem to be different  
54:36
sides or related. So when we get to study the  tensor modes in gravity, this Weyl squared term,  
54:44
if we resolve it in the same way, maybe  that will tell us why there are 36 of them. And maybe the 36 come out of gravity. That's  actually not — would not be that surprising.  
54:54
There are formulations of gravity which  very naturally have 36 objects in them.  
55:00
This is in loop quantum gravity. People  are very familiar with this. It's called   BF theory. And naturally it has  36 of these fields. So, you know,  
55:09
the dream would be that that's somehow  related. But we haven't made that work.
55:14
Is there any relationship between your  latest papers and then Mannheim's,   Bender's, conformal gravity?
55:21
Yeah, we're all trying to  do similar things. Bender   and Mannheim were also puzzled by  these negative norm states, okay?
55:33
And Bender, in particular, has been very  interested in studying quantum Hamiltonians  
55:41
which are superficially unbounded below, okay?  But nevertheless have positive spectra. Okay?  
55:51
Bounded above? No, unbounded above. So, take  a potential which is minus x to the fourth,  
55:58
okay? And study it quantum mechanically. So,  Bender will tell you that when you study it  
56:04
correctly, the allowed energies are all  positive and they go up to infinity. So,  
56:09
it's very counterintuitive. And basically, he  does it by deforming contours in the complex  
56:15
plane. It's a very elegant method. But there's  a slight difference between what we're doing.  
56:24
So you can say it as follows. Bender's method  — and Bender and Mannheim were interested in  
56:32
Weyl gravity. Actually, most people have  these two terms in quadratic gravity. Most  
56:40
people are focused on the Weyl gravity,  because it has more symmetry. There's no  
56:47
length scale. It is invariant under locally  rescaling. It has no scalar in the language.
56:55
The Ricci squared term has a scalar. So  we discovered that there's a limit where  
57:02
you can just ignore the Weyl squared and  everything is in the scalar. That's what   we've been studying. Bender and Mannheim's focus  was precisely on this Weyl squared in gravity,  
57:12
because they think maybe that's the kind of  fundamental theory, has more symmetry. But  
57:19
they still had to get rid of the negative norm  states. They did it in a way which essentially  
57:26
does the following. I've got some states which  have negative norm. And so, I just redefine my  
57:33
inner product to put a minus one in front of  those when I have two negative norm states.
57:41
What we've shown in our papers — and this gets  very interesting — is doing that is not covariant.
57:47
Okay. That is not consistent with spacetime  invariance. You pick a particular frame and  
57:55
you work in that frame. And so their  procedure, I believe, will not give a  
58:04
consistent quantum field theory. It'll break the  basic symmetries in the theory. So far, they've  
58:10
only really applied it in quantum mechanics,  which is a lot easier than field theory.
58:15
Field theory, you've got to respect  Lorentz symmetry, translation symmetry,  
58:22
and if you sort of do a brute force change  of the inner product, you will mess those up.
58:29
So, yeah, we're all circling around the  same problem. We claim that our resolution  
58:38
is the only covariant one. It's the only one  that fully respects the symmetries of the theory.
58:45
So, it's definitely preferred. And we claim  that if they did do more detailed calculations,  
58:51
they're going to discover problems. Wouldn't  be surprising. They've only analyzed it at  
58:56
a very elementary level. But no, Mannheim  and Bender and us are often in discussion  
59:04
about these things. And Mannheim even claims  that this Weyl squared gravity can solve the  
59:11
dark matter puzzle. Right? So he claims it  produces galaxy rotation curves without the  
59:17
need for dark matter and things like that.  So he's super ambitious with this program,   as we are. We think his framework doesn't  quite work. He will undoubtedly think ours  
59:28
doesn't for some reason, but we discuss  in a very collegial manner. And we're all  
59:35
after the same thing, which is a simpler  explanation for the properties we see.
59:41
I was just interviewed by someone from  New York Magazine who was asking me   about someone else's theory, not related to  physics actually, but someone else's theory,  
59:49
and then she was asking me, well, what do you  think of all the criticisms about the theory?   Then I said, you have to be specific  about which criticism, because the mere  
59:57
presence of criticism — that's every single  theory. When you're a champion of theory A,  
1:00:02
you're going to criticize theory B for a  variety of reasons. This is just how it works.
Orthodoxy vs. Revolutionary Ideas
1:00:10
The critics will see something you  missed. If the theory is wrong,   I'd rather know today than tomorrow, right?  Because I don't want to waste my time on it  
1:00:20
if it's wrong. If somebody points out a flaw, you  should welcome that. But of course you try to see  
1:00:29
if it's real or have they made a mistake.  I think that in the early 20th century,  
1:00:38
1910s, 1920s, when people were developing  quantum mechanics and GR and all the  
1:00:44
foundations of modern physics, there was  this very intense debate. Einstein's theory  
1:00:50
of gravity wasn't the first one. There was  Nordström, and there were very other people. There's Whitehead as well.
1:00:55
Whitehead had a theory? Exactly. And they're  all in turmoil, criticizing each other like mad,  
1:01:02
and the best theory survives. So, I very much  hope we will go into a phase like that. The  
1:01:10
field needs it desperately. The orthodoxy — string  theory has become an orthodoxy, which is terrible  
1:01:18
for the field, but it's an orthodoxy without  any predictions. You know, that's really sad.
1:01:24
If all the young people are working in a  framework which doesn't make any testable  
1:01:29
predictions about the real world, the whole  goal of the field becomes lost. So I think  
1:01:37
it's really important that people are pursuing  different approaches. They should be as simple  
1:01:43
as possible and as testable as possible, and we  should try to rule them out as quickly as we can.
1:01:50
But, you know, what we've discovered in our work  is this loophole, this little loophole. People   had all been assuming any sensible quantum  field theory must live in a Hilbert space,  
1:01:59
and it turns out that assumption's not correct.  You know, something as elementary as that — there  
1:02:06
may be other things. And we need to know what  they are, and we need to start pushing on those  
1:02:12
axioms to see if by varying them a little  bit, we will find the right answer.
1:02:19
You know, what drives me is that  the observations are so simple.  
1:02:24
That, for reasons we don't understand, the  universe seems to be extremely simple in  
1:02:31
its laws on very tiny scales and on very  large scales. All the complexity is on  
1:02:37
human scales. Right? I mean, stars are quite  simple, much simpler than people. Right? So,  
1:02:43
the complexity — certainly, you  know — atoms are pretty simple.
1:02:50
Fully characterize an atom. Then you get to, you  know, materials, they're getting more complicated,  
1:02:55
and then you get to bacteria, which are  very complicated, and you get living things,   and people, we're incredibly complicated.  But if you keep going to larger scales,  
1:03:04
things start simplifying again. I mean,  the planet is pretty simple. The Earth,   the Sun — you go to the larger scale, things  get simpler and simpler. We see black holes,  
1:03:14
which are very big, but they're extremely  simple. A black hole just has a mass,   angular momentum, charge, you know, it's like  an elementary particle. Then you get to the  
1:03:23
whole universe. Again, it's astonishingly  simple on large scales. So, you know,  
1:03:31
what I think of our job as physicists is to  understand the simple things, the very small, the  
1:03:39
very large. And those seem to be incredibly well  modeled by very precise mathematical formulae.
1:03:48
That doesn't explain everything at all.  It only explains the extremes. And then  
1:03:54
we have to somehow understand how this  interaction between the very large and   the very small ends up producing complexity  and life and consciousness and all these  
1:04:04
wonderful things which physics is not ready to  address yet, because it's just too difficult.
1:04:12
Is there a reason why the universe at the large   scales should also be simple? I  understand at the small scales —
1:04:18
I don't think there's a reason.  Well, I would say the following.  
1:04:25
I was very privileged to know and work with  Stephen Hawking, who was probably the most  
1:04:31
profound thinker about gravity, within  a large group of very profound thinkers.
1:04:37
Hawking was building on DeWitt and John Wheeler.  So the field of gravity and quantum gravity,  
1:04:49
attempts to do quantum gravity, did  attract some pretty amazing people,   and Hawking was one of them. So Hawking  introduced this concept of gravitational entropy.
1:05:02
Now, entropy is a very profound principle in  physics which explains macroscopic properties.  
1:05:09
So take air in a room. Why is it  smoothly distributed in the room?  
1:05:16
That maximizes the entropy.  That's just a typical state.
1:05:24
So, Hawking did the same — Hawking realized how  to define entropy for a spacetime and gravity. So,  
1:05:33
he associated an entropy with a black  hole. And what we did a few years ago is  
1:05:41
generalize his arguments to cosmologies. You can  associate an entropy with a different cosmology.
1:05:48
And what we find, using Hawking's  definition of entropy, which is   tremendously elegant mathematically, is  that the most probable, or the universe  
1:05:59
with the greatest number of microstates,  is smooth, is homogeneous and isotropic,  
1:06:06
and spatially flat, just like ours, and has to  have a small positive cosmological constant.  
1:06:15
This is a consequence of Hawking's formulation  of entropy. So why is the universe so simple on  
1:06:21
large scales? Same reason that a roomful of air  is almost uniform. It's just a typical state.
1:06:29
Now, it's very interesting, because in  cosmology, people traditionally took  
1:06:34
the point of view that the problem was  to understand the initial conditions.
Gravitational Entropy and Smoothness
1:06:40
You know, for some reason we don't understand,  somebody injected or somebody set off a universe.
1:06:46
And then the big puzzle is why did they start  a universe in such a smooth state that when  
1:06:53
it got big, it would be as smooth as we see it?  You know, that was very paradoxical. They would  
1:07:00
have to start the universe out in this incredibly  special state for it to end up so smooth. I mean,  
1:07:06
if it was lumpy initially, it would have  just collapsed early on or fragmented   or made black holes. It doesn't do that.  On large scales, it's incredibly simple.
1:07:16
So that was a big puzzle. So they  said, we've got to start it. So  
1:07:24
they imagined somebody started  the universe in a random state,  
1:07:30
and then they wanted a dynamics — inflation —  to smooth it out and make it big and smooth.  
1:07:41
The room full of gas, which I mentioned,  doesn't require anyone to smooth it out. It's just typical. But there  are sort of two points of view.  
1:07:49
One point of view in thermodynamics is  called ergodicity. And the argument is,  
1:07:57
even if I put the molecules in the room  in one corner and the rest was vacuum,  
1:08:04
if I let it go, they will bang around  and smooth themselves out. And so the  
1:08:10
argument is that if you let the system evolve,  it's going to find the typical state itself.
1:08:16
That's a traditional view of thermodynamics.  But there's another — and this is the same  
1:08:23
as the inflationists' view. They said, look,  there's basically no time for the universe to  
1:08:32
smooth itself out. You know, it's only been 14  billion years. It's not in equilibrium. It came  
1:08:40
out of a Big Bang. There wasn't time. This is  where the horizon argument comes in. They said,  
1:08:46
you know, two patches of space that were causally  disconnected couldn't interact. So how could they  
1:08:53
smooth themselves out? It's impossible. But  that's within the philosophy of ergodicity.
1:09:00
Now there's another philosophy which says, no,  ergodicity has nothing to do with thermodynamics,   okay? What you do is you put your molecules in  a room, you quantize them — it's very important,  
1:09:12
because that makes the states discrete. And  then you say, okay, what are the quantum  
1:09:19
states which are consistent with the macroscopic  observables? The total energy in the room,   the total number of atoms? That's a subset of  the quantum states that are consistent with the   macroscopic observables. The total energy  in the room, the total number of atoms —
1:09:28
That's a subset of the quantum states.  And then I just pick one at random. Okay,  
1:09:35
because it's discrete, it provides a measure,  right? There's a finite number of states,   and they're all equally likely, so just pick  one. And what you'll find is a typical state  
1:09:45
looks exactly like the room. It's smooth,  homogeneous, because those are typical. You  
1:09:52
don't need any dynamics to get a typical  configuration. Just pick it out of a hat.
1:09:58
So with cosmology, that, I believe, is  the right way to look at the universe.   You don't need dynamics to smooth  it out. You just need a measure.  
1:10:09
You need a way of counting the different possible  states of a spacetime. That's kind of, you know,  
1:10:16
it's a bit mind-boggling that I have to think  about the entire history of the universe and ask   how many different histories are there? But in  general relativity, that's what you have to do.
1:10:25
The basic object is a spacetime. And you must  count how many states there are for a spacetime.  
1:10:31
But this is exactly what Hawking's formula  does. So we just applied Hawking's formula,  
1:10:38
you see how many states there are, and then you  see which macroscopic parameters correspond to  
1:10:44
more states. And you find that there are more  states when the universe is smooth, for just the  
1:10:50
same reason that there are more states for gas in  a room when it's smooth. It's very unlikely that   all the molecules are in one corner. And so, yes,  the point of view of simply counting states is,  
1:11:05
I believe, a much more profound view and much more  appropriate for cosmology. And certainly nobody's  
1:11:10
started the universe. If the universe has some  kind of self-contained existence, which is the  
1:11:19
most economical possibility, right? Otherwise,  we need some other thing than the universe.
1:11:28
I'm always interested in the simplest possibility,   because I think it's likely to be the most  testable. If the universe kind of defines itself,  
1:11:39
then all we need to do is to see which  — applying whatever condition we have,  
1:11:48
we have the CPT symmetric condition, which allows  us to count the states using Hawking's method.
1:11:56
But other people may have other proposals  for kind of the beginning of the universe,   or what is — how does the universe become  self-contained? Count the number of possibilities  
1:12:06
and just pick the typical one. And if your theory  says this is typical, then it's a good theory.
1:12:15
Why is simplicity so important? Because it leads to — well,  why is simplicity important?
1:12:24
It's important because it's what we see  in nature. Okay, I honestly believe that  
1:12:31
for some reason we do not understand, the  universe is able to teach us about its laws,  
1:12:43
and that's very fruitful, because when  we learn about its laws by observing  
1:12:48
it and even experimenting with it, that  knowledge becomes incredibly powerful.
1:12:57
So, yeah, it's a deep mystery why the universe  is comprehensible. Part of that mystery is that,  
1:13:05
of course, we have evolved precisely by  understanding the universe. So we have sort  
1:13:11
of crept along this path of understanding, but  it's still a mystery why is that possible? Why  
1:13:16
is it possible to learn about the universe  from within? But it's a wonderful mystery.
1:13:24
And very compelling. You know, if we can learn  about it, let's do it. See where it leads us.
1:13:31
So, I believe in simplicity just because the  universe has turned out to be astonishingly  
1:13:37
simple. I mean, this goes back to  Pythagoras. Pythagoras, you know,  
1:13:43
who understood geometry, talked  about the harmonies in the heavens.
1:13:48
And he realized music is nothing but — or,  how should I say, harmonies are mathematical  
1:13:56
in nature. Music sounds good because, you know,  when things are sort of in the right ratios. And  
1:14:04
then he thought that geometry also would apply in  the heavens. And so that was a sort of philosophy  
1:14:12
which led to people like Galileo trying to  figure out, what are these mathematical laws?
1:14:19
And that worked! I mean, the inverse square  law discovered by Newton, incredibly powerful,  
1:14:27
universal law. Why does it exist? We don't  really know. But as physics has evolved,  
1:14:34
it's become more and more complete.  And my point of view is that maybe  
1:14:41
the physics we already know is 99.9% of the story.
1:14:48
It has internal contradictions, but it may  be just as fruitful to try to resolve those  
1:14:55
contradictions in as minimal a manner as possible.  That may be more fruitful than going off down some  
1:15:04
diverging path which is driven by prejudices. So  I think we've always got to keep an open mind,  
1:15:14
but what keeps us honest is this  search for simple explanations.  
1:15:20
And for me, that's the most important thing in  theoretical physics, not to lose sight of that.  
1:15:26
It's not mathematics. I mean, mathematics is —  you know, I shouldn't say just, because physics  
1:15:35
sort of feeds on mathematics. So mathematics is  extremely important. But in mathematics, it's  
1:15:41
much less constrained. You just invent logical  frameworks and try to see where they lead you.
1:15:48
Whereas in physics, the focus is on which of  those frameworks actually describe nature.
1:15:56
So what if a string theorist and a many-worlder  said to you, "Neil, we also care about simplicity.  
1:16:02
Actually, string theory is the simplest theory  that comes out of extremely minimal assumptions,   minimal zeros, ultra-softness, and then the rest,  Lorentz invariance and so forth. You agree with  
Multiverse Measure Problem
1:16:14
many-worlders. We actually care so much about  the measurement problem, we can do away with   the projection axiom. So we are actually minimal  in that we're shaving, and as a consequence you  
1:16:24
get some proliferations. But we're not seeking  to have so many children. We're not seeking."
1:16:31
They are looking for a simple picture. They're  certainly looking for a unified simple picture,  
1:16:37
but without — yeah, so they would argue  that inevitably as a consequence of  
1:16:46
their simplifications they have made, they get  enormous complexity in some respects. I mean,  
1:16:53
I think nobody could argue that a multiverse is  the most complex thing you can imagine. Okay, so  
1:16:59
when they say that our prescription for simplicity  leads to a multiverse, I definitely think they are  
1:17:09
obligated to go back and list very carefully what  their assumptions were. And as I mentioned, one of  
1:17:17
them is that quantum mechanics requires a Hilbert  space. Okay? And I think our work shows that's  
1:17:23
not true. And given that one of the assumptions,  which they didn't even make explicit, has turned  
1:17:31
out to be possible to violate, the whole story  about a multiverse being mandatory, I think,  
1:17:39
is in doubt. Now, I never liked the multiverse  anyway, because I felt that if it really is true  
1:17:47
that that's the unique, consistent theory, physics  is over. But that's a prejudice on my part.
1:18:00
So, yeah, but I think the important  point is we really have to look at   your assumptions very carefully if  it leads you to crazy conclusions.  
1:18:07
I do regard many worlds as an equally crazy  conclusion, which is — the state, you know,  
1:18:15
it's just this enormous redundancy. You've  got a theoretical framework in which you  
1:18:20
have all these universes branching and running in  parallel, and the branches get bigger and bigger.
1:18:28
And I strongly suspect this is completely  ill-defined. I mean, I don't think anybody  
1:18:34
claims — you know, when spaces become too  infinite, you just can't do math on them,  
1:18:41
right? It's not in control. And it's always  the same problem, is that there is no measure.
1:18:48
And so, when I tell you a funny story, when  multiverse ideas first started getting popular  
1:18:55
in particle physics, I had a friend who knew  — now what's his name in A Beautiful Mind,  
1:19:01
the mathematician? John Nash. John Nash.  Okay. So John Nash was obviously a very  
1:19:07
brilliant foundational thinker about  mathematics, right? And pretty crazy,  
1:19:13
as such people are. But a friend of mine  started worrying about the multiverse,   and a friend of mine went to ask John Nash,  you know, what do you — now, actually,  
1:19:22
it wasn't even the multiverse. In inflation,  you find bubbles which are called — Alan Guth  
1:19:32
calls them pocket universes. Within the universe,  you get a pocket universe, which is infinite in  
1:19:40
extent. And now you kind of have to ask, where  do I live? And so there's the measure problem.
1:19:47
Right, right. Inflation has this measure problem, nobody's  ever solved it. So, a friend of mine went to  
1:19:53
Nash and said, "Can you define a measure  on an infinite space?" And Nash says, "No,  
1:20:00
it's ridiculous. No chance." So, unless you have  
1:20:06
some special symmetries or something  that really guides you, you are lost.
1:20:13
If your theory makes a randomly infinite  space, you know, goodbye. It's not going  
1:20:21
to be a predictive theory. And I suspect the many  worlds picture suffers from the same problem, that  
1:20:29
nobody's ever going to really be able to quantify  probabilities or anything. It's a bad nightmare.
1:20:38
I will see, maybe it'll turn out to be — maybe  they will do. But, yeah, but I think it's — so  
1:20:47
for me, simplicity leads to predictivity, you  know, leads to understanding. And that's a kind  
1:20:54
of virtuous cycle. And we can never give up on  that. And it's very easy to go off-piste. Okay.
1:21:06
And convince yourself that, you know, this crazy  scenario is a logical consequence of your theory,  
1:21:18
whereas in fact you're blind to  your own assumptions. That's the  
1:21:26
biggest gripe I have about contemporary physics.
1:21:36
The most popular orthodoxies, both in particle  physics, cosmology, and so on. These orthodoxies  
1:21:44
are insufficiently self-critical, and  especially they tell young people,  
1:21:50
"It has to be this way." Okay. Whereas I think  it's much more valuable to tell young people,  
1:21:58
you know, "We've reached this crazy conclusion,  can you figure out a way out of it?"
1:22:07
And just be honest about the limitations and  the unlikelihood of your framework actually  
1:22:12
being valid. I mean, I'm always open to  and encourage young people to criticize  
1:22:24
my framework as much as everyone else's. And  if there's a real flaw, we should want to know  
1:22:30
as soon as possible. But rather few people are  thinking about the foundations of the framework.
1:22:36
Rather few people. Too many people are just  recycling orthodox ideas. You're in a unique  
1:22:43
position. You used to be the head of Perimeter,  in charge of Perimeter. How do you see the health  
1:22:49
of theoretical physics? It's a wonderful field.  It's a miraculous field. I mean, our predecessors  
1:22:59
did unbelievable things. Dirac and Maxwell and  Einstein and Newton, you know, these are — I  
Theoretical Physics Health
1:23:06
think what they achieved is just — is still — the  more we understand, the more miraculous it seems.
1:23:13
I think the field has been very  poor about strategizing its own   future. Theorists like me are so  fascinated with what they're doing,  
1:23:23
they don't actually spend the time to  think, how do we keep the field healthy?
1:23:30
And especially all about young people and about  encouraging diversity of cultures, of outlooks,  
1:23:38
of origins, of, you know, points of view. Too  often the older people encourage orthodoxy,  
1:23:46
which is very unhealthy. So, yeah, I think it's  rather poor at looking after itself and keeping  
1:23:54
healthy. Perimeter was an incredible opportunity  because it had very good support from a donor,  
1:24:02
the government matched it, and we had amazing  freedom. So I enjoyed it like crazy. It's doing  
1:24:10
very well now. But to be honest, I feel that in  my role as director, who built it substantially, I  
1:24:20
was probably too conservative. The whole challenge  is to persuade government to keep funding you.
1:24:30
It's not going to be a punt. I think  it's the easiest to make the case if   you're getting high citations and  you're, you know, stealing people  
1:24:36
from Harvard or whatever known places. So  the temptation is to evaluate yourself by  
1:24:46
the standards of the majority or the orthodoxy.  And I think that's unfortunate because it's  
1:24:55
really crucial to the health of the field to  promote people doing unorthodox directions.
1:25:03
It's not enough of that happening. So my worry  about Perimeter is that it must continue to  
1:25:09
promote foundational thinking and especially  young people who are questioning the orthodoxy.  
1:25:16
That's tough to do in today's climate where  people are worried about getting jobs and  
1:25:22
next grant and everything seems insecure. But I  think the very instability of the world today,  
1:25:30
although it's awful, and frightening and worrying  — we're all, who knows what will happen with AI.  
1:25:36
There are all kinds of wars going on. The global  order is breaking down maybe. So, terribly  
1:25:42
worrying things, as bad as they are, I'm not in  favor of them, but that in itself is incredibly  
1:25:48
stimulating of people who are questioning.  You know, if the world is totally stable,  
1:25:56
then there's no real incentive to question  things. So, the very instability of the  
1:26:02
world tends to promote unorthodox thinking. You  know, people say, "Look, the world's crazy. Okay,  
1:26:12
so I'm going to focus on this little corner of  intellectual thought." And, you know, it's very  
1:26:18
rewarding. I mean, you must find this running your  podcast. It takes you out of the real world and  
1:26:24
all of its problems. And you're looking for beauty  and simplicity and inner fulfillment, right?
1:26:33
And that's great for foundational thinking.  So, I do think we're entering a phase where  
1:26:40
I am expecting revolutionary ideas to  come out. And that's very exciting. And,  
1:26:48
you know, it's not that hard to be a researcher,  certainly in theoretical physics these days.  
1:26:55
You can go to a coffee shop, you've got a  laptop. You know, a laptop's very powerful,   even if you want to do some  math, computations, or whatever.
1:27:03
So, it is becoming much more accessible. And  your podcast — somebody wants to know what's,  
1:27:11
you know, important in physics, they can learn  much faster than they could 10 years ago,   thanks to your podcast and other things.  So, I think that's very interesting.  
1:27:21
A lot of people, I get email all the  time from people saying, "I've got   a much better theory than yours. Help."  But, you know, that's good. It's healthy.
1:27:32
People are trying these things. What you have to  do is try to see how to — I mean, obviously you  
1:27:39
need some kind of filter. Not every — a lot of  cranks out there too, but we have to strategize  
1:27:47
the field. So somebody very bright, very original,  can very quickly get to a place where their ideas  
1:27:56
can be critiqued by experts who can tell  them, you know, "You're wasting your time."
1:28:05
I hope Perimeter can play some of that role.
1:28:31
Well, thank you for coming to  Canada, for Toronto to come. It's such a pleasure to meet you in person.  And congratulations on everything you're  
1:28:40
doing. I think it's awesome. Thank you. And  well, to the extent people like the podcast,   it's for the guests, so thank you. No, no  problem. Anytime. Anytime. No, I would — you know,  
1:28:54
if you're interested in talking to my student Sam,  this guy Sam Bateman is an interesting example  
1:29:00
because he came to Edinburgh. He's from Ireland,  where they teach a very mathematical curriculum.
1:29:17
I'm not sure I want to do this, but  you know, let me just have a look,   which is the best attitude. And so he  did a little project with me. It didn't  
1:29:27
particularly work out, but you know, he  sort of enjoyed it. So the end of the year,   he said, "I'm not sure I want to  do a PhD, but yeah, let me try."
1:29:37
So, unlucky for him, he started doing a PhD with  me. And I gave him this impossible problem. You  
1:29:45
know, because I thought the sky could be  interpreted as a four-derivative theory,  
1:29:53
let's try to quantize four-derivative theories,  seriously. Now, anybody else would tell you this  
1:29:58
is impossible. You know, you're just killing this  guy's career. And sure enough, after four years,  
Sam Bateman’s Breakthrough
1:30:07
we had made very modest progress, right. We'd  looked at Bender and Mannheim and there's  
1:30:12
actually a whole literature. Lots of people trying  different directions, none of which really worked.  
1:30:20
And then last September, when his funding had  run out, okay, Sam says, "I think I know how it  
1:30:28
works," you know, and indeed. And all it took is  a slight tweak of the Born rule, you know, which —
1:30:37
And financial insecurity. And financial insecurity, right. He's relieved of  that. And the conviction that he's not going to  
1:30:44
get a job. Okay, so, don't worry about it.  And suddenly it all clicks together. Okay,  
1:30:51
so, then what happens is, now, so, this is a  PhD student with no papers, right. And that's  
1:31:00
my fault, because I said, undoable problem.  But then somebody comes to visit Edinburgh.
1:31:07
A guy called Raju Venugopalan, who's probably  the world-leading expert in non-linear quantum  
1:31:15
field theory effects like QCD. He's now  director of the only funded accelerator  
1:31:21
in the world at Brookhaven. So, Raju comes  and he's a very, very good quantum field  
1:31:28
theorist and he meets Sam and Sam is giving  informal talks. And Raju realizes, "Oh my God,  
1:31:36
there's something here," right. And so next  thing, Sam got offered a postdoc at the Simons  
1:31:44
Center in Stony Brook. Wow. With zero papers. Holy  moly. So that's where Sam's going. But actually,  
1:31:54
Raju is having so much fun in Edinburgh, he's  extended his visits to December. And so the three  
1:32:00
of us can work together. But you know, that's  the way it should work. All this chasing papers —
1:32:07
And Sam is this unworldly guy who's only doing it  because he likes doing it. And in the process of,  
1:32:20
you know, it's kind of miraculous. You  discover a little thing you can do. It's   not so little. He had to master covariant  quantization of field theory. The textbook  
1:32:31
of this was written by Bogoliubov,  the most recent one in the '80s.
1:32:37
Huge textbook, rigorous algebraic quantum  field theory. Okay, I guarantee you 99% of all  
1:32:48
practicing theorists have never even opened this  book. It's too heavy. Sam learnt how to quantize  
1:32:55
this four-derivative theory from this and other  books. And for me, this is not my specialty. I  
1:33:03
mean, I was much more applied in calculating CMB  anisotropy and things like cosmology. I mean,  
1:33:11
it did work with Hawking, but I'm not a very  sophisticated mathematician in any way. So,  
1:33:17
you know, Sam brought that and then we worked  together. It's very, very exciting. So now Sam  
1:33:24
is absolutely determined to continue in quantum  field theory. And yeah, it might be interesting  
1:33:33
for you to do a podcast with him or other  students. See, what do they make of it?
1:33:39
I mean, in that current situation,  they're terribly confused. I mean,  
1:33:47
imagine you go into theoretical physics today,  and there's string theory, which isn't really   working. There's Lenny Susskind telling you,  "I know the answer, it's holography," right,  
1:33:56
but I don't know how to do it. And, you know, I  encourage a student to do it. I mean, would you  
1:34:02
go and do it with him? You know, his track record  is — I mean, he's a brilliant guy, but the track   record isn't that great. He's been advocating  string theory for 50 years. It hasn't panned out.  
1:34:15
So yeah, it's a really confusing time. Or  you just go into astrophysics and deal with  
1:34:22
data and observations and so on. But, you  know, the stuff you're interested in and   I'm interested in is the deeper theoretical  questions. And there are some students who  
1:34:31
really want to do that. But there's not really  good environments for them. Even Perimeter.
1:34:40
I said it's sort of too dominated by orthodoxy.  What do you mean? You keep saying orthodoxy and  
1:34:47
conservatism. Specifically, what are you referring  to? Well, you encounter it all the time. I mean,  
1:34:55
people — most often in referee reports. So  you submit a paper and because the sheer  
1:35:03
volume of papers now being published means  that any one paper can't get more than sort  
1:35:11
of five or 10 minutes of a referee's time. I  feel just drowning. And so they have a quick  
1:35:18
look and they say, "Hey, I don't think this  is consistent with B." And they, you know,  
1:35:24
send it back and reject it. So they're not  really — I mean, there are some good referees,  
1:35:29
but by and large, and grants decided in similar  way, very rapidly, very superficial arguments.
1:35:39
And jobs, the worst thing. I mean, you  just ask any young person, any postdoc,  
1:35:46
who's getting offers. And the one  getting the offer will be the one   working on a popular paradigm. And most of  these paradigms have in the end not been  
1:35:59
successful. So why are all the jobs  in paradigms which haven't worked?
1:36:06
So then another side effect is that string theory  has had big spin-off into math departments. So  
1:36:13
lots of math departments have hired people to do  string theory. And those people in general don't  
1:36:20
care about observational predictions. They're  just interested in the formalism. And so I'm  
1:36:28
happy for them that they've got jobs, but, you  know, it's tended to sort of, you know, dilute  
1:36:35
the field. Now the field becomes about  mathematical issues which are not related,  
1:36:41
like supersymmetry. Supersymmetry is a huge  thing in math departments. Why? You know,  
1:36:47
because it's mathematics. I don't think it's a  particularly exciting mathematics, but it can be  
1:36:52
good mathematics. It's not earth-shattering. But  it's not physics. And so for a young person, they  
1:37:04
tend to get steered in the direction where there  are jobs. They get into mathematical formalisms,  
1:37:11
conformal field theories, and other ones. It's  a great subject. But, you know, by and large,   it's nothing to do with reality. And that's  where the jobs are. And that's — so there are  
1:37:24
the few people thinking about the foundations  of physics as they relate to actuality. Yeah.
1:37:31
I was speaking to Harvey Friedman,  who's a mathematician who invented   reverse mathematics. I don't know  if you've heard of him. He's also  
1:37:38
the youngest professor ever, at  least at the time, 18 years old.
1:37:44
I read about this. Or maybe it was  from your podcast. Anyway, yeah.
1:37:49
Hired at Stanford. So right. Okay, so — I saw this, yeah. When I was speaking with him, I realized —  I should have realized this sooner — he's  
1:37:57
interested in the foundations of math and I'm  interested in the foundations of math, physics,   biology. I'm interested in foundations in general.
1:38:03
Right. Actually, two years ago, I had a lecture series  called Rethinking the Foundations of Physics,  
1:38:09
Rethinking the Foundations of Biology,  and then one other which I can't recall. But you gave the first lecture. So right. So yeah,  I'm terribly — I remember that. Okay, yes. Thank  
1:38:20
you. No, pleasure. I think that is so important.  And I wish for my own career, if only when I was,  
1:38:29
you know, 20 years old, if I had realized — if I  could give myself advice, you know, back then I  
1:38:36
would have said, "Work hard on the foundations."  You know, instead I got my PhD place.
1:38:42
I listened to my advisor. He said, "Here's an  interesting problem, go and work on it." You know,   it took me a year to figure out it wasn't  that interesting. And I didn't question  
1:38:53
the orthodoxy enough. That, you know, what  was in fashion was grand unified theories  
1:38:59
and people worried about magnetic monopoles  and cosmic strings. There were all kinds of,  
1:39:05
you know, things people were worried about.  And I spent very little time worrying about  
1:39:12
the foundations of quantum mechanics,  of gravity, and I wish I'd spent more.  
1:39:20
And I would advise young people now, that's  the most important stuff. If you actually  
1:39:26
want to discover something, the more time  you can spend on foundations, the better.
1:39:31
Do you think the aversion to it is not only job  prospects, the lack of them, but also there's the  
1:39:37
twin fear that that's where the crackpots  tend to be, and I don't want to be that?
1:39:42
Maybe that's also in line with the  lack of job prospects. Absolutely.   Absolutely. And it's not without foundation.
1:39:48
And I put crackpots in quotations. I'm not   derisive — I'm just saying that  these are quotes that I've heard.
1:39:53
No, no. That's absolutely true. I mean, when  I was a postdoc, I was in Santa Barbara,   and a guy came — I think it was — I can't remember  his name. I don't want to say it wrong. But a guy  
1:40:06
came to give a lecture about the foundations  of quantum mechanics. And it was so woolly.   It was sort of French philosophy at its worst.  And he rambled on and on about foundations of  
1:40:17
quantum mechanics and we just thought this was  the biggest joke. And it probably was. Okay,  
1:40:23
but then what happened is people started working  on quantum foundations who actually were, yeah,  
1:40:36
a little bit more mathematical. There was  this prospect of quantum computing which  
1:40:41
kind of focused the mind on what is really  important. So there was an idea of actually  
1:40:46
testing these ideas and designing experiments,  like you mentioned the guy at Toronto. Oh,  
1:40:56
Aephraim Steinberg. Steinberg, yeah. So and his  advisor was Yakir Aharonov. Oh right, right.
1:41:03
It's all about Gedanken experiments and can  we prove the weirdness of quantum mechanics  
1:41:10
in various contexts. And that was really  fruitful. So that's foundations, but with a  
1:41:17
very strong focus on actually seeing stuff and  testing stuff. And that's fruitful. So yeah,  
1:41:25
I think foundations when it becomes — if you  like, I mean, I love philosophy, but when it  
1:41:30
becomes pure philosophy with no implications for  anything, then, you know, it's less interesting.  
1:41:40
But, yeah, I think the best philosophy is actually  relevant philosophy in some way. Telling us how to  
1:41:50
live our lives, or how we shouldn't live our  lives, or what the meaning of our lives are,  
1:41:57
why life is amazing, and challenging.  Philosophy is very good at challenging.
1:42:05
I'm not teaching physics and saying,  you know, you're not making sense.
1:42:11
Actually, Scott Aaronson said that  he's never had to choose his words   more carefully than he did around philosophers.
1:42:18
Right, which sounds like the opposite of what  most mathematicians, physicists, scientists   tend to think. They think philosophers are those  wishy-washy, unfalsifiable, ill-defined people.
1:42:28
It depends on the philosopher.  There are people like that,   but there are a lot of very  rigorous thinkers in philosophy.
1:42:35
And I think their skeptical turn of mind is  extremely helpful. Because then they will  
1:42:41
press you to say, you know, is what you're  saying actually meaningful? So no, I think  
1:42:48
it's very fruitful interactions. But somehow the  people who do make advances in physics are more  
1:42:55
concerned — that kind of young people questioning  the axioms of physics and trying to vary them.
1:43:04
And explore to what extent we've argued  ourselves into a corner. Can we get out  
1:43:12
of the corner? You know, those are the  young people. I think it's always true   that the youngest people are going to  be the most important for the future.
1:43:21
So. Jacob Barandes, who's a philosopher of  physics, he said that if you have money and you're  
1:43:27
watching and you want to donate, the highest ROI  comes from the philosophy of physics to actually  
Philosophy of Cosmology
1:43:33
produce fruitful new physics. Why? Because there's  such a tiny amount of philosophers of physics.
1:43:38
So that's true. And then if you actually  look at what they produced — so David   Deutsch with quantum computing. So right. Weak  measurements. So that's true. Entanglement,  
1:43:47
Bell's theorem. So that's true. John  Bell. Exactly. Yeah, I think that's true.  
1:43:52
Funding should look at the under-populated  areas. And in fact, that was the secret  
1:43:59
of Perimeter's success, is that when  Perimeter started, nobody was supported.
1:44:37
I would say more broadly, quantum mechanics  isn't the only game in town. You know,  
1:44:43
quantum mechanics is the non-relativistic  version. When you bring in relativity and  
1:44:48
quantum field theory and gravity, that's  where the power of physics really becomes  
1:44:53
extraordinary. And in cosmology it's  more incredible than anywhere else.
1:44:59
So I think the quantum — the philosophers of  quantum mechanics are only looking at a very   limited corner. It's tough because to do cosmology  you've got to essentially know all of physics,  
1:45:12
right? All of physics is involved and  that's a big field. So it's scary and   you've got to deal with — and so I think  there's a danger in philosophy is that  
1:45:23
you will end up just studying a little  corner of some small aspect of physics.  
1:45:28
Whereas the big questions about physics  are, yeah, ultimately involve cosmology.
1:45:35
There are surprisingly few philosophers of  QFT and philosophers of GR. There's some,   but there's surprisingly few.
1:45:42
Very few. And then I don't think I've ever heard  of a philosopher of cosmology. But if   you're watching, please, I would like to know.
1:45:50
I think that's a very good point. If somebody  started a course in philosophy of cosmology,  
1:45:56
it probably attracts a vast number of  students. And yeah, it has so much to offer.  
1:46:06
You have all kinds of wild ideas like the  steady state theory, and then there's inflation,  
1:46:11
and there's, you know — but most of all, we have  these unbelievable observations. We're seeing  
1:46:18
black holes merge, and, you know, so we really are  in a golden age for the field, observationally.  
1:46:26
And we're very poor in terms of the theoretical  range of ideas to make sense of it all.
1:46:34
The universe is helping us because after all,  it's really simple. And it's basically fitting  
1:46:41
extremely simple ideas, but, you know, why,   where does that simplicity come from?  What are the principles governing it?
1:46:49
You know, in fact, I learned an interesting  proposal, which probably has some merit.
1:46:56
You know, you could ask the question,  why is the universe the way it is?   Why are the laws the way they  are? And maybe it's the minimum  
1:47:04
you need to produce complexity at this level. So  this can sound a little bit like the anthropic  
1:47:12
principle, but that's not what I'm saying, you  know. It's nothing to do with human beings,   per se. It's self-organizing. The universe  has this capacity to produce structures.
1:47:25
So let me see if I got that correct. So first  let's imagine we can quantify complexity. So we  
1:47:31
can look at a variety of universes and say  this universe has complexity number 1,000,   this one has 10,000, this one  has 5,000. So then I ask, okay,  
1:47:39
what is the shortest program in  a sense to produce this 10,001? So exactly. And then this one, and then  this one. So exactly. And then I say,  
1:47:46
what is the ratio — the largest  ratio between — the most efficient. So right, right. So yeah, yeah, yeah. So  okay, that's interesting. So it may well be.
1:47:55
I think that's correct. I think it's  a very attractive idea that somehow  
1:48:00
the universe is optimal at producing  complexity out of simplicity. And it  
1:48:08
certainly seems that way because you know,  as I say, on small scales and large scales,   unbelievably simple. There's really nothing  interesting happening. But in the middle  
1:48:21
it's evolving in ways we can't predict. And it's  getting ever more complex and capable. Right. So —
1:48:32
That sounds like a computer  science question though. Yeah, it is. It is. Ultimately, physics is about  information for sure. And John Wheeler was the  
1:48:42
person who argued that. I was very lucky to know  him personally. Amazing character. Such a kind  
1:48:51
and absolutely visionary person. We  need more John Wheelers, that's for  
1:48:57
sure. So if there's a course on philosophy  of cosmology, that's the target audience.
1:49:02
John Wheelers, because they  can be incredibly helpful.
1:49:08
I better go. Sir? No, it's a great pleasure. Thank you.  Thank you. It's a great pleasure. So much  
1:49:14
fun to meet in person. Thanks for  coming. Yeah. I hope we meet again.
1:49:20
I'll see you next time.
1:49:33
Some of the top perks are that every week you  get brand new episodes ahead of time. You also  
1:49:39
get bonus written content exclusively for our  members. That's C-U-R-T-J-A-I-M-U-N-G-A-L.org.  
1:49:50
You can also just search my name and the word  Substack on Google. Since I started that Substack,  
1:49:55
it somehow already became number two in the  science category. Now, Substack, for those  
1:50:01
who are unfamiliar, is like a newsletter. One  that's beautifully formatted. There's zero spam.  
1:50:07
This is the best place to follow the content of  this channel that isn't anywhere else. It's not  
1:50:13
on YouTube. It's not on Patreon. It's exclusive  to the Substack. It's free. There are ways for  
1:50:19
you to support me on Substack if you want and  you'll get special bonuses if you do. Several  
1:50:25
people ask me like, "Hey Curt, you've spoken to so  many people in the field of theoretical physics,  
1:50:31
of philosophy, of consciousness. What are  your thoughts, man?" Well, while I remain  
1:50:37
impartial in interviews, this Substack is a  way to peer into my present deliberations on  
1:50:43
these topics. And it's the perfect way to  support me directly. Curt Jaimungal.org,  
1:50:51
or search Curt Jaimungal Substack on Google.  Oh, and I've received several messages, emails,  
1:50:58
and comments from professors and researchers  saying that they recommend Theories of Everything.
1:51:04
That's fantastic. If you're a professor  or a lecturer or what have you and   there's a particular standout episode that  students can benefit from, or your friends,  
1:51:14
please do share. And of course, a huge  thank you to our advertising sponsor,  
1:51:19
The Economist. Visit economist.com/TOE,  T-O-E, to get a massive discount on their  
1:51:27
annual subscription. I subscribe to The  Economist, and you'll love it as well. TOE is actually the only podcast that  they currently partner with. So it's a  
1:51:36
huge honor for me and for you, you're  getting an exclusive discount. That's   economist.com/TOE. T-O-E. And finally,  you should know this podcast is on iTunes,  
1:51:48
it's on Spotify, it's on all the audio  platforms. All you have to do is type   in Theories of Everything and you'll find  it. I know my last name is complicated,  
1:51:58
so maybe you don't want to type in Jaimungal,  but you can type in Theories of Everything.
1:52:03
Personally, I gain from rewatching  lectures and podcasts. I also read   in the comments that TOE listeners also  gain from replaying. So how about instead  
1:52:11
you re-listen on one of those platforms  like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts,   whatever podcast catcher you use, I'm  there with you. Thank you for listening.

All

From Curt Jaimungal

Podcasts

Learning

Related

For you

Recently uploaded


1:58:18

The Man Behind AI Safety Thinks AI Is Conscious
Curt Jaimungal
 and The Roman Forum with Roman Yampolskiy
70K views
•
3 weeks ago


16:57
European Reacts to Foreigners Didn’t Expect America’s World Cup to Be Like THIS!
European Reacts
4K views
•
1 hour ago
New


2:15:23
The Multiverse May Be Real | David Deutsch
Curt Jaimungal
46K views
•
8 months ago


7:47
Why Voyager 1 Hasn’t Frozen After 50 Years in Deep Space
Astrum Mysteries
76 views
•
12 hours ago
New


2:53:43
Biggest Mysteries in Physics: Antimatter, Dark Energy & ToE - Don Lincoln | Lex Fridman Podcast #497
Lex Fridman
543K views
•
3 weeks ago


1:27:07
UFO Roundtable: Former CIA Scientist Proves Aliens Exist!
The Diary Of A CEO
 and The Age Of Disclosure
4M views
•
1 month ago


1:56:40
Archaeology Warning: They May Have Secretly Found Antarctica  300 Years Before Us! - Graham Hancock
The Diary Of A CEO
 and Graham Hancock Official Channel
7.7M views
•
12 days ago


32:25
Maps That Changed How I See The World
Adorian
227K views
•
2 weeks ago


1:03:19
Alright... Let's listen to Abbey Road | Gen-Z Music Producer Reaction
Isaac Brown
271K views
•
10 days ago


33:35
18 Illusions That Will Break Your Brain.
Very Nearly Interesting
270K views
•
5 months ago


21:16
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING ' Peter Frampton - Do You Feel Like We Do' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
235K views
•
1 year ago


8:48
How to Tell Americans and Canadians Apart
Lost in the Pond
64K views
•
1 day ago
New


17:35
Europeans Thought They Knew America... They Were NOT READY!
European Reacts
238K views
•
6 days ago
New


38:15
Sarah Paine: “Russia and China Aren’t Allies” — America, Empires and the Future of War [INTERVIEW]
This Is The World
121K views
•
3 weeks ago


21:43
The Truth About Every IQ Range — What Your Score Actually Means
Human Glitch
3.7K views
•
3 months ago


17:51
HIP HOP FAN'S FIRST TIME HEARING 'Meatloaf - Bat Out Of Hell' | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
223K views
•
1 year ago


23:22
Why Don't Forensics Account For Gravity And Drag?
Veritasium
890K views
•
1 day ago
New


12:53
GEN Z Producer First Time REACTION to Spandau Ballet - True
Andiroo Reacts
106K views
•
3 months ago


1:19:03
Neil Turok’s stunningly simple, testable new theory of the universe
London Institute for Mathematical Sciences
101K views
•
12 days ago


1:41:29
The Breakthrough in Physics We’ve Been Waiting For
Curt Jaimungal
515K views
•
1 year ago


27:18
Vocal Fry: what it is, who does it, and why people hate it!
Dr Geoff Lindsey
3.6M views
•
2 years ago


32:10
What do other animals think of human music?
Howtown
1.6M views
•
1 month ago


12:06
7 Strange Things Scientists Think Are Lurking in Deep Space
The Architect Harry
24 views
•
11 hours ago
New


24:42
Chomsky was wrong.They taught me a lie.
languagejones
201K views
•
3 weeks ago


14:54
Ergativity: The Most Confusing Concept in Linguistics?
languagejones
118K views
•
3 months ago


23:43
Why the Ukraine War Turned Crimea Into Russia’s Biggest Strategic Trap
Elvira Bary
41K views
•
2 days ago
New

45:10
Trump Just Hung Scott Jennings Out to Dry
The Bulwark
261K views
•
23 hours ago
New

15:33
Tribal People React to R.E.M Everybody Hurts (Official Music Video)
TRYBALS
41K views
•
6 months ago

19:00
David Reich & The New History of Human Origins
Highly Compelling
8.9K views
•
6 days ago
New

23:44
Why Cannibalism Is Biologically Insane (Not Just Moral)
NomNomics
9.3K views
•
7 days ago

17:38
Eagles - Lyin' Eyes | BEST STORYTELLING WE'VE HEARD IN A WHILE! | First Time Reaction
Cliff Beats Classics
70K views
•
4 days ago
New

40:15
I asked Prof. Brian Cox 100 Questions
100 Questions with Tom Simons
 and TommyInnit
1.9M views
•
1 month ago

38:45
5 Space Misconceptions Most People Still Believe
Joe Scott
286K views
•
1 day ago
New

13:24
Rating Good and Terrible British Accents by American Actors
Lost in the Pond
478K views
•
4 months ago

32:05
Stonehenge Was Reanalyzed by AI — And the Findings Are Hard to Explain
Optic Expedition
198K views
•
2 days ago
New

22:27
Tribal People React to James Blunt's Monsters For The First Time
TRYBALS
366K views
•
3 years ago

4:44
France and Germany's Fighter Jet Program (FCAS) Is Dead || Peter Zeihan
Zeihan on Geopolitics
60K views
•
14 hours ago
New

28:51
Gen-Z Music Producer listens to Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young for the first time...
Isaac Brown
233K views
•
1 month ago

8:19
FIRST TIME HEARING 'Aerosmith - I Don't Wanna Miss A Thing | GENUINE REACTION
MollyBoyTV
7.8K views
•
2 years ago

14:13
All 7 Dimensions Explained in Detail (From 0D to Infinity)
Ridddle
739K views
•
10 days ago

    
true
